The wide playgrounds were swarming with boys. All were shouting and the
prefects urged them on with strong cries. The evening air was pale and
chilly and after every charge and thud of the footballers the greasy
leather orb flew like a heavy bird through the grey light. He kept on
the fringe of his line, out of sight of his prefect, out of the reach
of the rude feet, feigning to run now and then. He felt his body small
and weak amid the throng of the players and his eyes were weak and
watery. Rody Kickham was not like that: he would be captain of the
third line all the fellows said.

Rody Kickham was a decent fellow but Nasty Roche was a stink. Rody
Kickham had greaves in his number and a hamper in the refectory. Nasty
Roche had big hands. He called the Friday pudding dog-in-the-blanket.
And one day he had asked:

That was not a nice expression. His mother had told him not to speak
with the rough boys in the college. Nice mother! The first day in the
hall of the castle when she had said goodbye she had put up her veil
double to her nose to kiss him: and her nose and eyes were red. But he
had pretended not to see that she was going to cry. She was a nice
mother but she was not so nice when she cried. And his father had given
him two five-shilling pieces for pocket money. And his father had told
him if he wanted anything to write home to him and, whatever he did,
never to peach on a fellow. Then at the door of the castle the rector
had shaken hands with his father and mother, his soutane fluttering in
the breeze, and the car had driven off with his father and mother on
it. They had cried to him from the car, waving their hands:

 The suspension of Ecuador's crude oil
  shipments after an earthquake cut an oil pipeline will last at
  least four months, a senior Energy Ministry official said.
      The official said Ecuador could resume exports after
  repairing a 40 km section of the 510 km pipeline, which links
  jungle oil fields at Lago Agrio to Balao on the Pacific coast.
  It would take about 100 mln U.S. Dlrs to repair the pipeline,
  the official, who did not want to be named, told Reuters.
  Ecuador had enough oil to meet domestic demand for about 35
  days and would have to import crude to supplement stocks.
      The earthquake last Thursday night registered six on the
  12-point international Mercalli scale. The damage to the
  pipeline was a severe economic blow to Ecuador, where oil
  accounts for up to two-thirds of total exports and as much as
  60 pct of government revenues.
      Financially pressed Ecuador, a member of the Organisation
  of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), was recently pumping
  about 260,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude, about 50,000 bpd
  above the output quota assigned by the cartel, another Energy
  Ministry spokesman said. Last year, it exported an average of
  173,500 bpd, according to the central bank.
      However, Ecuador might build an emergency 25 km pipeline,
  costing 15 to 20 mln dlrs, to hook up with a Colombian
  pipeline, the first official said. He estimated it could take
  about 60 days to build.
      Ecuador, squeezed by the slide in world oil prices in 1986,
  had only 138 mln dlrs in net international reserves at the end
  of January, about equal to one month's imports.
      It suspended interest payments in January on 5.4 billion
  dlrs owed to about 400 private foreign banks. The country's
  total foreign debt is 8.16 billion dlrs, the eighth largest in
  Latin America.



There was a rushing, whizzing, throbbing noise in the air.  A great
body, like that of some immense bird, sailed along, casting a grotesque
shadow on the ground below.  An elderly man, who was seated on the
porch of a large house, started to his feet in alarm.

"Gracious goodness! What was that, Mrs. Baggert?" he called to a
motherly-looking woman who stood in the doorway.  "What happened?"

"Nothing much, Mr. Swift," was the calm reply "I think that was Tom and
Mr. Sharp in their airship, that's all. I didn't see it, but the noise
sounded like that of the Red Cloud."

"Of course! To be sure!" exclaimed Mr. Barton Swift, the well-known
inventor, as he started down the path in order to get a good view of
the air, unobstructed by the trees. "Yes, there they are," he added.
"That's the airship, but I didn't expect them back so soon. They must
have made good time from Shopton. I wonder if anything can be the
matter that they hurried so?"

He gazed aloft toward where a queerly-shaped machine was circling about
nearly five hundred feet in the air, for the craft, after swooping down
close to the house, had ascended and was now hovering just above the
line of breakers that marked the New Jersey seacoast, where Mr. Swift
had taken up a temporary residence.
