
Chapter 1: Introduction

The purpose of this book is not to decide the religious issue of the 
present day, but merely to present the issue as sharply and clearly as 
possible, in order that the reader may be aided in deciding it for 
himself. Presenting an issue sharply is indeed by no means a popular 
business at the present time; there are many who prefer to fight their 
intellectual battles in what Dr. Francis L. Patton has aptly called a 
"condition of low visibility."[1] Clear-cut definition of terms in 
religious matters, bold facing of the logical implications of religious 
views, is by many persons regarded as an impious proceeding. May it not 
discourage contribution to mission boards? May it not hinder the 
progress of consolidation, and produce a poor showing in columns of 
Church statistics? But with such persons we cannot possibly bring 
ourselves to agree. Light may seem at times to be an impertinent 
intruder, but it is always beneficial in the end. The type of religion 
which rejoices in the pious sound of traditional phrases, regardless of 
their meanings, or shrinks from "controversial" matters, will never 
stand amid the shocks of life. In the sphere of religion, as in other 
spheres, the things


about which men are agreed are apt to be the things that are least worth 
holding; the really important things are the things about which men will 
fight.

In the sphere of religion, in particular, the present time is a time of 
conflict; the great redemptive religion which has always been known as 
Christianity is battling against a totally diverse type of religious 
belief, which is only the more destructive of the Christian faith 
because it makes use of traditional Christian terminology. This modern 
non-redemptive religion is called "modernism" or "liberalism." Both 
names are unsatisfactory; the latter, in particular, is 
question-begging. The movement designated as "liberalism" is regarded as 
"liberal" only by its friends; to its opponents it seems to involve a 
narrow ignoring of many relevant facts. And indeed the movement is so 
various in its manifestations that one may almost despair of finding any 
common name which will apply to all its forms. But manifold as are the 
forms in which the movement appears, the root of the movement is one; 
the many varieties of modern liberal religion are rooted 
innaturalism--that is, in the denial of any entrance of the creative 
power of God (as distinguished from the ordinary course of nature) in 
connection with the origin of Christianity. The word "naturalism" is 
here used in a sense somewhat different from its philosophical meaning. 
In this non-philosophical sense it describes with fair accuracy the real 
root of what is called, by what may turn out to be a degradation of an 
originally noble word, "liberal" religion.

The rise of this modern naturalistic liberalism has not come by chance, 
but has been occasioned by important changes which have recently taken 
place in the conditions of life. The past one hundred years have 
witnessed the beginning of a new era in human history, which may


conceivably be regretted, but certainly cannot be ignored, by the most 
obstinate conservatism. The change is not something that lies beneath 
the surface and might be visible only to the discerning eye; on the 
contrary it forces itself upon the attention of the plain man at a 
hundred points. Modern inventions and the industrialism that has been 
built upon them have given us in many respects a new world to live in; 
we can no more remove ourselves from that world than we can escape from 
the atmosphere that we breathe.

But such changes in the material conditions of life do not stand alone; 
they have been produced by mighty changes in the human mind, as in their 
turn they themselves give rise to further spiritual changes. The 
industrial world of today has been produced not by blind forces of 
nature but by the conscious activity of the human spirit; it has been 
produced by the achievements of science. The outstanding feature of 
recent history is an enormous widening of human knowledge, which has 
gone hand in hand with such perfecting of the instrument of 
investigation that scarcely any limits can be assigned to future 
progress in the material realm.

The application of modern scientific methods is almost as broad as the 
universe in which we live. Though the most palpable achievements are in 
the sphere of physics and chemistry, the sphere of human life cannot be 
isolated from the rest, and with the other sciences there has appeared, 
for example, a modern science of history, which, with psychology and 
sociology and the like, claims, even if it does not deserve, full 
equality with its sister sciences. No department of knowledge can 
maintain its isolation from the modern lust of scientific conquest; 
treaties of inviolability, though hallowed by all the sanctions of 
age-long tradition, are beingflung ruthlessly to the winds.


In such an age, it is obvious that every inheritance from the past must 
be subject to searching criticism; and as a matter of fact some 
convictions of the human race have crumbled to pieces in the test. 
Indeed, dependence of any institution upon the past is now sometimes 
even regarded as furnishing a presumption, not in favor of it, but 
against it. So many convictions have had to be abandoned that men have 
sometimes come to believe that all convictions must go.

If such an attitude be justifiable, then no institution is faced by a 
stronger hostile presumption than the institution of the Christian 
religion, for no institution has based itself more squarely upon the 
authority of a by-gone age. We are not now inquiring whether such policy 
is wise or historically justifiable; in any case the fact itself is 
plain, that Christianity during many centuries has consistently appealed 
for the truth of its claims, not merely and not even primarily to 
current experience, but to certain ancient books the most recent of 
which was written some nineteen hundred years ago. It is no wonder that 
that appeal is being criticized today; for the writers of the books in 
question were no doubt men of their own age, whose outlook upon the 
material world, judged by modern standards, must have been of the 
crudest and most elementary kind. Inevitably the question arises whether 
the opinions of such men can ever be normative for men of the present 
day; in other words, whether first-century religion can ever stand in 
company with twentieth-century science.

However the question may be answered, it presents a serious problem to 
the modern Church. Attempts are indeed sometimes made to make the answer 
easier than at first sight it appears to be. Religion, it is said, is so 
entirely separate from science, that the two, rightly defined,


cannot possibly come into conflict. This attempt at separation, as it is 
hoped the following pages may show, is open to objections of the most 
serious kind. But what must now be observed is that even if the 
separation is justifiable it cannot be effected without effort; the 
removal of the problem of religion and science itself constitutes a 
problem. For, rightly or wrongly, religion during the centuries has as a 
matter of fact connected itself with a host of convictions, especially 
in the sphere of history, which may form the subject of scientific 
investigation; just as scientificinvestigators, on the other hand, have 
sometimes attached themselves, again rightly or wrongly, to conclusions 
which impinge upon the innermost domain of philosophy and of religion. 
For example, if any simple Christian of one hundred years ago, or even 
of today, were asked what would become of his religion if history should 
prove indubitably that no man called Jesus ever lived and died in the 
first century of our era, he would undoubtedly answer that his religion 
would fall away. Yet the investigation of events in the first century in 
Judea, just as much as in Italy or in Greece, belongs to the sphere of 
scientific history. In other words, our simple Christian, whether 
rightly or wrongly, whether wisely or unwisely, has as a matter of fact 
connected his religion, in a way that to him seems indissoluble, with 
convictions about which science also has a right to speak. If, then, 
those convictions, ostensibly religious, which belong to the sphere of 
science, are not really religious at all, the demonstration of that fact 
is itself no trifling task. Even if the problem of science and religion 
reduces itself to the problem of disentangling religion from 
pseudo-scientific accretions, the seriousness of the problem is not 
thereby diminished. From every point of view, therefore, the problem in 
question is the most serious concern


of the Church. What is the relation between Christianity and modern 
culture; may Christianity be maintained in a scientific age?

It is this problem which modern liberalism attempts to solve. Admitting 
that scientific objections may arise against the particularities of the 
Christian religion-- against the Christian doctrines of the person of 
Christ, and of redemption through His death and resurrection--the 
liberal theologian seeks to rescue certain of the general principles of 
religion, of which these particularities are thought to be mere 
temporary symbols, and these general principles he regards as 
constituting "the essence of Christianity."

It may well be questioned, however, whether this method of defense will 
really prove to be efficacious; for after the apologist has abandoned 
his outer defenses to the enemy and withdrawn into some inner citadel, 
he will probably discover that the enemy pursues him even there. Modern 
materialism, especially in the realm of psychology, is not content with 
occupying the lower quarters of the Christian city, but pushes its way 
into all the higher reaches of life; it is just as much opposed to the 
philosophical idealism of the liberal preacher as to the Biblical 
doctrines that the liberal preacher has abandoned in the interests of 
peace. Mere concessiveness, therefore, will never succeed in avoiding 
the intellectual conflict. In the intellectualbattle of the present day 
there can be no "peace without victory"; one side or the other must win.

As a matter of fact, however, it may appear that the figure which has 
just been used is altogether misleading; it may appear that what the 
liberal theologian has retained after abandoning to the enemy one 
Christian doctrine after another is not Christianity at all, but a 
religion which is so entirely different from Christianity as to be


long in a distinct category. It may appear further that the fears of the 
modern man as to Christianity were entirely ungrounded, and that in 
abandoning the embattled walls of the city of God he has fled in 
needless panic into the open plains of a vague natural religion only to 
fall an easy victim to the enemy who ever lies in ambush there.

Two lines of criticism, then, are possible with respect to the liberal 
attempt at reconciling science and Christianity. Modern liberalism may 
be criticized (1) on the ground that it is un-Christian and (2) on the 
ground that it is unscientific. We shall concern ourselves here chiefly 
with the former line of criticism; we shall be interested in showing 
that despite the liberal use of traditional phraseology modern 
liberalism not only is a different religion from Christianity but 
belongs in a totally different class of religions. But in showing that 
the liberal attempt at rescuing Christianity is false we are not showing 
that there is no way of rescuing Christianity at all; on the contrary, 
it may appear incidentally, even in the present little book, that it is 
not the Christianity of the New Testament which is in conflict with 
science, but the supposed Christianity of the modern liberal Church, and 
that the real city of God, and that city alone, has defenses which are 
capable of warding of the assaults of modern unbelief. However, our 
immediate concern is with the other side of the problem; our principal 
concern just now is to show that the liberal attempt at reconciling 
Christianity with modern science has really relinquished everything 
distinctive of Christianity, so that what remains is in essentials only 
that same indefinite type of religious aspiration which was in the world 
before Christianity came upon the scene. In trying to remove from 
Christianity everything that could possibly be objected to


in the name of science, in trying to bribe off the enemy by those 
concessions whichthe enemy most desires, the apologist has really 
abandoned what he started out to defend. Here as in many other 
departments of life it appears that the things that are sometimes 
thought to be hardest to defend are also the things that are most worth 
defending. In maintaining that liberalism in the modern Church 
represents a return to an un-Christian and sub-Christian form of the 
religious life, we are particularly anxious not to be misunderstood. 
"Un-Christian" in such a connection is sometimes taken as a term of 
opprobrium. We do not mean it at all as such. Socrates was not a 
Christian, neither was Goethe; yet we share to the full the respect with 
which their names are regarded. They tower immeasurably above the common 
run of men; if he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than 
they, he is certainly greater not by any inherent superiority, but by 
virtue of an undeserved privilege which ought to make him humble rather 
than contemptuous. Such considerations, however, should not be allowed 
to obscure the vital importance of the question at issue. If a condition 
could be conceived in which all the preaching of the Church should be 
controlled by the liberalism which in many quarters has already become 
preponderant, then, we believe, Christianity would at last have perished 
from the earth and the gospel would have sounded forth for the last 
time. If so, it follows that the inquiry with which we are now concerned 
is immeasurably the most important of all those with which the Church 
has to deal. Vastly more important than all questions with regard to 
methods of preaching is the root question as to what it is that shall be 
preached. Many, no doubt, will turn in impatience from the inquiry--all 
those, namely, who have settled the question in,


such a way that they cannot even conceive of its being reopened. Such, 
for example, are the pietists, of whom there are still many. "What," 
they say, "is the need of argument in defence of the Bible? Is it not 
the Word of God, and does it not carry with it an immediate certitude of 
its truth which could only be obscured by defense? If science comes into 
contradiction with the Bible so much the worse for science!" For these 
persons we have the highest respect, for we believe that they are right 
in the main point; they have arrived by a direct and easy road at a 
conviction which for other men is attained only through intellectual 
struggle. But we cannot reasonably expect them to be interested in what 
we have to say. Another class of uninterested persons is much more 
numerous. It consists of thosewho have definitely settled the question 
in the opposite way. By them this little book, if it ever comes into 
their hands, will soon be flung aside as only another attempt at defence 
of a position already hopelessly lost. There are still individuals, they 
will say, who believe that the earth is flat; there are also individuals 
who defend the Christianity of the Church, miracles and atonement and 
all. In either case, it will be said, the phenomenon is interesting as a 
curious example of arrested development, but it is nothing more.

Such a closing of the question, however, whether it approve itself 
finally or no, is in its present form based upon a very imperfect view 
of the situation; it is based upon a grossly exaggerated estimate of the 
achievements of modern science. Scientific investigation, as has already 
been observed, has certainly accomplished much; it has in many respects 
produced a new world. But there is another aspect of the picture which 
should not be ignored. The modern world represents in some respects an 
enormous improvement over the world in which our ancestors

lived; but in other respects it exhibits a lamentable decline. The 
improvement appears in the physical conditions of life, but in the 
spiritual realm there is a corresponding loss. The loss is clearest, 
perhaps, in the realm of art. Despite the mighty revolution which has 
been produced in the external conditions of life, no great poet is now 
living to celebrate the change; humanity has suddenly become dumb. Gone, 
too, are the great painters and the great musicians and the great 
sculptors. The art that still subsists is largely imitative, and where 
it is not imitative it is usually bizarre. Even the appreciation of the 
glories of the past is gradually being lost, under the influence of a 
utilitarian education that concerns itself only with the production of 
physical well-being. The "Outline of History" of Mr. H. G. Wells, with 
its contemptuous neglect of all the higher ranges of human life, is a 
thoroughly modern book.

This unprecedented decline in literature and art is only one 
manifestation of a more far-reaching phenomenon; it is only one instance 
of that narrowing of the range of personality which has been going on in 
the modern world. The whole development of modern society has tended 
mightily toward the limitation of the realm of freedom for the 
individual man. The tendency is most clearly seen in socialism; a 
socialistic state would mean the reduction to a minimum of the sphere of 
individual choice. Labor and recreation, under a socialistic government, 
would both be prescribed, and individual liberty would be gone. But the 
same tendency exhibits itself today even in those communities where the 
name of socialism is mostabhorred. When once the majority has determined 
that a certain regime is beneficial, that regime without further 
hesitation is forced ruthlessly upon the individual man. It never seems 
to occur to modern legislatures that


although "welfare" is good, forced welfare may be bad. In other words, 
utilitarianism is being carried out to its logical conclusions; in the 
interests of physical well-being the great principles of liberty are 
being thrown ruthlessly to the winds.

The result is an unparalleled impoverishment of human life. Personality 
can only be developed in the realm of individual choice. And that realm, 
in the modern state, is being slowly but steadily contracted. The 
tendency is making itself felt especially in the sphere of education. 
The object of education, it is now assumed, is the production of the 
greatest happiness for the greatest number. But the greatest happiness 
for the greatest number, it is assumed further, can be defined only by 
the will of the majority. Idiosyncrasies in education, therefore, it is 
said, must be avoided, and the choice of schools must be taken away from 
the individual parent and placed in the hands of the state. The state 
then exercises its authority through the instruments that are ready to 
hand, and at once, therefore, the child is placed under the control of 
psychological experts, themselves without the slightest acquaintance 
with the higher realms of human life, who proceed to prevent any such 
acquaintance being gained by those who come under their care. Such a 
result is being slightly delayed in America by the remnants of 
Anglo-Saxon individualism, but the signs of the times are all contrary 
to the maintenance of this half-way position; liberty is certainly held 
by but a precarious tenure when once its underlying principles have been 
lost. For a time it looked as though the utilitarianism which came into 
vogue in the middle of the nineteenth century would be a purely academic 
matter, without influence upon daily life. But such appearances have 
proved to be deceptive. The dominant tendency, even in a country like 
America, which

formerly prided itself on its freedom from bureaucratic regulation of 
the details of life, is toward a drab utilitarianism in which all higher 
aspirations are to be lost.

Manifestations of such a tendency can easily be seen. In the state of 
Nebraska, for example, a law is now in force according to which no 
instruction in any school inthe state, public or private, is to be given 
through the medium of a language other than English, and no language 
other than English is to be studied even as a language until the child 
has passed an examination before the county superintendent of education 
showing that the eighth grade has been passed.[1] In other words, no 
foreign language, apparently not even Latin or Greek, is to be studied 
until the child is too old to learn it well. It is in this way that 
modern collectivism deals with a kind of study which is absolutely 
essential to all genuine mental advance. The minds of the people of 
Nebraska, and of any other states where similar laws prevail,[2] are to 
be kept by the power of the state in a permanent condition of arrested 
development.

It might seem as though with such laws obscurantism had reached its 
lowest possible depths. But there are depths lower still. In the state 
of Oregon, on Election Day, 1922, a law was passed by a referendum vote 
in accordance with which all children in the state are required to 
attend the public schools. Christian schools and private schools, at 
least in the all-important lower grades, are thus wiped out of 
existence. Such laws, which if the present temper of the people prevails 
will probably

soon be extended far beyond the bounds of one state,[1] [which will] 
mean of course the ultimate destruction of all real education. When one 
considers what the public schools of America in many places already 
are--their materialism, their discouragement of any sustained 
intellectual effort, their encouragement of the dangerous 
pseudo-scientific fads of experimental psychology--one can only be 
appalled by the thought of a commonwealth in which there is no escape 
from such a soul-killing system. But the principle of such laws and 
their ultimate tendency are far worse than the immediate results.[2] A 
public

1. In Michigan, a bill similar to the one now passed in Oregon recently 
received an enormous vote at a referendum, and an agitation looking at 
least in the same general direction is said to be continuing.

2. The evil principle is seen with special clearness in the so-called 
"Lusk Laws" in the state of New York. One of these refers to teachers in 
the public schools. The other provides that "No person, firm, 
corporation or society shall conduct, maintain or operate any school, 
institute, class or course of instruction in any subjects whatever 
without making application for and being granted a license from the 
university of the state of New York to so conduct, maintain or operate 
such institute, school, class or course." It is further provided that "A 
school, institute, class or course licensed as provided In this section 
shall be subject to visitation by officers and employees of the 
university of the state of New York." See Laws of the State of New York, 
1921, Vol. III, Chapter 667, pp. 2049-2051. This law is so broadly 
worded that it could not possibly be enforced, even by the whole German 
army in its pre-war efficiency or by all the espionage system of the 
Czar. The exact measure of enforcement is left to the discretion of 
officials, and the citizens are placed in constant danger of that 
intolerable interference with private life which real enforcement ofthe 
provision about "courses of instruction in any subjects whatever" would 
mean. One of the exemptions is in principle particularly bad. "Nor shall 
such license he required:' the law provides. "by schools now or 
hereafter established and maintained by a religious denomination or sect 
well recognized as such at the time this section takes effect." One can 
certainly rejoice that the existing churches are freed, for the time 
being, from the menace involved in the law. But in principle the 
limitation of the exemption to the existing churches really runs counter 
to the fundamental idea Of religious liberty; for it sets up a 
distinction between established religions and those that are not 
established. There was always tolerance for established religious 
bodies, even in the Roman Empire; but religious liberty consists in 
equal rights for religious bodies that are new. The other exemptions do 
not remove in the slightest the oppressive character of the law. Bad as 
the law must be in its Immediate effects, it is far more alarming in 
what it reveals about the temper of the people. A people which tolerates 
such preposterous legislation upon the statute books is a people that 
has wandered far away from the principles of American liberty. True 
patriotism will not conceal the menace, but will rather seek to recall 
the citizens to those great principles for which our fathers, in America 
and In England, were willing to bleed and die. There are some 
encouraging indications that the Lusk Laws may soon be repealed. If they 
are repealed, they will still serve as A warning that only by constant 
watchfulness can liberty be preserved.

A public school system, in itself, is indeed of enormous benefit to the 
race. But it is of benefit only if it is kept healthy at every moment by 
the absolutely free possibility of the competition of private schools. A 
public school system, if it means the providing of free education for 
those who desire it, is a noteworthy and beneficent achievement of 
modern times; but when once it becomes monopolistic it is the most 
perfect instrument of tyranny which has yet been devised. Freedom of 
thought in the middle ages was combated by the Inquisition, but the 
modern method is far more effective. Place the lives of children in 
their formative years, despite the convictions of their parents, under 
the intimate control of experts appointed by the state, force them then 
to attend schools where the higher aspirations of humanity are crushed 
out, and where the mind is filled with the materialism of the day, and 
it is difficult to see how even the remnants of liberty can subsist. 
Such a tyranny, supported as it is by a perverse technique used as the 
instrument in destroying human souls, is certainly far more dangerous 
than the crude tyrannies of the past, which despite their weapons of 
fire and sword permitted thought at least to be free.

The truth is that the materialistic paternalism of the present day, if 
allowed to go on unchecked, will rapidly

make of America one huge "Main Street," where spiritual adventure will 
be discouraged and democracy will be regarded as consisting in the 
reduction of all mankind to the proportions of the narrowest and least 
gifted of the citizens. God grant that there may come a reaction, and 
that the great principles of Anglo-Saxon liberty may be rediscovered 
before it is too late! But whatever solution be found for the 
educational and social problems of our own country, a lamentable 
conditionmust be detected in the world at large. It cannot be denied 
that great men are few or non-existent, and that there has been a 
general contracting of the area of personal life. Material betterment 
has gone hand in hand with spiritual decline.

Such a condition of the world ought to cause the choice between 
modernism and traditionalism, liberalism and conservatism, to be 
approached without any of the prejudice which is too often displayed. In 
view of the lamentable defects of modern life, a type of religion 
certainly should not be commended simply because it is modern or 
condemned simply because it is old. On the contrary, the condition of 
mankind is such that one may well ask what it is that made the men of 
past generations so great and the men of the present generation so 
small. In the midst of all the material achievements of modern life, one 
may well ask the question whether in gaining the whole world we have not 
lost our own soul. Are we forever condemned to live the sordid life of 
utilitarianism? Or is there some lost secret which if rediscovered will 
restore to mankind something of the glories of the past?

Such a secret the writer of this little book would discover in the 
Christian religion. But the Christian religion which is meant is 
certainly not the religion of the modern liberal Church, but a message 
of divine grace, almost forgotten

now, as it was in the middle ages, but destined to burst forth once more 
in God's good time, in a new Reformation, and bring light and freedom to 
mankind. What that message is can be made clear, as is the case with all 
definition, only by way of exclusion, by way of contrast. In setting 
forth the current liberalism, now almost dominant in the Church, over 
against Christianity, we are animated, therefore, by no merely negative 
or polemic purpose; on the contrary, by showing what Christianity is not 
we hope to be able to show what Christianity is, in order that men may 
be led to turn from the weak and beggarly elements and have recourse 
again to the grace of God.
Chapter 2: Doctrine

Modern liberalism in the Church, whatever judgment may be passed upon 
it, is at any rate no longer merely an academic matter. It is no longer 
a matter merely of theological seminaries or universities. On the 
contrary its attack upon the fundamentals of the Christian faith is 
being carried on vigorously by Sunday-School "lesson-helps," by the 
pulpit, and by the religious press. If such an attack be unjustified, 
the remedy is not to be found, as some devout persons have suggested, in 
the abolition of theological seminaries, or the abandonment of 
scientific theology, but rather in a more earnest search after truth and 
a more loyal devotion to it when once it is found.

At the theological seminaries and universities, however, the roots of 
the great issue are more clearly seen than in the world at large; among 
students the reassuring employment of traditional phrases is often 
abandoned, and the advocates of a new religion are not at pains, as they 
are in the Church at large, to maintain an appearance of conformity with 
the past. But such frankness, we are convinced, ought to be extended to 
the people as a whole. Few desires on the part of religious teachers 
have been more harmfully exaggerated than the desire to "avoid giving 
offense." Only too often that desire has come perilously near 
dishonesty; the religious teacher, in his heart of hearts, is well aware 
of the radicalism of his



views, but is unwilling to relinquish his place in the hallowed 
atmosphere of the Church by speaking his whole mind. Against all such 
policy of concealment or palliation, our sympathies are altogether with 
those men, whether radicals or conservatives, who have a passion for 
light.

What then, at bottom, when the traditional phrases have all been 
stripped away, is the real meaning of the present revolt against the 
fundamentals of the Christian faith? What, in brief, are the teachings 
of modern liberalism as over against the teachings of Christianity?

At the outset, we are met with an objection. "Teachings," it is said, 
"are unimportant; the exposition of the teachings of liberalism and the 
teachings of Christianity, therefore, can arouse no interest at the 
present day; creeds are merely the changing expression of a unitary 
Christian experience, and provided only theyexpress that experience they 
are all equally good. The teachings of liberalism, therefore, might be 
as far removed as possible from the teachings of historic Christianity, 
and yet the two might be at bottom the same."

Such is the way in which expression is often given to the modern 
hostility to "doctrine." But is it really doctrine as such that is 
objected to, and not rather one particular doctrine in the interests of 
another? Undoubtedly, in many forms of liberalism it is the latter 
alternative which fits the case. There are doctrines of modern 
liberalism, just as tenaciously and intolerantly upheld as any doctrines 
that find a place in the historic creeds. Such for example are the 
liberal doctrines of the universal fatherhood of God and the universal 
brotherhood of man. These doctrines are, as we shall see, contrary to 
the doctrines of the Christian religion. But doctrines they are all the 
same, and as such they require intellectual



defence. In seeming to object to all theology, the liberal preacher is 
often merely objecting to one system of theology in the interests of 
another. And the desired immunity from theological controversy has not 
yet been attained.

Sometimes, however, the modern objection to doctrine is more seriously 
meant. And whether the objection be well-founded or not, the real 
meaning of it should at least be faced.

That meaning is perfectly plain. The objection involves an out-and-out 
skepticism. If all creeds are equally true, then since they are 
contradictory to one another, they are all equally false, or at least 
equally uncertain. We are indulging, therefore, in a mere juggling with 
words. To say that all creeds are equally true, and that they are based 
upon experience, is merely to fall back upon that agnosticism which 
fifty years ago was regarded as the deadliest enemy of the Church. The 
enemy has not really been changed into a friend merely because he has 
been received within the camp. Very different is the Christian 
conception of a creed. According to the Christian conception, a creed is 
not a mere expression of Christian experience, but on the contrary it is 
a setting forth of those facts upon which experience is based.

But, it will be said, Christianity is a life, not a doctrine. The 
assertion is often made, and it has an appearance of godliness. But it 
is radically false, and to detect its falsity one does not even need to 
be a Christian. For to say that "Christianity is a life" is to make an 
assertion in the sphere of history. The assertion does not lie in the 
sphere of ideals; it is far different from saying that Christianity 
ought to be a life, or that the ideal religion is a life. The assertion 
that Christianity is a life issubject to historical investigation 
exactly as is the assertion that



the Roman Empire under Nero was a free democracy. Possibly the Roman 
Empire under Nero would have been better if it had been a free 
democracy, but the historical question is simply whether as a matter of 
fact it was a free democracy or no. Christianity is an historical 
phenomenon, like the Roman Empire, or the Kingdom of Prussia, or the 
United States of America. And as an historical phenomenon it must be 
investigated on the basis of historical evidence.

Is it true, then, that Christianity is not a doctrine but a life? The 
question can be settled only by an examination of the beginnings of 
Christianity. Recognition of that fact does not involve any acceptance 
of Christian belief; it is merely a matter of common sense and common 
honesty. At the foundation of the life of every corporation is the 
incorporation paper, in which the objects of the corporation are set 
forth. Other objects may be vastly more desirable than those objects, 
but if the directors use the name and the resources of the corporation 
to pursue the other objects they are acting ultra vires of the 
corporation. So it is with Christianity. It is perfectly conceivable 
that the originators of the Christian movement had no right to legislate 
for subsequent generations i but at any rate they did have an 
inalienable right to legislate for all generations that should choose to 
bear the name of "Christian." It is conceivable that Christianity may 
now have to be abandoned, and another religion substituted for it; but 
at any rate the question what Christianity is can be determined only by 
an examination of the beginnings of Christianity.

The beginnings of Christianity constitute a fairly definite historical 
phenomenon. The Christian movement originated a few days after the death 
of Jesus of Nazareth. It is doubtful whether anything that preceded the



death of Jesus can be called Christianity. At any rate, if Christianity 
existed before that event, it was Christianity only in a preliminary 
stage. The name originated after the death of Jesus, and the thing 
itself was also something new. Evidently there was an important new 
beginning among the disciples of Jesus in Jerusalem after the 
crucifixion. At that time is to be placed the beginning of the 
remarkable movement which spread out from Jerusalem into the Gentile 
world--the movement which is called Christianity.

About the early stages of this movement definite historical information 
has been preserved in the Epistles of Paul, which are regarded by all 
serious historians as genuine products of the first Christian 
generation. The writer of the Epistles had been in direct communication 
with those intimate friends of Jesus who had begun the Christian 
movement in Jerusalem, and in the Epistles he makes it abundantly plain 
what the fundamental character of the movement was. But if any one fact 
is clear, on the basis of this evidence, it is that the Christian 
movement at its inception was not just a way of life in the modern 
sense, but a way of life founded upon a message. It was based, not upon 
mere feeling, not upon a mere program of work, but upon an account of 
facts. In other words it was based upon doctrine.

Certainly with regard to Paul himself there should be no debate; Paul 
certainly was not indifferent to doctrine; on the contrary, doctrine was 
the very basis of his life. His devotion to doctrine did not, it is 
true, make him incapable of a magnificent tolerance. One notable example 
of such tolerance is to be found during his imprisonment at Rome, as 
attested by the Epistle to the Philippians. Apparently certain Christian 
teachers at



Rome had been jealous of Paul's greatness. As long as he had been at 
liberty they had been obliged to take a secondary place; but now that he 
was in prison, they seized the supremacy. They sought to raise up 
affliction for Paul in his bonds; they preached Christ even of envy and 
strife. In short, the rival preachers made of the preaching of the 
gospel a means to the gratification of low personal ambition; it seems 
to have been about as mean a piece of business as could well be 
conceived. But Paul was not disturbed. "Whether in presence, or in 
truth," he said, "Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and 
will rejoice" (Phil. i. 18). The way in which the preaching was being 
carried on was wrong, but the message itself was true; and Paul was far 
more interested in the content of the message than in the manner of its 
presentation. It is impossible to conceive a finer piece of broad-minded 
tolerance.

But the tolerance of Paul was not indiscriminate. He displayed no 
tolerance, for example, in Galatia. There, too, there were rival 
preachers. But Paul had no tolerance for them. "But though we," he said, 
"or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that 
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed" (Gal. i. 8). What 
is the reason for the difference in the apostle's attitudein the two 
cases? What is the reason for the broad tolerance in Rome, and the 
fierce anathemas in Galatia? The answer is perfectly plain. In Rome, 
Paul was tolerant, because there the content of the message that was 
being proclaimed by the rival teachers was true; in Galatia he was 
intolerant, because there the content of the rival message was false. In 
neither case did personalities have anything to do with Paul's attitude. 
No doubt the motives of the Judaizers in Galatia were far from pure, and 
in an incidental way Paul does point out



their impurity. But that was not the ground of his opposition. The 
Judaizers no doubt were morally far from perfect, but Paul's opposition 
to them would have been exactly the same if they had all been angels 
from heaven. His opposition was based altogether upon the falsity of 
their teaching; they were substituting for the one true gospel a false 
gospel which was no gospel at all. It never occurred to Paul that a 
gospel might be true for one man and not for another; the blight of 
pragmatism had never fallen upon his soul. Paul was convinced of the 
objective truth of the gospel message, and devotion to that truth was 
the great passion of his life. Christianity for Paul was not only a 
life, but also a doctrine, and logically the doctrine came first.1

But what was the difference between the teaching of Paul and the 
teaching of the Judaizers ? What was it that gave rise to the stupendous 
polemic of the Epistle to the Galatians? To the modern Church the 
difference would have seemed to be a mere theological subtlety. About 
many things the Judaizers were in perfect agreement with Paul. The 
Judaizers believed that Jesus was the Messiah; there is not a shadow of 
evidence that they objected to Paul's lofty view of the person of 
Christ. Without the slightest doubt, they believed that Jesus had really 
risen from the dead. They believed, moreover, that faith in Christ was 
necessary to salvation. But the trouble was, they believed that 
something else was also necessary; they believed that what Christ had 
done needed to be pieced out by the believer's own effort to keep the 
Law. From the



modern point of view the difference would have seemed to be very slight. 
Paul as well as the Judaizers believed that the keeping of the law of 
God, in its deepest

import, is inseparably connected with faith. The difference concerned 
only the logical--not even, perhaps, the temporal--order of three steps. 
Paul said that a man (1) first believes on Christ, (2) then is justified 
before God, (3) then immediately proceeds to keep God's law. The 
Judaizers said that a man (1) believes on Christ and (2) keeps the law 
of God the best he can, and then (3) is justified. The difference would 
seem to modern "practical" Christians to be a highly subtle and 
intangible matter, hardly worthy of consideration at all in view of the 
large measure of agreement in the practical realm. What a splendid 
cleaning up of the Gentile cities it would have been if the Judaizers 
had succeeded in extending to those cities the observance of the Mosaic 
law, even including the unfortunate ceremonial observances! Surely Paul 
ought to have made common cause with teachers who were so nearly in 
agreement with him; surely he ought to have applied to them the great 
principle of Christian unity.

As a matter of fact, however, Paul did nothing of the kind; and only 
because he (and others) did nothing of the kind does the Christian 
Church exist today. Paul saw very clearly that the differences between 
the Judaizers and himself was the differences between two entirely 
distinct types of religion; it was the differences between a religion of 
merit and a religion of grace. If Christ provides only a part of our 
salvation, leaving us to provide the rest, then we are still hopeless 
under the load of sin. For no matter how small the gap which must be 
bridged before salvation can be attained, the awakened conscience sees 
clearly that our wretched attempt at goodness is insufficient even to 
bridge that gap. The guilty soul



enters again into the hopeless reckoning with God, to determine whether 
we have really done our part. And thus we groan again under the old 
bondage of the law. Such an attempt to piece out the work of Christ by 
our own merit, Paul saw clearly, is the very essence of unbelief; Christ 
will do everything or nothing, and the only hope is to throw ourselves 
unreservedly on His mercy and trust Him for all.

Paul certainly was right. The differences which divided him from the 
Judaizers was no mere theological subtlety, but concerned the very heart 
and core of the religion of Christ. "Just as I am without one plea, But 
that Thy blood was shed for me"-- that was what Paul was contending for 
in Galatia; that hymn would never have been written if the Judaizers had 
won. And without the thing which that hymn expresses there is no 
Christianity at all.

Certainly, then, Paul was no advocate of an undogmatic religion; he was 
interestedabove everything else in the objective and universal truth of 
his message. So much will probably be admitted by serious historians, no 
matter what their own personal attitude toward the religion of Paul may 
be. Sometimes, indeed, the modern liberal preacher seeks to produce an 
opposite impression by quoting out of their context words of Paul which 
he interprets in a way as far removed as possible from the original 
sense. The truth is, it is hard to give Paul up. The modern liberal 
desires to produce upon the minds of simple Christians (and upon his own 
mind) the impression of some sort of continuity between modern 
liberalism and the thought and life of the great Apostle. But such an 
impression is altogether misleading. Paul was not interested merely in 
the ethical principles of Jesus; he was not interested merely in general 
principles of religion or of ethics. On the contrary, he was interested 
in the redeeming



work of Christ and its effect upon us. His primary interest was in 
Christian doctrine, and Christian doctrine not merely in its 
presuppositions but at its center. If Christianity is to be made 
independent of doctrine, then Paulinism must be removed from 
Christianity root and branch.

But what of that? Some men are not afraid of the conclusion. If 
Paulinism must be removed, they say, we can get along without it. May it 
not turn out that in introducing a doctrinal element into the life of 
the Church Paul was only perverting a primitive Christianity which was 
as independent of doctrine as even the modern liberal preacher could 
desire?

This suggestion is clearly overruled by the historical evidence. The 
problem certainly cannot be solved in so easy a way. Many attempts have 
indeed been made to separate the religion of Paul sharply from that of 
the primitive Jerusalem Church; many attempts have been made to show 
that Paul introduced an entirely new principle into the Christian 
movement or even was the founder of a new religion.1 But all such 
attempts have resulted in failure. The Pauline Epistles themselves 
attest a fundamental unity of principle between Paul and the original 
companions of Jesus, and the whole early history of the Church becomes 
unintelligible except on the basis of such unity. Certainly with regard 
to the fundamentally doctrinal character of Christianity Paul was no 
innovator. The fact appears in the whole character of Paul's 
relationship to the Jerusalem Church as it is attested by the Epistles, 
and it also appears with startling clearness in the precious passage in 
1 Cor. xv. 3-7, where Paul summarizes the tradition which he had 
received from the


primitive Church. What is it that forms the content of that primitive 
teaching? Is it a general principle of the fatherliness of God or the 
brotherliness of man? Is it a vague admiration for the character of 
Jesus such as that which prevails in the modern Church? Nothing could be 
further from the fact. "Christ died for our sins," said the primitive 
disciples, "according to the Scriptures; he was buried; he has been 
raised on the third day according to the Scriptures." From the 
beginning, the Christian gospel, as indeed the name "gospel" or "good 
news" implies, consisted in an account of something that had happened. 
And from the beginning, the meaning of the happening was set forth; and 
when the meaning of the happening was set forth then there was Christian 
doctrine. "Christ died"--that is history; "Christ died for our 
sins"--that is doctrine. Without these two elements, joined in an 
absolutely indissoluble union, there is no Christianity.

It is perfectly clear, then, that the first Christian missionaries did 
not simply come forward with an exhortation they did not say: "Jesus of 
Nazareth lived a wonderful life of filial piety, and we call upon you 
our hearers to yield yourselves, as we have done, to the spell of that 
life." Certainly that is what modern historians would have expected the 
first Christian missionaries to say, but it must be recognized that as a 
matter of fact they said nothing of the kind. Conceivably the first 
disciples of Jesus, after the catastrophe of His death, might have 
engaged in quiet meditation upon His teaching. They might have said to 
themselves that "Our Father which art in heaven" was a good way of 
addressing God even though the One who had taught them that prayer was 
dead. They might have clung to the ethical principles of Jesus and 
cherished the vague hope that the One who



enunciated such principles had some personal existence beyond the grave. 
Such redactions might have seemed very natural to the modern man. But to 
Peter, James and John they certainly never occurred. Jesus had raised in 
them high hopes; those hopes were destroyed by the Cross; and 
reflections on the general principles of religion and ethics were quite 
powerless to revive the hopes again. The disciples of Jesus had 
evidently been far inferior to their Master in every possible way; they 
had not understood His lofty spiritual teaching, but even in the hour of 
solemn crisis had quarreled over great places in the approaching 
Kingdom. What hope was there that such men could succeed where their 
Master had failed? Even when Hehad been with them, they had been 
powerless; and now that He was taken from them, what little power they 
may have had was gone.1

Yet those same weak, discouraged men, within a few days after the death 
of their Master, instituted the most important spiritual movement that 
the world has ever seen. What had produced the astonishing change? What 
had transformed the weak and cowardly disciples into the spiritual 
conquerors of the world? Evidently it was not the mere memory of Jesus' 
life, for that was a source of sadness rather than of joy. Evidently the 
disciples of Jesus, within the few days between the crucifixion and the 
beginning of their work in Jerusalem, had received some new equipment 
for their task. What that new equipment was, at least the outstanding 
and external element in it (to say nothing of the endowment which 
Christian men believe to have been received at Pentecost), is perfectly 
plain. The great weapon with which the disciples of Jesus set out to 
conquer the world was not


a mere comprehension of eternal principles; it was an historical 
message, an account of something that had recently happened, it was the 
message, "He is risen."1

But the message of the resurrection was not isolated. It was connected 
with the death of Jesus, seen now to be not a failure but a triumphant 
act of divine grace; it was connected with the entire appearance of 
Jesus upon earth. The coming of Jesus was understood now as an act of 
God by which sinful men were saved. The primitive Church was concerned 
not merely with what Jesus had said, but also, and primarily, with what 
Jesus had done. The world was to be redeemed through the proclamation of 
an event. And with the event went the meaning of the event; and the 
setting forth of the event with the meaning of the event was doctrine. 
These two elements are always combined in the Christian message. The 
narration of the facts is history; the narration of the facts with the 
meaning of the facts is doctrine. "Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was 
crucified, dead and buried"--that is history. "He loved me and gave 
Himself for me"--that is doctrine. Such was the Christianity of the 
primitive Church.

"But," it may be said, "even if the Christianity of the primitive Church 
was dependent upon doctrine, we may still emancipate ourselves from such 
dependence; we may appeal from the primitive Church to Jesus Himself. It 
has already been admitted that if doctrine is to be abandoned Paul must 
be abandoned:it may now be admitted that if doctrine is to be abandoned, 
even the primitive Jerusalem Church, with its message of the 
resurrection, must be abandoned. But possibly we can still find in Jesus 
Himself the simple, non-doctrinal religion that we


desire." Such is the real meaning of the modern slogan, "Back to 
Christ."

Must we really take such a step as that? It would certainly be an 
extraordinary step. A great religion derived its power from the message 
of the redeeming work of Christ; without that message Jesus and His 
disciples would soon have been forgotten. The same message, with its 
implications, has been the very heart and soul of the Christian movement 
throughout the centuries. Yet we are now asked to believe that the thing 
that has given Christianity its power all through the centuries was a 
blunder, that the originators of the movement misunderstood radically 
the meaning of their Master's life and work, and that it has been left 
to us moderns to get the first inkling of the initial mistake. Even if 
this view of the case were correct, and even if Jesus Himself taught a 
religion like that of modern liberalism, it would still be doubtful 
whether such a religion could rightly be called Christianity; for the 
name Christian was first applied only after the supposed decisive change 
had taken place, and it is very doubtful whether a name which through 
nineteen centuries has been so firmly attached to one religion ought now 
suddenly to be applied to another. If the first disciples of Jesus 
really departed so radically from their Master, then the better 
terminology would probably lead us to say simply that Jesus was not the 
founder of Christianity, but of a simple, non-doctrinal religion, long 
forgotten, but now rediscovered by modern men. Even so, the contrast 
between liberalism and Christianity would still appear.

But as a matter of fact, such a strange state of affairs does not 
prevail at all. It is not true that in basing Christianity upon an event 
the disciples of Jesus were departing from the teaching of their Master. 
For


certainly Jesus Himself did the same thing. Jesus did not content 
Himself with enunciating general principles of religion and ethics; the 
picture of Jesus as a sage similar to Confucius, uttering wise maxims 
about conduct, may satisfy Mr. H. G.Wells, as he trips along lightly 
over the problems of history, but it disappears so soon as one engages 
seriously in historical research. "Repent," said Jesus, "for the Kingdom 
of Heaven is at hand." The gospel which Jesus proclaimed in Galilee 
consisted in the proclamation of a coming Kingdom. But clearly Jesus 
regarded the coming of the Kingdom as an event, or as a series of 
events. No doubt He also regarded the Kingdom as a present reality in 
the souls of men; no doubt He represented the Kingdom in one sense as 
already present. We shall not really succeed in getting along without 
this aspect of the matter in our interpretation of Jesus' words. But we 
shall also not get along without the other aspect, according to which 
the coming of the Kingdom depended upon definite and catastrophic 
events. But if Jesus regarded the coming of the Kingdom as dependent 
upon a definite event, then His teaching was similar at the decisive 
point to that of the primitive Church; neither He nor the primitive 
Church enunciated merely general and permanent principles of religion; 
both of them, on the contrary, made the message depend upon something 
that happened. Only, in the teaching of Jesus the happening was 
represented as being still in the future, while in that of the Jerusalem 
Church the first act of it at least lay already in the past. Jesus 
proclaimed the event as coming; the disciples proclaimed part of it at 
least as already past; but the important thing is that both Jesus and 
the disciples did proclaim an event. Jesus was certainly not a mere 
enunciator of permanent truths, like the modern liberal preacher; on the 
contrary He was


conscious of standing at the turning-point of the ages, when what had 
never been was now to come to be.

But Jesus announced not only an event; He announced also the meaning of 
the event. It is natural, indeed, that the full meaning could be made 
clear only after the event had taken place. If Jesus really came, then, 
to announce, and to bring about, an event, the disciples were not 
departing from His purpose, if they set forth the meaning of the event 
more fully than it could be set forth during the preliminary period 
constituted by the earthly ministry of their Master. But Jesus Himself, 
though by way of prophecy, did set forth the meaning of the great 
happening that was to be at the basis of the new era.

Certainly He did so, and grandly, if the words attributed to Him in all 
of the Gospels are really His. But even if the Fourth Gospel be 
rejected, and even if the most radical criticism be applied to the other 
three, it will still be impossible to get rid of this element in Jesus' 
teaching. The significant words attributed to Jesus atthe Last Supper 
with regard to His approaching death, and the utterance of Jesus in Mk. 
x. 45 ("The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto but to minister, 
and to give His life a ransom for many"), have indeed been the subject 
of vigorous debate. It is difficult to accept such words as authentic 
and yet maintain the modern view of Jesus at all. Yet it is also 
difficult to get rid of them on any critical theory. What we are now 
concerned with, however, is something more general than the authenticity 
even of these precious words. What we are now concerned to observe is 
that Jesus certainly did not content Himself with the enunciation of 
permanent moral principles; He certainly did announce an approaching 
event; and He certainly did not announce the event without giving some 
account of its meaning. But when He


gave an account of the meaning of the event, no matter how brief that 
account may have been, He was overstepping the line that separates an 
undogmatic religion, or even a dogmatic religion that teaches only 
eternal principles, from one that is rooted in the significance of 
definite historical facts; He was placing a great gulf between Himself 
and the philosophic modern liberalism which today incorrectly bears His 
name.

In another way also the teaching of Jesus was rooted in doctrine. It was 
rooted in doctrine because it depended upon a stupendous presentation of 
Jesus' own Person. The assertion is often made, indeed, that Jesus kept 
His own Person out of His gospel, and came forward merely as the supreme 
prophet of God. That assertion lies at the very root of the modern 
liberal conception of the life of Christ. But common as it is, it is 
radically false. And it is interesting to observe how the liberal 
historians themselves, so soon as they begin to deal seriously with the 
sources, are obliged to admit that the real Jesus was not all that they 
could have liked Jesus to be. A Houston Stewart Chamberlain,1 indeed, 
can construct a Jesus who was the advocate of a pure, "formless," 
non-doctrinal religion; but trained historians, despite their own 
desires, are obliged to admit that there was an element in the real 
Jesus which refuses to be pressed into any such mold. There is to the 
liberal historians, as Heitmuller has significantly said, "something 
almost uncanny" about Jesus.2

This "uncanny" element in Jesus is found in His Messianic consciousness. 
The strange fact is that this pure teacher of righteousness appealed to 
by modern liberalism, this classical exponent of the non-doctrinal 
religion


which is supposed to underlie all the historical religions as the 
irreducible truth remaining after the doctrinal accretions have been 
removed--the strange fact is that this supreme revealer of eternal truth 
supposed that He was to be the chief actor in a world catastrophe and 
was to sit in judgment upon the whole earth. Such is the stupendous form 
in which Jesus applied to Himself the category of Messiahship.

It is interesting to observe how modern men have dealt with the 
Messianic consciousness of Jesus. Some, like Mr. H. G. Wells, have 
practically ignored it. Without discussing the question whether it be 
historical or not they have practically treated it as though it did not 
exist, and have not allowed it to disturb them at all in their 
construction of the sage of Nazareth. The Jesus thus reconstructed may 
be useful as investing modern programs with the sanctity of His hallowed 
name; Mr. Wells may find it edifying to associate Jesus with Confucius 
in a brotherhood of beneficent vagueness. But what ought to be clearly 
understood is that such a Jesus has nothing to do with history. He is a 
purely imaginary figure, a symbol and not a fact.

Others, more seriously, have recognized the existence of the problem, 
but have sought to avoid it by denying that Jesus ever thought that He 
was the Messiah, and by supporting their denial, not by mere assertions, 
but by a critical examination of the sources. Such was the effort, for 
example, of W. Wrede,1 and a brilliant effort it was. But it has 
resulted in failure. The Messianic consciousness of Jesus is not merely 
rooted in the sources considered as documents, but it lies at the very 
basis of the whole edifice of the Church. If, as J. Weiss has 
pertinently said, the disciples before the crucifixion had


merely been told that the Kingdom of God was coming, if Jesus had really 
kept altogether in the background His own part in the Kingdom, then why 
when despair finally gave place to joy did the disciples not merely say, 
"Despite Jesus' death, the Kingdom that He foretold will truly come"? 
Why did they say rather, "Despite His death, He is the Messiah"?1 From 
no point of view, then, can the fact be denied that Jesus did claim to 
be the Messiah--neither from the point of view of acceptance of the 
Gospel witness as a whole, nor from the point of view of 
modernnaturalism.

And when the Gospel account of Jesus is considered closely, it is found 
to involve the Messianic consciousness throughout. Even those parts of 
the Gospels which have been regarded as most purely ethical are found to 
be based altogether upon Jesus' lofty claims. The Sermon on the Mount is 
a striking example. It is the fashion now to place the Sermon on the 
Mount in contrast with the rest of the New Testament. "We will have 
nothing to do with theology," men say in effect, "we will have nothing 
to do with miracles, with atonement, or with heaven or with hell. For us 
the Golden Rule is a sufficient guide of life; in the simple principles 
of the Sermon on the Mount we discover a solution of all the problems of 
society." It is indeed rather strange that men can speak in this way. 
Certainly it is rather derogatory to Jesus to assert that never except 
in one brief part of His recorded words did He say anything that is 
worth while. But even in the Sermon on the Mount there is far more than 
some men suppose. Men say that it contains no theology) in reality it 
contains theology of the most stupendous kind. In particular, it


contains the loftiest possible presentation of Jesus' own Person. That 
presentation appears in the strange note of authority which pervades the 
whole discourse; it appears in the recurrent words, "But I say unto 
you." Jesus plainly puts His own words on an equality with what He 
certainly regarded as the divine words of Scripture; He claimed the 
right to legislate for the Kingdom of God. Let it not be objected that 
this note of authority involves merely a prophetic consciousness in 
Jesus, a mere right to speak in God's name as God's Spirit might lead. 
For what prophet ever spoke in this way? The prophets said, "Thus saith 
the Lord," but Jesus said, "I say." We have no mere prophet here, no 
mere humble exponent of the will of God; but a stupendous Person 
speaking in a manner which for any other person would be abominable and 
absurd. The same thing appears in the passage Matt. vii. 21-23: "Not 
everyone who says to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of 
Heaven, but he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. Many 
shall say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy 
name, and in thy name cast out demons, and in thy name done many mighty 
works? And then I shall confess to them, 'I never knew you; depart from 
me, ye that work lawlessness."' This passage is in some respects a 
favorite with modern liberal teachers; for it is interpreted--falsely, 
it is true, yet plausibly--as meaning thatall that a man needs to attain 
standing with God is an approximately right performance of his duties to 
his fellow-men, and not any assent to a creed or even any direct 
relation to Jesus. But have those who quote the passage 80 triumphantly 
in this way ever stopped to reflect upon the other side of the 
picture--upon the stupendous fact that in this same passage the eternal 
destinies of men are made dependent upon the word of Jesus ? Jesus here 
represents


Himself as seated on the judgment-seat of all the earth, separating whom 
He will forever from the bliss that is involved in being present with 
Him. Could anything be further removed than such a Jesus from the humble 
teacher of righteousness appealed to by modern liberalism? Clearly it is 
impossible to escape from theology, even in the chosen precincts of the 
Sermon on the Mount. A stupendous theology, with Jesus' own Person at 
the center of it, is the presupposition of the whole teaching.

But may not that theology still be removed? May we not get rid of the 
bizarre, theological element which has intruded itself even into the 
Sermon on the Mount, and content ourselves merely with the ethical 
portion of the discourse? The question, from the point of view of modern 
liberalism, is natural. But it must be answered with an emphatic 
negative. For the fact is that the ethic of the discourse, taken by 
itself, will not work at all. The Golden Rule furnishes an example. "Do 
unto others as you would have others do unto you"--is that rule a rule 
of universal application, will it really solve all the problems of 
society? A little experience shows that such is not the case. Help a 
drunkard to get rid of his evil habit, and you will soon come to 
distrust the modern interpretation of the Golden Rule. The trouble is 
that the drunkard's companions apply the rule only too well; they do 
unto him exactly what they would have him do unto them --by buying him a 
drink. The Golden Rule becomes a powerful obstacle in the way of moral 
advance. But the trouble does not lie in the rule itself; it lies in the 
modern interpretation of the rule. The error consists in supposing that 
the Golden Rule, with the rest of the Sermon on the Mount, is addressed 
to the whole world. As a matter of fact the whole discourse is expressly 
addressed to Jesus' disciples; and from them the great world outside is


distinguished in the plainest possible way. The persons to whom the 
Golden Ruleis addressed are persons in whom a great change has been 
wrought--a change which fits them for entrance into the Kingdom of God. 
Such persons will have pure desires; they, and they only, can safely do 
unto others as they would have others do unto them, for the things that 
they would have others do unto them are high and pure.

So it is with the whole of the discourse. The new law of the Sermon on 
the Mount, in itself, can only produce despair. Strange indeed is the 
complacency with which modern men can say that the Golden Rule and the 
high ethical principles of Jesus are all that they need. In reality, if 
the requirements for entrance into the Kingdom of God are what Jesus 
declares them to be, we are all undone; we have not even attained to the 
external righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, and how shall we 
attain to that righteousness of the heart which Jesus demands ? The 
Sermon on the Mount, rightly interpreted, then, makes man a seeker after 
some divine means of salvation by which entrance into the Kingdom can be 
obtained. Even Moses was too high for us; but before this higher law of 
Jesus who shall stand without being condemned? The Sermon on the Mount, 
like all the rest of the New Testament, really leads a man straight to 
the foot of the Cross.

Even the disciples, to whom the teaching of Jesus was first addressed, 
knew well that they needed more than guidance in the way that they 
should go. It is only a superficial reading of the Gospels that can find 
in the relation which the disciples sustained to Jesus a mere relation 
of pupil to Master. When Jesus said, "Come unto me, all ye that labor 
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest," he was speaking not as a 
philosopher calling pupils


to his school) but as One who was in possession of rich stores of divine 
grace. And this much at least the disciples knew. They knew well in 
their heart of hearts that they had no right to stand in the Kingdom; 
they knew that only Jesus could win them entrance there. They did not 
yet know fully how Jesus could make them children of God; but they did 
know that He could do it and He alone. And in that trust all the 
theology of the great Christian creeds was in expectation contained.

At this point, an objection may arise. May we not--the modern liberal 
will say-- may we not now return to that simple trust of the disciples? 
May we not cease to ask how Jesus saves; may we not simply leave the way 
to Him? What need is there, then, of defining "effectual calling," what 
need of enumerating "justification, adoption and sanctification and the 
several benefits which in this life do eitheraccompany or flow from 
them"? What need even of rehearsing the steps in the saving work of 
Christ as they were rehearsed by the Jerusalem Church; what need of 
saying that "Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, that 
he was buried, that he has been raised on the third day according to the 
Scriptures"? Should not our trust be in a Person rather than in a 
message; in Jesus, rather than in what Jesus did; in Jesus' character 
rather than in Jesus' death?

Plausible words these are--plausible, and pitifully vain. Can we really 
return to Galilee; are we really in the same situation as those who came 
to Jesus when He was on earth? Can we hear Him say to us, "Thy sins are 
forgiven thee"? These are serious questions, and they cannot possibly be 
ignored. The plain fact is that Jesus of Nazareth died these nineteen 
hundred years ago. It was possible for the men of Galilee in the first 
century to trust Him; for to them He extended His aid. For them, life's


problem was easy. They needed only to push in through the crowd or be 
lowered through some Capernaum roof and the long search was over. But we 
are separated by nineteen centuries from the One who alone could give us 
aid. How can we bridge the gulf of time that separates us from Jesus?

Some persons would bridge the gulf by the mere use of the historical 
imagination. "Jesus is not dead," we are told, "but lives on through His 
recorded words and deeds; we do not need even to believe it all; even a 
part is sufficient; the wonderful personality of Jesus shines out clear 
from the Gospel story. Jesus, in other words, may still be known; let us 
simply--without theology, without controversy, without inquiry about 
miracles--abandon ourselves to His spell, and He will heal us."

There is a certain plausibility about that. It may readily be admitted 
that Jesus lives on in the Gospel record. In that narrative we see not 
merely a lifeless picture, but receive the impression of a living 
Person. We can still, as we read, share the astonishment of those who 
listened to the new teaching in the synagogue at Capernaum. We can 
sympathize with the faith and devotion of the little band of disciples 
who would not leave Him when others were offended at the hard saying. We 
feel a sympathetic thrill of joy at the blessed relief which was given 
to those who were ill in body and in mind. We can appreciate the 
wonderful love and compassion of Him who was sent to seek and to save 
that which was lost. A wonderful story it is indeed--not dead, but 
pulsating with life at every turn.

Certainly the Jesus of the Gospels is a real, a living Person. But that 
is not the only question. We are going forward far too fast. Jesus lives 
in the Gospels--so much may freely be admitted--but we of the twentieth 
century,


how may we come into vital relation to Him? He died nineteen hundred 
years ago. The life which He now lives in the Gospels is simply the old 
life lived over and over again. And in that life we have no place; in 
that life we are spectators, not actors. The life which Jesus lives in 
the Gospels is after all for us but the spurious life of the stage. We 
sit silent in the playhouse and watch the absorbing Gospel drama of 
forgiveness and healing and love and courage and high endeavor; in rapt 
attention we follow the fortunes of those who came to Jesus laboring and 
heavy laden and found rest. For a time our own troubles are forgotten. 
But suddenly the curtain falls, with the closing of the book, and out we 
go again into the cold humdrum of our own lives. Gone are the warmth and 
gladness of an ideal world, and "in their stead a sense of real things 
comes doubly strong." We are no longer living over again the lives of 
Peter and James and John. Alas, we are living our own lives once more, 
with our own problems and our own misery and our own sin. And still we 
are seeking our own Savior.

Let us not deceive ourselves. A Jewish teacher of the first century can 
never satisfy the longing of our souls. Clothe Him with all the art of 
modern research, throw upon Him the warm, deceptive calcium-light of 
modern sentimentality; and despite it all common sense will come to its 
rights again, and for our brief hour of self-deception-- as though we 
had been with Jesus--will wreak upon us the revenge of hopeless 
disillusionment.

But, says the modern preacher, are we not, in being satisfied with the 
"historical" Jesus, the great teacher who proclaimed the Kingdom of God, 
merely restoring the simplicity of the primitive gospel? No, we answer, 
you are not, but, temporally at least, you are not so very far wrong. 
You are really returning to a very primitive


stage in the life of the Church. Only, that stage is not the Galilean 
springtime. For in Galilee men had a living Savior. There was one time 
and one time only when the disciples lived, like you, merely on the 
memory of Jesus. When was it? It was a gloomy, desperate time. It was 
the three sad days after the crucifixion. Then and then only did Jesus' 
disciples regard Him merely as a blessed memory. "Wetrusted," they said, 
"that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel." "We 
trusted"--but now our trust is gone. Shall we remain, with modern 
liberalism, forever in the gloom of those sad days? Or shall we pass out 
from it to the warmth and joy of Pentecost?

Certainly we shall remain forever in the gloom if we attend merely to 
the character of Jesus and neglect the thing that He has done, if we try 
to attend to the Person and neglect the message. We may have joy for 
sadness and power for weakness; but not by easy half-way measures, not 
by avoidance of controversy, not by trying to hold on to Jesus and yet 
reject the gospel. What was it that within a few days transformed a band 
of mourners into the spiritual conquerors of the world? It was not the 
memory of Jesus' life; it was not the inspiration which came from past 
contact with Him. But it was the message, "He is risen." That message 
alone gave to the disciples a living Savior i and it alone can give to 
us a living Savior today. We shall never have vital contact with Jesus 
if we attend to His person and neglect the message; for it is the 
message which makes Him ours.

But the Christian message contains more than the fact of the 
resurrection.1 It is not enough to know that Jesus is alive; it is not 
enough to know that a wonderful Person

1. For what follows compare A Rapid Survey of the History and Literature 
of New Testament Times, published by the Presbyterian Board of 
Publication and Sabbath School Work, Teacher's Manual, pp. 44f.


lived in the first century of the Christian era and that Person still 
lives, somewhere and somehow, today. Jesus lives, and that is well; but 
what good is it to us ? We are like the inhabitants of far-off Syria or 
Phoenicia in the days of His flesh. There is a wonderful Person who can 
heal every ill of body and mind. But, alas, we are not with Him, and the 
way is far. How shall we come into His presence? How shall contact be 
established between us and Him? For the people of ancient Galilee 
contact was established by a touch of Jesus' hand or a word from His 
lips. But for us the problem is not so easy. We cannot find Him by the 
lake shore or in crowded houses; we cannot be lowered into any room 
where He sits amid scribes and Pharisees. If we employ only our own 
methods of search, we shall find ourselves on a fruitless pilgrimage. 
Surely we need guidance, if we are to find our Savior.

And in the New Testament we find guidance full and free--guidance so 
complete as to remove all doubt, yet so simple that a child can 
understand. Contact with Jesus according to the New Testament is 
established by what Jesus does, not for others, but for us. The account 
of what Jesus did for others is indeed necessary. Byreading how He went 
about doing good, how He healed the sick and raised the dead and forgave 
sins, we learn that He is a Person who is worthy of trust. But such 
knowledge is to the Christian man not an end in itself, but a means to 
an end. It is not enough to know that Jesus is a Person worthy of trust; 
it is also necessary to know that He is willing to have us trust Him. It 
is not enough that He saved others; we need to know also that He has 
saved us. That knowledge is given in the story of the Cross. For us 
Jesus does not merely place His fingers in the ears and


say, "Be opened''; for us He does not merely say "Arise and walk." For 
us He has done a greater thing--for us He died. Our dreadful guilt, the 
condemnation of God's law--it was wiped out by an act of grace. That is 
the message which brings Jesus near to us, and makes Him not merely the 
Savior of the men of Galilee long ago, but the Savior of you and me.

It is vain, then, to speak of reposing trust in the Person without 
believing the message. For trust involves a personal relation between 
the one who trusts and him in whom the trust is reposed. And in this 
case the personal relation is set up by the blessed theology of the 
Cross. Without the eighth chapter of Romans, the mere story of the 
earthly life of Jesus would be remote and dead; for it is through the 
eighth chapter of Romans, or the message which that chapter contains, 
that Jesus becomes our Savior today.

The truth is that when men speak of trust in Jesus' Person, as being 
possible without acceptance of the message of His death and 
resurrection, they do not really mean trust at all. What they designate 
as trust is really admiration or reverence. They reverence Jesus as the 
supreme Person of all history and the supreme revealer of God. But trust 
can come only when the supreme Person extends His saving power to us. 
"He went about doing good," "He spake words such as never man spake," 
"He is the express image of God"--that is reverence; "He loved me and 
gave Himself for me"--that is faith.

But the words "He loved me and gave Himself for me" are in historical 
form; they constitute an account of something that happened. And they 
add to the fact the meaning of the fact; they contain in essence the 
whole profound theology of redemption through the blood of Christ. 
Christian doctrine lies at the very roots of faith.


It must be admitted, then, that if we are to have a nondoctrinal 
religion, or a doctrinal religion founded merely on general truth, we 
must give up not only Paul, not only the primitive Jerusalem Church, but 
also Jesus Himself. But what is meant by doctrine? It has been 
interpreted here as meaning any presentation of the facts which lie at 
the basis of the Christian religion with the true meaning of the facts. 
But is that the only sense of the word? May the word not also be taken 
in a narrower sense? May it not also mean a systematic and minute and 
one-sidedly scientific presentation of the facts? And if the word is 
taken in this narrower sense, may not the modern objection to doctrine 
involve merely an objection to the excessive subtlety of controversial 
theology, and not at all an objection to the glowing words of the New 
Testament, an objection to the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and 
not at all to the first century? Undoubtedly the word is so taken by 
many occupants of the pews when they listen to the modern exaltation of 
"life" at the expense of "doctrine." The pious hearer labors under the 
impression that he is merely being asked to return to the simplicity of 
the New Testament, instead of attending to the subtleties of the 
theologians. Since it has never occurred to him to attend to the 
subtleties of the theologians, he has that comfortable feeling which 
always comes to the churchgoer when some one else's sins are being 
attacked. It is no wonder that the modern invectives against doctrine 
constitute a popular type of preaching. At any rate, an attack upon 
Calvin or Turrettin or the Westminster divines does not seem to the 
modern churchgoer to be a very dangerous thing. In point of fact, 
however, the attack upon doctrine is not nearly so innocent a matter as 
our simple churchgoer supposes; for the things Objected to in the 
theology of the Church are also at


the very heart of the New Testament. Ultimately the attack is not 
against the seventeenth century, but against the Bible and against Jesus 
Himself.

Even if it were an attack not upon the Bible but only upon the great 
historic presentations of Biblical teaching, it would still be 
unfortunate. If the Church were led to wipe out of existence all 
products of the thinking of nineteen Christian centuries and start 
fresh, the loss, even if the Bible were retained, would be immense. When 
it is once admitted that a body of facts lies at the basis of the 
Christian religion, the efforts which past generations have made toward 
the classification of the facts will have to be treated with respect. In 
no branch ofscience would there be any real advance if every generation 
started fresh with no dependence upon what past generations have 
achieved. Yet in theology, vituperation of the past seems to be thought 
essential to progress. And upon what base slanders the vituperation is 
based! After listening to modern tirades against the great creeds of the 
Church, one receives rather a shock when one turns to the Westminster 
Confession, for example, or to that tenderest and most theological of 
books, the "Pilgrim's Progress" of John Bunyan, and discovers that in 
doing so one has turned from shallow modern phrases to a "dead 
orthodoxy" that is pulsating with life in every word. In such orthodoxy 
there is life enough to set the whole world aglow with Christian love.

As a matter of fact, however, in the modern vituperation of "doctrine," 
it is not merely the great theologians or the great creeds that are 
being attacked, but the New Testament and our Lord Himself. In rejecting 
doctrine, the liberal preacher is rejecting the simple words of Paul' 
"Who loved me and gave Himself for me," just as much as the homoousion 
of the Nicene Creed. For the word "doctrine"


is really used not in its narrowest, but in its broadest sense. The 
liberal preacher is really rejecting the whole basis of Christianity, 
which is a religion founded not on aspirations, but on facts. Here is 
found the most fundamental difference between liberalism and 
Christianity--liberalism is altogether in the imperative mood, while 
Christianity begins with a triumphant indicative; liberalism appeals to 
man's will, while Christianity announces, first, a gracious act of God.

In maintaining the doctrinal basis of Christianity, we are particularly 
anxious not to be misunderstood. There are certain things that we do not 
mean.

In the first place, we do not mean that if doctrine is sound it makes no 
difference about life. On the contrary, it makes all the difference in 
the world. From the beginning, Christianity was certainly a way of life; 
the salvation that it offered was a salvation from sin, and salvation 
from sin appeared not merely in a blessed hope but also in an immediate 
moral change. The early Christians, to the astonishment of their 
neighbors, lived a strange new kind of life--a life of honesty, of 
purity and of unselfishness. And from the Christian community all other 
types of life were excluded in the strictest way. From the beginning 
Christianity was certainly a life.

But how was the life produced? It might conceivably have been produced 
by exhortation. That method had often been tried in the ancient world; 
in the Hellenistic age there were many wandering preachers who told men 
how theyought to live. But such exhortation proved to be powerless. 
Although the ideals of the Cynic and Stoic preachers were high, these 
preachers never succeeded ._ transforming society. The strange thing 
about Christianity was that it adopted an entirely different method. It 
transformed the lives of men not by appealing to the


human will, but by telling a story; not by exhortation, but by the 
narration of an event. It is no wonder that such a method seemed 
strange. Could anything be more impractical than the attempt to 
influence conduct by rehearsing events concerning the death of a 
religious teacher? That is what Paul called "the foolishness of the 
message." It seemed foolish to the ancient world, and it seems foolish 
to liberal preachers today. But the strange thing is that it works. The 
effects of it appear even in this world. Where the most eloquent 
exhortation fails, the simple story of an event succeeds; the lives of 
men are transformed by a piece of news.

It is especially by such transformation of life, today as always, that 
the Christian message is commended to the attention of men. Certainly, 
then, it does make an enormous difference whether our lives be right. If 
our doctrine be true, and our lives be wrong, how terrible is our sin! 
For then we have brought despite upon the truth itself. On the other 
hand, however, it is also very sad when men use the social graces which 
God has given them, and the moral momentum of a godly ancestry, to 
commend a message which is false. Nothing in the world can take the 
place of truth.

In the second place, we do not mean, in insisting upon the doctrinal 
basis of Christianity, that all points of doctrine are equally 
important. It is perfectly possible for Christian fellowship to be 
maintained despite differences of opinion.

One such difference of opinion, which has been attaining increasing 
prominence in recent years, concerns the order of events in connection 
with the Lord's return. A large number of Christian people believe that 
when evil has reached its climax in the world, the Lord Jesus will 
return to this earth in bodily presence to bring about a reign of


righteousness which will last a thousand years, and that only after that 
period the end of the world will come. That belief, in the opinion of 
the present writer, is an error, arrived at by a false interpretation of 
the Word of God; we do not think thatthe prophecies of the Bible permit 
so definite a mapping-out of future events. The Lord will come again, 
and it will be no mere "spiritual" coming in the modern sense--so much 
is clear--but that so little will be accomplished by the present 
dispensation of the Holy Spirit and so much will be left to be 
accomplished by the Lord in bodily presence--such a view we cannot find 
to be justified by the words of Scripture. What is our attitude, then, 
with regard to this debate? Certainly it cannot be an attitude of 
indifference. The recrudescence of "Chiliasm" or "premillennialism" in 
the modern Church causes us serious concern; it is coupled, we think, 
with a false method of interpreting Scripture which in the long run will 
be productive of harm. Yet how great is our agreement with those who 
hold the premillennial view! They share to the full our reverence for 
the authority of the Bible, and differ from us only in the 
interpretation of the Bible; they share our ascription of deity to the 
Lord Jesus, and our supernaturalistic conception both of the entrance of 
Jesus into the world and of the consummation when He shall come again. 
Certainly, then, from our point of view, their error, serious though it 
may be, is not deadly error; and Christian fellowship, with loyalty not 
only to the Bible but to the great creeds of the Church, can still unite 
us with them. It is therefore highly misleading when modern liberals 
represent the present issue in the Church, both in the mission field and 
at home, as being an issue between premillennialism and the opposite 
view. It is really an issue between Christianity, whether premillennial 
or not, on the one side,


and a naturalistic negation of all Christianity on the other.

Another difference of opinion which can subsist in the midst of 
Christian fellowship is the difference of opinion about the mode of 
efficacy of the sacraments. That difference is indeed serious, and to 
deny its seriousness is a far greater error than to take the wrong side 
in the controversy itself. It is often said that the divided condition 
of Christendom is an evil, and so it is. But the evil consists in the 
existence of the errors which cause the divisions and not at all in the 
recognition of those errors when once they exist. It was a great 
calamity when at the "Marburg Conference" between Luther and the 
representatives of the Swiss Reformation, Luther wrote on the table with 
regard to the Lord's Supper, "This is my body," and said to Zwingli and 
Oecolampadius, "You have another spirit." That difference of opinion led 
to the breach between the Lutheran and the Reformed branches of the 
Church, and caused Protestantism to lose much of the ground that might 
otherwise have been gained. It was a great calamity indeed. But the 
calamity was due to the fact that Luther (as we believe) was wrong about 
the Lord's Supper;and it would have been a far greater calamity if being 
wrong about the Supper he had represented the whole question as a 
trifling affair. Luther was wrong about the Supper, but not nearly so 
wrong as he would have been if, being wrong, he had said to his 
opponents: "Brethren, this matter is a trifle; and it makes really very 
little difference what a man thinks about the table of the Lord." Such 
indifferentism would have been far more deadly than all the divisions 
between the branches of the Church. A Luther who would have compromised 
with regard to the Lord's Supper never would have said at the Diet of 
Worms, "Here I stand, I cannot do otherwise,


God help me, Amen." Indifferentism about doctrine makes no heroes of the 
faith.

Still another difference of opinion concerns the nature and prerogatives 
of the Christian ministry. According to Anglican doctrine, the bishops 
are in possession of an authority which has been handed down to them, by 
successive ordination, from the apostles of the Lord, and without such 
ordination there is no valid priesthood. Other churches deny this 
doctrine of "apostolic succession," and hold a different view of the 
ministry. Here again, the difference is no trifle, and we have little 
sympathy with those who in the mere interests of Church efficiency try 
to induce Anglicans to let down the barrier which their principles have 
led them to erect. But despite the importance of this difference, it 
does not descend to the very roots. Even to the conscientious Anglican 
himself, though he regards the members of other bodies as in schism, 
Christian fellowship with individuals in those other bodies is still 
possible; and certainly those who reject the Anglican view of the 
ministry can regard the Anglican Church as a genuine and very noble 
member in the body of Christ.

Another difference of opinion is that between the Calvinistic or 
Reformed theology and the Arminianism which appears in the Methodist 
Church. It is difficult to see how any one who has really studied the 
question can regard that difference as an unimportant matter. On the 
contrary' it touches very closely some of the profoundest things of the 
Christian faith. A Calvinist is constrained to regard the Arminian 
theology as a serious impoverishment of the Scripture doctrine of divine 
grace, and equally serious is the view which the Arminian must hold as 
to the doctrine of the Reformed Churches. Yet here again, true 
evangelical fellowship is possible between those



who hold, with regard to some exceedingly important matters, sharply 
opposing views.

Far more serious still is the division between the Church of Rome and 
evangelical Protestantism in all its forms. Yet how great is the common 
heritage which unites the Roman Catholic Church, with its maintenance of 
the authority of Holy Scripture and with its acceptance of the great 
early creeds, to devout Protestants today! We would not indeed obscure 
the difference which divides us from Rome. The gulf is indeed profound. 
But profound as it is, it seems almost trifling compared to the abyss 
which stands between us and many ministers of our own Church. The Church 
of Rome may represent a perversion of the Christian religion; but 
naturalistic liberalism is not Christianity at all.

That does not mean that conservatives and liberals must live in personal 
animosity. It does not involve any lack of sympathy on our part for 
those who have felt obliged by the current of the times to relinquish 
their confidence in the strange message of the Cross. Many ties--ties of 
blood, of citizenship, of ethical aims, of humanitarian endeavor--unite 
us to those who have abandoned the gospel. We trust that those ties may 
never be weakened, and that ultimately they may serve some purpose in 
the propagation of the Christian faith. But Christian service consists 
primarily in the propagation of a message, and specifically Christian 
fellowship exists only between those to whom the message has become the 
very basis of all life.

The character of Christianity as founded upon a message is summed up in 
the words of the eighth verse of the first chapter of Acts--"Ye shall be 
my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and unto 
the uttermost part of the earth." It is entirely unnecessary,


for the present purpose, to argue about the historical value of the Book 
of Acts or to discuss the question whether Jesus really spoke the words 
just quoted. ID any case the verse must be recognized as an adequate 
summary of what is known about primitive Christianity. From the 
beginning Christianity was a campaign of witnessing. And the witnessing 
did not concern merely what Jesus was doing within the recesses of the 
individual life. To take the words of Acts in that way is to do violence 
to the context and to all the evidence. On the contrary, the Epistles of 
Paul and all the sources make it abundantly plain that the testimony was 
primarily not to inner spiritual facts but to what Jesus had done once 
for all in Hisdeath and resurrection.

Christianity is based, then, upon an account of something that happened, 
and the Christian worker is primarily a witness. But if so, it is rather 
important that the Christian worker should tell the truth. When a man 
takes his seat upon the witness stand, it makes little difference what 
the cut of his coat is, or whether his sentences are nicely turned. The 
important thing is that he tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth. If we are to be truly Christians, then, it does make a 
vast difference what our teachings are, and it is by no means aside from 
the point to set forth the teachings of Christianity in contrast with 
the teachings of the chief modern rival of Christianity.

The chief modern rival of Christianity is "liberalism." An examination 
of the teachings of liberalism in comparison with those of Christianity 
will show that at every point the two movements are in direct 
opposition. That examination will now be undertaken, though merely in a 
summary and cursory way.
Chapter 3: "God & Man"

It has been observed in the last chapter that Christianity is based on 
an account of something that happened in the first century of our era. 
But before that account can be received, certain presuppositions must be 
accepted. The Christian gospel consists in an account of how God saved 
man, and before that gospel can be understood something must be known 
(1) about God and (2) about man. The doctrine of God and the doctrine of 
man are the two great presuppositions of the gospel. With regard to 
these presuppositions, as with regard to the gospel itself, modern 
liberalism is diametrically opposed to Christianity.

It is opposed to Christianity, in the first place, in its conception of 
God. But at this point we are met with a particularly insistent form of 
that objection to doctrinal matters which has already been considered. 
It is unnecessary, we are told, to have a"conception" of God; theology, 
or the knowledge of God, it is said, is the death of religion; we should 
not seek to know God, but should merely feel His presence.

With regard to this objection, it ought to be observed that if religion 
consists merely in feeling the presence of God, it is devoid of any 
moral quality whatever. Pure feeling, if there be such a thing, is 
non-moral. What makes affection for a human friend, for example, such an 
ennobling thing is the knowledge which we possess of the


character of our friend. Human affection, apparently so simple, is 
really just bristling with dogma. It depends upon a host of observations 
treasured up in the mind with regard to the character of our friends. 
But if human affection is thus really dependent upon knowledge, why 
should it be otherwise with that supreme personal relationship which is 
at the basis of religion ? Why should we be indignant about slanders 
directed against a human friend, while at the same time we are patient 
about the basest slanders directed against our God? Certainly it does 
make the greatest possible difference what we think about God; the 
knowledge of God is the very basis of religion.

How, then, shall God be known; how shall we become so acquainted with 
Him that personal fellowship may become possible? Some liberal preachers 
would say that we become acquainted with God only through Jesus. That 
assertion has an appearance of loyalty to our Lord, but in reality it is 
highly derogatory to Him. For Jesus Himself plainly recognized the 
validity of other ways of knowing God, and to reject those other ways is 
to reject the things that lay at the very center of Jesus' life. Jesus 
plainly found God's hand in nature; the lilies of the field revealed to 
Him the weaving of God. He found God also in the moral law; the law 
written in the hearts of men was God's law, which revealed His 
righteousness. Finally Jesus plainly found God revealed in the 
Scriptures. How profound was our Lord's use of the words of prophets and 
psalmists! To say that such revelation of God was invalid, or is useless 
to us today, is to do despite to things that lay closest to Jesus' mind 
and heart.

But, as a matter of fact, when men say that we know God only as He is 
revealed in Jesus, they are denying all real knowledge of God whatever. 
For unless there be


some idea of God independent of Jesus, the ascription of deity to Jesus 
has no meaning. To say, "Jesus is God," is meaningless unless the word 
"God" has an antecedent meaning attached to it. And the attaching of a 
meaning to the word "God" is accomplished by the means which have just 
been mentioned. We are not forgetting the words of Jesus in the Gospel 
of John, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." But these words do 
not mean that if a man had never known what the word "God" means, he 
could come to attach an idea to that word merely by his knowledge of 
Jesus' character. On the contrary, the disciples to whom Jesus was 
speaking had already a very definite conception of God; a knowledge of 
the one supreme Person was presupposed in all that Jesus said. But the 
disciples desired not only a knowledge of God hut also intimate, 
personal contact. And that came through their intercourse with Jesus. 
Jesus revealed, in a wonderfully intimate way, the character of God, but 
such revelation obtained its true significance only on the basis both of 
the Old Testament heritage and of Jesus' own teaching. Rational theism, 
the knowledge of one Supreme Person, Maker and active Ruler of the 
world, is at the very root of Christianity.

But, the modern preacher will say, it is incongruous to attribute to 
Jesus an acceptance of "rational theism"; Jesus had a practical, not a 
theoretical, knowledge of God. There is a sense in which these words are 
true. Certainly no part of Jesus' knowledge of God was merely 
theoretical; everything that Jesus knew about God touched His heart and 
determined His actions. In that sense, Jesus' knowledge of God was 
"practical." But unfortunately that is not the sense in which the 
assertion of modern liberalism is meant. What is frequently meant by a 
"practical" knowledge of God in modern parlance is


not a theoretical knowledge of God that is also practical, but a 
practical knowledge which is not theoretical --in other words, a 
knowledge which gives no information about objective reality, a 
knowledge which is no knowledge at all. And nothing could possibly be 
more unlike the religion of Jesus than that. The relation of Jesus to 
His heavenly Father was not a relation to a vague and impersonal 
goodness, it was not a relation which merely clothed itself in symbolic, 
personal form. On the contrary, it was a relation to a real Person, 
whose existence was just as definite and just as much a subject of 
theoretic knowledge as the existence of the lilies of the field that God 
had clothed. The very basis of the religion of Jesus was a triumphant 
belief in the real existence of a personal God.

And without that belief no type of religion can rightly appeal to Jesus 
today. Jesus was a theist, and rational theism is at the basis of 
Christianity. Jesus did not, indeed, support His theism by argument; He 
did not provide in advance answers to the Kantian attack upon the 
theistic proofs. But that means not that He was indifferent to the 
belief which is the logical result of those proofs, but that the belief 
stood so firm, both to Him and to His hearers, that in His teaching it 
is always presupposed. So today it is not necessary for all Christians 
to analyze the logical basis of their belief in God; the human mind has 
a wonderful faculty for the condensation of perfectly valid arguments, 
and what seems like an instinctive belief may turn out to be the result 
of many logical steps. Or, rather' it may be that the belief in a 
personal God is the result of a primitive revelation, and that the 
theistic proofs are only the logical confirmation of what was originally 
arrived at by a different means. At any rate, the logical confirmation 
of the belief in God is a vital concern


to the Christian; at this point as at many others religion and 
philosophy are connected in the most intimate possible way. True 
religion can make no peace with a false philosophy, any more than with a 
science that is falsely so-called; a thing cannot possibly be true in 
religion and false in philosophy or in science. All methods of arriving 
at truth, if they be valid methods, will arrive at a harmonious result. 
Certainly the atheistic or agnostic Christianity which sometimes goes 
under the name of a "practical" religion is no Christianity at all. At 
the very root of Christianity is the belief in the real existence of a 
personal God.

Strangely enough, at the very time when modern liberalism is decrying 
the theistic proofs, and taking refuge in a "practical" knowledge which 
shall somehow be independent of scientifically or philosophically 
ascertained facts, the liberal preacher loves to use one designation of 
God which is nothing if not theistic; he loves to speak of God as 
"Father." The term certainly has the merit of ascribing personality to 
God. By some of those who use it, indeed, it is not seriously meant; by 
some it is employed because it is useful, not because it is true. But 
not all liberals are able to make the subtle distinction between 
theoretic judgments and judgments of value; some liberals, though 
perhaps a decreasing number, are true believers in a personal God. And 
such men are able to think of God truly as a Father.

The term presents a very lofty conception of God. It is not indeed 
exclusively Christian; the term "Father" has been applied to God outside 
of Christianity. It appears, for example, in the widespread belief in an 
"All- Father," which prevails among many races even in company with 
polytheism; it appears here and there in the Old Testament, and in 
pre-Christian Jewish writings subsequent to


the Old Testament period. Such occurrences of the term are by no means 
devoid of significance. The Old Testament usage, in particular, is a 
worthy precursor of our Lord's teaching; for although in the Old 
Testament the word "Father" ordinarily designates God in relation not to 
the individual, but to the nation or to the king, yet the individual 
Israelite, because of his part in the chosen people, felt himself to be 
in a peculiarly intimate relation to the covenant God. But despite this 
anticipation of the teaching of our Lord, Jesus brought such an 
incomparable enrichment of the usage of the term, that it is a correct 
instinct which regards the thought of God as Father as something 
characteristically Christian.

Modern men have been so much impressed with this element in Jesus' 
teaching that they have sometimes been inclined to regard it as the very 
sum and substance of our religion. We are not interested, they say, in 
many things for which men formerly gave their lives; we are not 
interested in the theology of the creeds; we are not interested in the 
doctrines of sin and salvation; we are not interested in atonement 
through the blood of Christ: enough for us is the simple truth of the 
fatherhood of God and its corollary, the brotherhood of man. We may not 
be very orthodox in the theological sense, they continue, but of course 
you will recognize us as Christians because we accept Jesus' teaching as 
to the Father God.

It is very strange how intelligent persons can speak in this way. It is 
very strange how those who accept only the universal fatherhood of God 
as the sum and substance of religion can regard themselves as Christians 
or can appeal to Jesus of Nazareth. For the plain fact is that this 
modern doctrine of the universal fatherhood of God formed no part 
whatever of Jesus' teaching. Where is it that Jesus may be supposed to 
have taught the universal


fatherhood of God? Certainly it is not in the parable of the Prodigal 
Son. For in the first place, the publicans and sinners whose acceptance 
by Jesus formed theoccasion both of the Pharisees' objection and of 
Jesus' answer to them by means of the parable, were not any men 
anywhere, but were members of the chosen people and as such might be 
designated as sons of God. In the second place, a parable is certainly 
not to be pressed in its details. So here because the joy of the father 
in the parable is like the joy of God when a sinner receives salvation 
at Jesus' hand, it does not follow that the relation which God sustains 
to still unrepentant sinners is that of a Father to his children. Where 
else, then, can the universal fatherhood of God be found ? Surely not in 
the Sermon on the Mount; for throughout the Sermon on the Mount those 
who can call God Father are distinguished in the most emphatic way from 
the great world of the Gentiles outside. One passage in the discourse 
has indeed been urged in support of the modern doctrine: "But I say unto 
you, love your enemies and pray for them that persecute you; that ye may 
be sons of your Father who is in heaven; for He maketh His sun to rise 
on evil and good and sendeth rain on just and unjust" (Matt. v. 44, 45). 
But the passage certainly will not bear the weight which is hung upon 
it. God is indeed represented here as caring for all men whether evil or 
good, but He is certainly not called the Father of all. Indeed it might 
almost be said that the point of the passage depends on the fact that He 
is not the Father of all. He cares even for those who are not His 
children but His enemies; so His children, Jesus' disciples, ought to 
imitate Him by loving even those who are not their brethren but their 
persecutors. The modern doctrine of the universal fatherhood of God is 
not to be found in the teaching of Jesus.


And it is not to be found in the New Testament. The whole New Testament 
and Jesus Himself do indeed represent God as standing in a relation to 
all men, whether Christians or not, which is analogous to that in which 
a father stands to his children. He is the Author of the being of all, 
and as such might well be called the Father of all. He cares for all, 
and for that reason also might be called the Father of all. Here and 
there the figure of fatherhood seems to be used to designate this 
broader relationship which God sustains to all men or even to all 
created beings. So in an isolated passage in Hebrews, God is spoken of 
as the "Father of spirits" (Heb. xii. 9). Here perhaps it is the 
relation of God, as creator, to the personal beings whom He has created 
which is in view. One of the clearest instances of the broader use of 
the figure of fatherhood is found in the speech of Paul at Athens, Acts 
xvii. 28: "For we are also His offspring." Here it is plainly the 
relation in which God stands to all men, whether Christians or not, 
which is in mind. But the words form part of an hexameter line and are 
taken from a pagan poet; they are not representedas part of the gospel, 
but merely as belonging to the common meeting-ground which Paul 
discovered in speaking to his pagan hearers. This passage is only 
typical of what appears, with respect to a universal fatherhood of God, 
in the New Testament as a whole. Something analogous to a universal 
fatherhood of God is taught in the New Testament. Here and there the 
terminology of fatherhood and sonship is even used to describe this 
general relationship. But such instances are extremely rare. Ordinarily 
the lofty term "Father" is used to describe a relationship of a far more 
intimate kind, the relationship in which God stands to the company of 
the redeemed.

The modern doctrine of the universal fatherhood of
God, then, which is being celebrated as "the essence of Christianity," 
really belongs at best only to that vague natural religion which forms 
the presupposition which the Christian preacher can use when the gospel 
is to be proclaimed; and when it is regarded as a reassuring, 
all-sufficient thing, it comes into direct opposition to the New 
Testament. The gospel itself refers to something entirely different; the 
really distinctive New Testament teaching about the fatherhood of God 
concerns only those who have been brought into the household of faith.

There is nothing narrow about such teaching; for the door of the 
household of faith is open wide to all. That door is the "new and living 
way" which Jesus opened by His blood. And if we really love our fellow 
men, we shall not go about the world, with the liberal preacher, trying 
to make men satisfied with the coldness of a vague natural religion. But 
by the preaching of the gospel we shall invite them into the warmth and 
joy of the house of God. Christianity offers men all that is offered by 
the modern liberal teaching about the universal fatherhood of God; but 
it is Christianity only because it offers also infinitely more.

But the liberal conception of God differs even more fundamentally from 
the Christian view than in the different circle of ideas connected with 
the terminology of fatherhood. The truth is that liberalism has lost 
sight of the very center and core of the Christian teaching. In the 
Christian view of God as set forth in the Bible, there are many 
elements. But one attribute of God is absolutely fundamental in the 
Bible; one attribute is absolutely necessary in order to render 
intelligible all the rest. That attribute is the awful transcendence of 
God. From beginning to end the Bible is concerned to set forth the awful 
gulf that separates the creature from theCreator. It is



true, indeed, that according to the Bible God is immanent in the world. 
Not a sparrow falls to the ground without Him. But he is immanent in the 
world not because He is identified with the world, but because He is the 
free Creator and Upholder of it. Between the creature and the Creator a 
great gulf is fixed.

In modern liberalism, on the other hand, this sharp distinction between 
God and the world is broken down, and the name "God" is applied to the 
mighty world process itself. We find ourselves in the midst of a mighty 
process, which manifests itself in the indefinitely small and in the 
indefinitely great--in the infinitesimal life which is revealed through 
the microscope and in the vast movements of the heavenly spheres. To 
this world-process, of which we ourselves form a part, we apply the 
dread name of "God." God, therefore, it is said in effect, is not a 
person distinct from ourselves; on the contrary our life is a part of 
His. Thus the Gospel story of the Incarnation, according to modern 
liberalism, is sometimes thought of as a symbol of the general truth 
that man at his best is one with God.

It is strange how such a representation can be regarded as anything new, 
for as a matter of fact, pantheism is a very ancient phenomenon. It has 
always been with us, to blight the religious life of man. And modern 
liberalism, even when it is not consistently pantheistic, is at any rate 
pantheizing. It tends everywhere to break down the separateness between 
God and the world, and the sharp personal distinction between God and 
man. Even the sin of man on this view ought logically to be regarded as 
part of the life of God. Very different is the living and holy God of 
the Bible and of Christian faith.

Christianity differs from liberalism, then, in the first place, in its 
conception of God. But it also differs in its conception of man.



Modern liberalism has lost all sense of the gulf that separates the 
creature from the Creator; its doctrine of man follows naturally from 
its doctrine of God. But it is not only the creature limitations of 
mankind which are denied. Even more important is another difference. 
According to the Bible, man is a sinner under the justcondemnation of 
God; according to modern liberalism, there is really no such thing as 
sin. At the very root of the modern liberal movement is the loss of the 
consciousness of sin.1

The consciousness of sin was formerly the starting-point of all 
preaching; but today it is gone. Characteristic of the modern age, above 
all else, is a supreme confidence in human goodness; the religious 
literature of the day is redolent of that confidence. Get beneath the 
rough exterior of men, we are told, and we shall discover enough 
self-sacrifice to found upon it the hope of society; the world's evil, 
it is said, can be overcome with the world's good; no help is needed 
from outside the world.

What has produced this satisfaction with human goodness? What has become 
of the consciousness of sin? The consciousness of sin has certainly been 
lost. But what has removed it from the hearts of men?

In the first place, the war has perhaps had something to do with the 
change. In time of war, our attention is called so exclusively to the 
sins of other people that we are sometimes inclined to forget our own 
sins. Attention to the sins of other people is, indeed, sometimes 
necessary. It is quite right to be indignant against any oppression of 
the weak which is being carried on by the strong. But such a habit of 
mind, if made permanent, if carried over into the days of peace, has its 
dangers. It joins forces


with the collectivism of the modern state to obscure the individual, 
personal character of guilt. If John Smith beats his wife nowadays, no 
one is so old-fashioned as to blame John Smith for it. On the contrary, 
it is said, John Smith is evidently the victim of some more of that 
Bolshevistic propaganda; Congress ought to be called in extra session in 
order to take up the case of John Smith in an alien and sedition law.

But the loss of the consciousness of sin is far deeper than the war; it 
has its roots in a mighty spiritual process which has been active during 
the past seventy-five years. Like other great movements, that process 
has come silently--so silently that its results have been achieved 
before the plain man was even aware of what was taking place. 
Nevertheless, despite all superficial continuity, a remarkable change 
has come about within the last seventy-five years. The change is nothing 
less thanthe substitution of paganism for Christianity as the dominant 
view of life. Seventy-five years ago, Western civilization, despite 
inconsistencies, was still predominantly Christian; today it is 
predominantly pagan.

In speaking of "paganism," we are not using a term of reproach. Ancient 
Greece was pagan, but it was glorious, and the modern world has not even 
begun to equal its achievements. What, then, is paganism? The answer is 
not really difficult. Paganism is that view of life which finds the 
highest goal of human existence in the healthy and harmonious and joyous 
development of existing human faculties. Very different is the Christian 
ideal. Paganism is optimistic with regard to unaided human nature' 
whereas Christianity is the religion of the broken heart.

In saying that Christianity is the religion of the broken heart, we do 
not mean that Christianity ends with the



broken heart; we do not mean that the characteristic Christian attitude 
is a continual beating on the breast or a continual crying of "Woe is 
me." Nothing could be further from the fact. On the contrary, 
Christianity means that sin is faced once for all, and then is cast, by 
the grace of God, forever into the depths of the sea. The trouble with 
the paganism of ancient Greece, as with the paganism of modern times, 
was not in the superstructure, which was glorious, but in the 
foundation, which was rotten. There was always something to be covered 
up; the enthusiasm of the architect was maintained only by ignoring the 
disturbing fact of sin. In Christianity, on the other hand, nothing 
needs to be covered up. The fact of sin is faced squarely once for all, 
and is dealt with by the grace of God. But then, after sin has been 
removed by the grace of God, the Christian can proceed to develop 
joyously every faculty that God has given him. Such is the higher 
Christian humanism--a humanism founded not upon human pride but upon 
divine grace.

But although Christianity does not end with the broken heart, it does 
begin with the broken heart; it begins with the consciousness of sin. 
Without the consciousness of sin, the whole of the gospel will seem to 
be an idle tale. But how can the consciousness of sin be revived? 
Something no doubt can be accomplished by the proclamation of the law of 
God, for the law reveals transgressions. The whole of the law, moreover, 
should be proclaimed. It will hardly be wise to adopt the suggestion 
(recently offered among many suggestions as to the ways in which weshall 
have to modify our message in order to retain the allegiance of the 
returning soldiers) that we must stop treating the little sins as though 
they were big sins. That suggestion means apparently that we must not 
worry too much about the little sins, but must let them remain 
unmolested.



With regard to such an expedient, it may perhaps be suggested that in 
the moral battle we are fighting against a very resourceful enemy, who 
does not reveal the position of his guns by desultory artillery action 
when he plans a great attack. In the moral battle, as in the Great 
European War, the quiet sectors are usually the most dangerous. It is 
through the "little sins" that Satan gains an entrance into our lives. 
Probably, therefore, it will be prudent to watch all sectors of the 
front and lose no time about introducing the unity of command.

But if the consciousness of sin is to be produced, the law of God must 
be proclaimed in the lives of Christian people as well as in word. It is 
quite useless for the preacher to breathe out fire and brimstone from 
the pulpit, if at the same time the occupants of the pews go on taking 
sin very lightly and being content with the more' standards of the 
world. The rank and file of the Church must do their part in so 
proclaiming the law of God by their lives that the secrets of men's 
hearts shall be revealed.

All these things, however, are in themselves quite insufficient to 
produce the consciousness of sin. The more one observes the condition of 
the Church, the more one feels obliged to confess that the conviction of 
sin is a great mystery' which can be produced only by the Spirit of God. 
Proclamation of the law, in word and in deed, can prepare for the 
experience, but the experience itself comes from God. When a man has 
that experience, when a man comes under the conviction of sin, his whole 
attitude toward life is transformed; he wonders at his former blindness, 
and the message of the gospel, which formerly seemed to be an idle tale, 
becomes now instinct with light. But it is God alone who can produce the 
change.

Only, let us not try to do without the Spirit of God.


The fundamental fault of the modern Church is that she is busily engaged 
in an absolutely impossible task--she is busily engaged in calling the 
righteous to repentance. Modern preachers are trying to bring men into 
the Church without requiring them to relinquish their pride; they are 
trying to help men avoid the conviction of sin. The preacher gets up 
into the pulpit, opens the Bible, and addresses the congregation 
somewhat as follows: "You people are very good," he says; "you respond 
to every appeal that looks toward the welfare of the community. Now we 
have in the Bible--especially in the life of Jesus--something so good 
that we believe it is good enough even for you good people." Such is 
modern preaching. It is heard every Sunday in thousands of pulpits. But 
it is entirely futile. Even our Lord did not call the righteous to 
repentance, and probably we shall be no more successful than He.

Chapter 4: "The Bible"

Modern liberalism, it has been observed so far, has lost sight of the 
two great presuppositions of the Christian message--the living God, and 
the fact of sin. The liberal doctrine of God and the liberal doctrine of 
man are both diametrically opposite to the Christian view. But the 
divergence concerns not only the presuppositions of the message, but 
also the message itself.

The Christian message has come to us through the Bible. What shall we 
think about this Book in which the message is contained?

According to the Christian view, the Bible contains an account of a 
revelation from God to man, which is found nowhere else. It is true, the 
Bible also contains a confirmation and a wonderful enrichment of the 
revelations which are given also by the things that God has made and by 
the conscience of man. "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the 
firmament showeth his handywork"--these wordsare a confirmation of the 
revelation of God in nature; "all have sinned and fall short of the 
glory of God"--these words are a confirmation of what is attested by the 
conscience. But in addition to such reaffirmations of what might 
conceivably be learned elsewhere--as a matter of fact, because of men's 
blindness, even so much is learned elsewhere only in comparatively 
obscure fashion--the Bible also contains an account of a revelation 
which is absolutely new. That new revelation concerns the way



by which sinful man can come into communion with the living God.

The way was opened, according to the Bible, by an act of God, when, 
almost nineteen hundred years ago, outside the walls of Jerusalem, the 
eternal Son was offered as a sacrifice for the sins of men. To that one 
great event the whole Old Testament looks forward, and in that one event 
the whole of the New Testament finds its center and core. Salvation 
then, according to the Bible, is not something that was discovered, but 
something that happened. Hence appears the uniqueness of the Bible. All 
the ideas of Christianity might be discovered in some other religion, 
yet there would be in that other religion no Christianity. For 
Christianity depends, not upon a complex of ideas, but upon the 
narration of an event. Without that event, the world, in the Christian 
view, is altogether dark, and humanity is lost under the guilt of sin. 
There can be no salvation by the discovery of eternal truth, for eternal 
truth brings naught but despair, because of sin. But a new face has been 
put upon life by the blessed thing that God did when He offered up His 
only begotten Son.

An objection is sometimes offered against this view of the contents of 
the Bible.1 Must we, it is said, depend upon what happened so long ago? 
Does salvation wait upon the examination of musty records? Is the 
trained student of Palestinian history the modern priest without whose 
gracious intervention no one can see God? Can we not find, instead, a 
salvation that is independent of history, a salvation that depends only 
on what is with us here and now?

The objection is not devoid of weight. But it ignores one of the primary 
evidences for the truth of the gospel record. That evidence is found in 
Christian experience.


Salvation does depend upon what happened long ago, but the event of long 
ago has effects that continue until today. We are told in the New 
Testament that Jesus offered Himself as a sacrifice for the sins of 
those who should believe on Him. That is a record of a past event. But 
we can make trial of it today, and making trial of it we find it to be 
true. We are told in the New Testament that on a certain morning long 
ago Jesus rose from the dead. That again is a record of a past event. 
But again we can make trial of it, and making trial of it we discover 
that Jesus is truly a living Savior today.

But at this point a fatal error lies in wait. It is one of the root 
errors of modern liberalism. Christian experience, we have just said, is 
useful as confirming the gospel message. But because it is necessary, 
many men have jumped to the conclusion that it is all that is necessary. 
Having a present experience of Christ in the heart, may we not, it is 
said, hold that experience no matter what history may tell us as to the 
events of the first Easter morning? May we not make ourselves altogether 
independent of the results of Biblical criticism? No matter what sort of 
man history may tell us Jesus of Nazareth actually was, no matter what 
history may say about the real meaning of His death or about the story 
of His alleged resurrection, may we not continue to experience the 
presence of Christ in our souls?

The trouble is that the experience thus maintained is not Christian 
experience. Religious experience it may be, but Christian experience it 
certainly is not. For Christian experience depends absolutely upon an 
event. The Christian says to himself: "I have meditated upon the problem 
of becoming right with God, I have tried to produce a righteousness that 
will stand in His sight; but when I heard the gospel message I learned 
that what I had


weakly striven to accomplish had been accomplished by the Lord Jesus 
Christ when He died for me on the Cross and completed His redeeming work 
by the glorious resurrection. If the thing has not yet been done, if I 
merely have an idea of its accomplishment, then I am of all men most 
miserable, for I am still in my sins. My Christian life, then, depends 
altogether upon the truth of the New Testament record."

Christian experience is rightly used when it confirms the documentary 
evidence. But it can never possibly provide a substitute for the 
documentary evidence. We know that the gospel story is true partly 
because of the early date of the documents in which it appears, the 
evidence as to their authorship, the internal evidence of their truth, 
the impossibility of explaining them as being based upon deception or 
upon myth. This evidence is gloriously confirmed by present experience, 
which adds to the documentary evidence that wonderful directness and 
immediacy of conviction which delivers us from fear. Christian 
experience is rightly used when it helps to convince us that the events 
narrated in the New Testament actually did occur; but it can never 
enable us to be Christians whether the events occurred or not. It is a 
fair flower, and should be prized as a gift of God. But cut it from its 
root in the blessed Book, and it soon withers away and dies.

Thus the revelation of which an account is contained in the Bible 
embraces not only a reaffirmation of eternal truths--itself necessary 
because the truths have been obscured by the blinding effect of sin--but 
also a revelation which sets forth the meaning of an act of God.

The contents of the Bible, then, are unique. But another fact about the 
Bible is also important. The Bible might contain an account of a true 
revelation from God, and yet the account be full of error. Before the 
full


authority of the Bible can be established, therefore, it is necessary to 
add to the Christian doctrine of revelation the Christian doctrine of 
inspiration. The latter doctrine means that the Bible not only is an 
account of important things, but that the account itself is true, the 
writers having been so preserved from error, despite a full maintenance 
of their habits of thought and expression, that the resulting Book is 
the "infallible rule of faith and practice."

This doctrine of "plenary inspiration" has been made the subject of 
persistent misrepresentation. Its opponents speak of it as though it 
involved a mechanical] theory of the activity of the Holy Spirit. The 
Spirit, it is said, is represented in this doctrine as dictating the 
Bible to writers who were really little more than stenographers. But of 
course all such caricatures are without basis in fact, and it is rather 
surprising that intelligent men should be so blinded by prejudice about 
this matter as not even to examine for themselves the perfectly 
accessible treatises in which the doctrine of plenary inspiration is set 
forth. It is usually considered goodpractice to examine a thing for 
one's self before echoing the vulgar ridicule of it. But in connection 
with the Bible, such scholarly restraints are somehow regarded as out of 
place. It is so much easier to content one's self with a few opprobrious 
adjectives such as "mechanical," or the like. Why engage c: in serious 
criticism when the people prefer ridicule? Why attack a real opponent 
when it is easier to knock down a man of straw? 1

1. It is not denied that there are some persons in the modern Church who 
do neglect the context of Bible quotations and who do ignore the human 
characteristics of the Biblical writers. But in an entirely 
Unwarrantable manner this defective way of using the Bible is 
attributed, by insinuation at least, to the great body of those who Ye 
held to the inspiration of Scripture.


As a matter of fact, the doctrine of plenary inspiration does not deny 
the individuality of the Biblical writers; it does not ignore their use 
of ordinary means for acquiring information; it does not involve any 
lack of interest in the historical situations which gave rise to the 
Biblical books. What it does deny is the presence of error in the Bible. 
It supposes that the Holy Spirit so informed the minds of the Biblical 
writers that they were kept from falling into the error" that mar all 
other books. The Bible might contain an account of a genuine revelation 
of God, and yet not contain a true account. But according to the 
doctrine of inspiration, the account is as a matter of fact a true 
account; the Bible is an "infallible rule of faith and practice."

Certainly that is a stupendous claim, and it is no wonder that it has 
been attacked. But the trouble is that the attack is not always fair. If 
the liberal preacher objected to the doctrine of plenary inspiration on 
the ground that as a matter of fact there are errors in the Bible, he 
might be right and he might be wrong, but at any rate the discussion 
would be conducted on the proper ground. But too often the preacher 
desires to avoid the delicate question of errors in the Bible--a 
question which might give offence to the rank and file--and prefers to 
speak merely against "mechanical" theories of inspiration, the theory of 
"dictation," the "superstitious use of the Bible as a talisman," or the 
like. It all sounds to the plain man as though it were very harmless. 
Does not the liberal preacher say that the Bible is "divine"--indeed 
that it is the more divine because it is the more human ? What could be 
more edifying than that? But of course such appearances are deceptive. A 
Bible that is full of error is certainly divine in the modern 
pantheizing sense of "divine," according to which God is just another 
name for the course of the world


with all its imperfections and all its sin. But the God whom the 
Christian worships is a God of truth.

It must be admitted that there are many Christians who do not accept the 
doctrine of plenary inspiration. That doctrine is denied not only by 
liberal opponents of Christianity, but also by many true Christian men. 
There are many Christian men in the modern Church who find in the origin 
of Christianity no mere product of evolution but a real entrance of the 
creative power of God, who depend for their salvation, not at all upon 
their own efforts to lead the Christ life, but upon the atoning blood of 
Christ--there are many men in the modern Church who thus accept the 
central message of the Bible and yet believe that the message has come 
to us merely on the authority of trustworthy witnesses unaided in their 
literary work by any supernatural guidance of the Spirit of God. There 
are many who believe that the Bible is right at the central point, in 
its account of the redeeming work of Christ, and yet believe that it 
contains many errors. Such men are not really liberals, but Christians; 
because they have accepted as true the message upon which Christianity 
depends. A great gulf separates them from those who reject the 
supernatural act of God with which Christianity stands or falls.

It is another question, however, whether the mediating view of the Bible 
which is thus maintained is logically tenable, the trouble being that 
our Lord Himself seems to have held the high view of the Bible which is 
here being rejected. Certainly it is another question--and a question 
which the present writer would answer with an emphatic negative--whether 
the panic about the Bible, which gives rise to such concessions, is at 
all justified by the facts. If the Christian make full use of his 
Christian privileges, he finds the seat of authority in the whole


Bible, which he regards as no mere word of man but as the very Word of 
God.

Very different is the view of modern liberalism. The modern liberal 
rejects not only the doctrine of plenary inspiration, but even such 
respect for the Bible as would be proper over against any ordinarily 
trustworthy book. But what is substituted for the Christian view of the 
Bible ? What is the liberal view as to the seat of authority in religion 
? 1

The impression is sometimes produced that the modern liberal substitutes 
for the authority of the Bible the authority of Christ. He cannot 
accept, he says, what he regards as the perverse moral teaching of the 
Old Testament or the sophistical arguments of Paul. But he regards 
himself as being the true Christian because, rejecting the rest of the 
Bible, he depends upon Jesus alone.

This impression, however, is utterly false. The modern liberal does not 
really hold to the authority of Jesus. Even if he did so, indeed, he 
would still be impoverishing greatly his knowledge of God and of the way 
of salvation. The words of Jesus, spoken during His earthly ministry, 
could hardly contain all that we need to know about God and about the 
way of salvation; for the meaning of Jesus' redeeming work could hardly 
be fully set forth before that work was done. It could be set forth 
indeed by way of prophecy, and as a matter of fact it was so set forth 
by Jesus even in the days of His flesh. But the full explanation could 
naturally be given only after the work was done. And such was actually 
the divine method. It is doing despite, not only to the Spirit of God, 
but also to Jesus Himself, to regard the teaching of the Holy Spirit,



given through the apostles, as at all inferior in authority to the 
teaching of Jesus.

As a matter of fact, however, the modern liberal does not hold fast even 
to the authority of Jesus. Certainly he does not accept the words of 
Jesus as they are recorded in the Gospels. For among the recorded words 
of Jesus are to be found just those things which are most abhorrent to 
the modern liberal Church, and in His recorded words Jesus also points 
forward to the fuller revelation which was afterwards to be given 
through His apostles. Evidently, therefore, those words of Jesus which 
are to be regarded as authoritative by modern liberalism must first be 
selected from the mass of the recorded words by a critical process. The 
critical process is certainly very difficult, and the suspicion often 
arises that the critic is retaining as genuine words of the historical 
Jesus only those words which conform to his own preconceived ideas. But 
even after the sifting process has been completed, the liberal scholar 
is still unable to accept as authoritative all the sayings of Jesus; he 
must finally admit that even the "historical" Jesus as reconstructed by 
modern historians said some things that are untrue.

So much is usually admitted. But, it is maintained, although not 
everything thatJesus said is true, His central "life-purpose" is still 
to be regarded as regulative for the Church. But what then was the 
life-purpose of Jesus ? According to the shortest, and if modern 
criticism be accepted' the earliest of the Gospels, the Son of Man came 
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a 
ransom for many" (Mark x. 45). Here the vicarious death is put as the 
"life-purpose" of Jesus. Such an utterance must of course be pushed 
aside by the modern liberal Church. The truth is that the life-purpose 
of Jesus discovered by modern liberalism is not the life



purpose of the real Jesus, but merely represents those elements in the 
teaching of Jesus--isolated and misinterpreted--which happen to agree 
with the modern program. It is not Jesus, then, who is the real 
authority, but the modern principle by which the selection within Jesus' 
recorded teaching has been made. Certain isolated ethical principles of 
the Sermon on the Mount are accepted, not at all because they are 
teachings of Jesus, but because they agree with modern ideas.

It is not true at all, then, that modern liberalism is based upon the 
authority of Jesus. It is obliged to reject a vast deal that is 
absolutely essential in Jesus' example and teaching--notably His 
consciousness of being the heavenly Messiah. The real authority, for 
liberalism, can only be "the Christian consciousness" or "Christian 
experience." But how shall the findings of the Christian consciousness 
be established? Surely not by a majority vote of the organized Church. 
Such a method would obviously do away with all liberty of conscience. 
The only authority, then, can be individual experience; truth can only 
be that which "helps" the individual man. Such an authority is obviously 
no authority at all; for individual experience is endlessly diverse, and 
when once truth is regarded only as that which works at any particular 
time, it ceases to be truth. The result is an abysmal skepticism.

The Christian man, on the other hand, finds in the Bible the very Word 
of God. Let it not be said that dependence upon a book is a dead or an 
artificial thing. The Reformation of the sixteenth century was founded 
upon the authority of the Bible, yet it set the world aflame. Dependence 
upon a word of man would be slavish, but dependence upon God's word is 
life. Dark and gloomy would be the world, if we were left to our own 
devices and had no blessed Word of God. The Bible, to the Christian


is not a burdensome law, but the very Magna Charta of Christian liberty.

It is no wonder, then, that liberalism is totally different from 
Christianity, for the foundation is different. Christianity is founded 
upon the Bible. It bases upon the Bible both its thinking and its life. 
Liberalism on the other hand is founded upon the shifting emotions of 
sinful men.
Chapter 5: "Christ"

Three points of difference between liberalism and Christianity have been 
noticed so far. The two religions are different with regard to the 
presuppositions of the Christian message, the view of God and the view 
of man; and they are also different with regard to their estimate of the 
Book in which the message is contained. It is not surprising, then, that 
they differ fundamentally with regard to the message itself. But before 
the message is considered, we must consider the Person upon whom the 
message is based. The Person is Jesus. And in their attitude toward 
Jesus, liberalism and Christianity are sharply opposed.

The Christian attitude toward Jesus appears in the whole New Testament. 
In examining the New Testament witness it has become customary in recent 
years to begin with the Epistles of Paul.1 This custom is sometimes 
based upon error; it is sometimes based upon the view that the Epistles 
of Paul are "primary" sources of information, while the Gospels are 
considered to be only "secondary." As a matter of fact, the Gospels, as 
well as the Epistles, are primary sources of the highest possible value. 
But the custom of beginning with Paul is at least convenient. Its 
convenience is due to the large measure of agreement which prevails with 
regard to the Pauline Epistles



About the date and authorship of the Gospels there is debate; but with 
regard to the authorship and approximate date of the principal epistles 
of Paul all serious historians, whether Christian or non-Christian, are 
agreed. It is universally admitted that the chief of the extant epistles 
attributed to Paul were really written by a man of the first Christian 
generation, who was himself a contemporary of Jesus and had come into 
personal contact with certain of Jesus' intimate friends. What, then, 
was the attitude of this representative of the first Christian 
generation toward Jesus of Nazareth?

The answer cannot be at all in doubt. The apostle Paul clearly stood 
always toward Jesus in a truly religious relationship. Jesus was not for 
Paul merely an example for faith; He was primarily the object of faith 
The religion of Paul did not consist in having faith in God like the 
faith which Jesus had in God; it consisted rather in having faith in 
Jesus. An appeal to the example of Jesus is not indeed absent from the 
Pauline Epistles, and certainly it was not absent from Paul's life. The 
example of Jesus was found by Paul, moreover, not merely in the acts of 
incarnation and atonement but even in the daily life of Jesus in 
Palestine. Exaggeration with regard to this matter should be avoided. 
Plainly Paul knew far more about the life of Jesus than in the Epistles 
he has seen fit to tell; plainly the Epistles do not begin to contain 
all the instruction which Paul had given to the Churches at the 
commencement of their Christian life. But even after exaggerations have 
been avoided, the fact is significant enough. The plain fact is that 
imitation of Jesus, important though it was for Paul, was swallowed up 
by something far more important still. Not the example of Jesus, but the 
redeeming work of Jesus, was the primary thing for Paul. The religion of 
Paul was not



primarily faith in God like Jesus' faith; it was faith in Jesus; Paul 
committed to Jesus without reserve the eternal destinies of his soul. 
That is what we mean when we say that Paul stood in a truly religious 
relation to Jesus.

But Paul was not the first to stand in this religious relation to Jesus. 
Evidently, at this decisive point, he was only continuing an attitude 
toward Jesus which had already been assumed by those who had been 
Christians before him. Paul was not indeed led to assume that attitude 
by the persuasions of the earlier disciples; he was converted by the 
Lord Himself on the road to Damascus. But the faith so induced was in 
essentials like the faith which had already prevailed among the earlier 
disciples. Indeed, an account of the redeeming work of Christ is 
designated by Paul as something that he had "received"; and that account 
had evidently beenaccompanied already in the primitive Church by trust 
in the Redeemer. Paul was not the first who had faith in Jesus, as 
distinguished from faith in God like the faith which Jesus had; Paul was 
not the first to make Jesus the object of faith.

So much will no doubt be admitted by all. But who were the predecessors 
of Paul in making Jesus the object of faith? The obvious answer has 
always been that they were the primitive disciples in Jerusalem, and 
that answer really stands abundantly firm. A strange attempt has indeed 
been made in recent years, by Bousset and Heitmuller, to cast doubt upon 
it. What Paul "received," it has been suggested, was received, not from 
the primitive Jerusalem Church, but from such Christian communities as 
the one at Antioch. But this attempt at interposing an extra link 
between the Jerusalem Church and Paul has resulted in failure. The 
Epistles really provide abundant information as to Paul's relations to 
Jerusalem. Paul was deeply interested in the Jerusalem Church; in 
opposition



to his Judaizing opponents, who had in certain matters appealed to the 
original apostles against him, he emphasizes his agreement with Peter 
and the rest. But even the Judaizers had had no objection to Paul's way 
of regarding Jesus as the object of faith; about that matter there is 
not in the Epistles the least suspicion of any debate. About the place 
of the Mosaic law in the Christian life there was discussion, though 
even with regard to that matter the Judaizers were entirely unjustified 
in appealing to the original apostles against Paul But with regard to 
the attitude toward Jesus the original apostles had evidently given not 
even the slightest color for an appeal to them against the teaching of 
Paul. Evidently in making Jesus the object of religious faith--the thing 
that was the heart and soul of Paul's religion--Paul was in no 
disagreement with those who had. been apostles before him. Had there 
been such disagreement, the "right hand of fellowship," which the 
pillars of the Jerusalem Church gave to Paul (Gal. ii. 9), would have 
been impossible. The facts are really too plain. The whole of early 
Christian history is a hopeless riddle unless the Jerusalem Church, as 
well as Paul, made Jesus the object of religious faith. Primitive 
Christianity certainly did not consist in the mere imitation of Jesus.

But was this "faith in Jesus" justified by the teaching of Jesus 
Himself? The question has really been answered in Chapter 2. It was 
there shown that Jesus most certainly did not keep His Person out of His 
gospel, but on the contrary presented Himself as the Savior of men. The 
demonstration of that fact was the highest merit of the late James 
Denney. His work on "Jesus and the Gospel" is faulty in somerespects; it 
is marred by an undue concessiveness toward some modern types of 
criticism. But just because of its concessiveness with regard to many



important matters, its main thesis stands all the more firm. Denney has 
shown that no matter what view be taken of the sources underlying the 
Gospels, and no matter what elements in the Gospels be rejected as 
secondary, still even the supposed "historical Jesus," as He is left 
after the critical process is done, plainly presented Himself, not 
merely as an example for faith, but as the object of faith.

It may be added, moreover, that Jesus did not invite the confidence of 
men by minimizing the load which He offered to bear. He did not say: 
"Trust me to give you acceptance with God, because acceptance with God 
is not difficult; God does not regard sin so seriously after all." On 
the contrary Jesus presented the wrath of God in a more awful way than 
it was afterwards presented by His disciples; it was Jesus--Jesus whom 
modern liberals represent as a mild-mannered exponent of an 
indiscriminating love--it was Jesus who spoke of the outer darkness and 
the everlasting fire, of the sin that shall not be forgiven either in 
this world or in that which is to come. There is nothing in Jesus' 
teaching about the character of God which in itself can evoke trust. On 
the contrary the awful presentation can give rise, in the hearts of us 
sinners, only to despair. Trust arises only when we attend to God's way 
of salvation. And that way is found in Jesus. Jesus did not invite the 
confidence of men by a minimizing presentation of what was necessary in 
order that sinners might stand faultless before the awful throne of God. 
On the contrary, he invited confidence by the presentation of His own 
wondrous Person. Great was the guilt of sin, but Jesus was greater 
still. God, according to Jesus, was a loving Father; but He was a loving

Father, not of the sinful world, but of those whom He Himself had 
brought into His Kingdom through the Son



The truth is, the witness of the New Testament, with regard to Jesus as 
the object of faith, is an absolutely unitary witness. The thing is 
rooted far too deep in the records of primitive Christianity ever to be 
removed by any critical process. The Jesus spoken of in the New 
Testament was no mere teacher of righteousness, no mere pioneer in a new 
type of religious life, but One who was regarded, and regarded Himself, 
as the Savior whom men could trust.

But by modern liberalism He is regarded in a totally different way. 
Christians stand in a religious relation to Jesus; liberals do not stand 
in a religious relation to Jesus-- what difference could be more 
profound than that? The modern liberal preacher reverences Jesus; he has 
the name of Jesus forever on his lips; he speaks of Jesus as the supreme 
revelation of God; he enters, or tries to enter, into the religious life 
of Jesus. But he does not stand in a religious relation to Jesus. Jesus 
for him is an example for faith, not the object of faith. The modern 
liberal tries to have faith in God like the faith which he supposes 
Jesus had in God; but he does not have faith in Jesus.

According to modern liberalism, in other words, Jesus was the Founder of 
Christianity because He was the first Christian, and Christianity 
consists in maintenance of the religious life which Jesus instituted.

But was Jesus really a Christian? Or, to put the same question in 
another way, are we able or ought we as Christians to enter in every 
respect into the experience of Jesus and make Him in every respect our 
example? Certain difficulties arise with regard to this question

The first difficulty appears in the Messianic consciousness of Jesus. 
The Person whom we are asked to take as our example thought that He was 
the heavenly Son of



Man who was to be the final Judge of all the earth. Can we imitate Him 
there? The trouble is not merely that Jesus undertook a special mission 
which can never be ours. That difficulty might conceivably be overcome; 
we might still take Jesus as our example by adapting to our station in 
life the kind of character which He displayed in His. But another 
difficulty is more serious. The real trouble is that the lofty claim of 
Jesus, if, as modern liberalism is constrained to believe, the claim was 
unjustified, places a moral stain upon Jesus' character. What shall be 
thought of a human being who lapsed so far from the path of humility and 
sanity as to believe that the eternal destinies of the world were 
committed into His hands? The truth is that if Jesus be merely an 
example, He is not a worthy example; for He claimed to be far more.

Against this objection modern liberalism has usually adopted a policy of 
palliation. The Messianic consciousness, it is said, arose late in the 
experience of Jesus, and was not really fundamental. What was really 
fundamental, the liberal historians continue, was the consciousness of 
sonship toward God--a consciousness whichmay be shared by every humble 
disciple. The Messianic consciousness, on this view, arose only as an 
afterthought. Jesus was conscious, it is said, of standing toward God in 
a relation of untroubled sonship. But He discovered that this relation 
was not shared by others. He became aware, therefore, of a mission to 
bring others into the place of privilege which He Himself already 
occupied. That mission made Him unique, and to give expression to His 
uniqueness He adopted, late in His life and almost against His will, the 
faulty category of Messiahship.

Many are the forms in which some such psychological reconstruction of 
the life of Jesus has been set forth in recent years. The modern world 
has devoted its very best



literary efforts to this task. But the efforts have resulted in failure. 
In the first place, there is no real evidence that the reconstructed 
Jesus is historical. The sources know nothing of a Jesus who adopted the 
category of Messiahship late in life and against His will. On the 
contrary the only Jesus that they present is a Jesus who based the whole 
of His ministry upon His stupendous claim. In the second place, even if 
the modern reconstruction were historical it would not solve the problem 
at all. The problem is a moral and psychological problem. How can a 
human being who lapsed so far from the path of rectitude as to think 
Himself to be the judge of all the earth--how can such a human being be 
regarded as the supreme example for mankind? It is absolutely no answer 
to the objection to say that Jesus accepted the category of Messiahship 
reluctantly and late in life. No matter when He succumbed to temptation 
the outstanding fact is that, on this view, He did succumb; and that 
moral defeat places an indelible stain upon His character. No doubt it 
is possible to make excuses for Him, and many excuses are as a matter of 
fact made by the liberal historians. But what has become then of the 
claim of liberalism to be truly Christian? Can a man for whom excuses 
have to be made be regarded as standing to his modern critics in a 
relationship even remotely analogous to that in which the Jesus of the 
New Testament stands to the Christian Church?

But there is another difficulty in the way of regarding Jesus as simply 
the first Christian. This second difficulty concerns the attitude of 
Jesus toward sin. If Jesus is separated from us by his Messianic 
consciousness, He is separated from us even more fundamentally by the 
absence in Him of a sense of sin.

With respect to the sinlessness of Jesus modern liberal historians find 
themselves in a quandary. To affirm that


He was sinless means to relinquish much of that ease of defending 
liberal religion which the liberal historians are anxious to preserve, 
and involves hazardous assumptions with regard to the nature of sin. For 
if sin is merely imperfection, how can an absolute negation of it be 
ventured upon within a process of nature which is supposed to be ever 
changing and ever advancing? The very idea of "sinlessness," much more 
the reality of it, requires us to conceive of sin as transgression of a 
fixed law or a fixed standard, and involves the conception of an 
absolute goodness. But to that conception of an absolute goodness the 
modern evolutionary view of the world properly speaking has no right.. 
At any rate, if such absolute goodness is to be allowed to intrude at a 
definite point in the present world-process, we are involved in that 
supernaturalism which, as will be observed later, is the very thing that 
the modern reconstruction of Christianity is most anxious to avoid. Once 
affirm that Jesus was sinless and all other men sinful, and you have 
entered into irreconcilable conflict with the whole modern point of 
view. On the other hand, if there are scientific objections, from the 
liberal point of view, against an affirmation of the sinlessness of 
Jesus, there are also very obvious religious objections against an 
opposite affirmation of His sinfulness--difficulties for modern 
liberalism as well as for the theology of the historic Church. If Jesus 
was sinful like other men, the last remnant of his uniqueness would seem 
to have disappeared, and all continuity with the previous development of 
Christianity would seem to be destroyed.

In the face of this quandary the modern liberal historian is inclined to 
avoid rash assertions. IIe will not be sure that when Jesus taught His 
disciples to say, "Forgive us our debts," He did not pray that prayer 
with them; on the other hand he will not really face the results


that logically follow from his doubt. In his perplexity, he apt to be 
content with the assertion that whether Jesus was sinless or not He was 
at any rate immeasurably above the rest of us. Whether Jesus was 
"sinless" is an academic question, we shall probably be told, that 
concerns the mysteries of the absolute; what we need to do is to bow in 
simple reverence before a holiness which compared with our impurity is 
as a white light in a dark place.

That such avoidance of the difficulty is unsatisfactory hardly requires 
proof; obviously the liberal theologian is trying to obtain the 
religious advantages of an

affirmation of sinlessness in Jesus at the same time that he obtains the 
supposed scientific advantages of its denial. But just for the moment we 
are not concerned with the question at all; we are not concerned to 
determine whether as a matter of fact Jesus was sinless or no. What we 
need to observe just now is that whether Jesus was sinful or sinless at 
any rate in the record of His life which has actually come into our 
hands He displays no consciousness of sin. Even if the words "Why 
callest thou me good?" meant that Jesus denied the attribute of goodness 
to Himself--which they do not--it would still remain true that He never 
in His recorded words deals in any intelligible way with sin in His own 
life. In the account of the temptation we are told how He kept sin from 
entering, but never how He dealt with it after its entrance had been 
effected. The religious experience of Jesus, as it is recorded in the 
Gospels, in other words, gives us no information about the way in which 
sin shall be removed.

Yet in the Gospels Jesus is represented constantly as dealing with the 
problem of sin. He always assumes that other men are sinful; yet He 
never finds sin in Himself. A stupendous difference is found here 
between Jesus' experience and ours.


That differences prevents the religious experience of Jesus from serving 
as the sole basis of the Christian life. For clearly if Christianity is 
anything it is a way of getting rid of sin. At any rate, if it is not 
that it is useless; for all men have sinned. And as a matter of fact it 
was that from the very beginning. Whether the beginning of Christian 
preaching be put on the day of Pentecost or when Jesus first taught in 
Galilee, in either case one of its first words was "Repent." Throughout 
the whole New Testament the Christianity of the primitive Church is 
represented clearly as a way of getting rid of sin. But if Christianity 
is a way of getting rid of sin, then Jesus was not a Christian; for 
Jesus, so far as we can see, had no sin to get rid of.

Why then did the early Christians call themselves disciples of Jesus, 
why did they connect themselves with His name? The answer is not 
difficult. They connected themselves with His name not because He was 
their example in their ridding themselves of sin, but because their 
method of ridding themselves of sin was by means of Him. It was what 
Jesus did for them, and not primarily the example of His own life, which 
made them Christians. Such is the witness of all our primitive records. 
The record is fullest, as has already been observed, in the case of the 
Apostle Paul; clearly Paul regarded himself as saved from sin by what 
Jesus did for him on the cross. But Paul did not stand alone. "Christ 
died for our sin`" was notsomething that Paul had originated; it was 
something he had "received." The benefits of that saving work of Christ, 
according to the primitive Church, were to be received by faith; even if 
the classic formulation of this conviction should prove to be due to 
Paul, the conviction itself clearly goes back to the very beginning. The 
primitive Christians felt themselves in need of salvation. How,


they asked, should the load of sin be removed? Their answer is perfectly 
plain. They simply trusted Jesus to remove it. In other words they had 
"faith" in Him.

Here again we are brought face to face with the significant fact which 
was noticed at the beginning of this chapter; the early Christians 
regarded Jesus not merely as an example for faith but primarily as the 
object of faith. Christianity from the beginning was a means of getting 
rid of sin by trust in Jesus of Nazareth. But if Jesus was thus the 
object of Christian faith, He Himself was no more a Christian than God 
is a religious being. God is the object of all religion, He is 
absolutely necessary to all religion; but He Himself is the only being 
in the universe who can never in His own nature be religious. So it is 
with Jesus as related to Christian faith. Christian faith is trust 
reposed in Him for the removal of sin; He could not repose trust (in the 
sense with which we are here concerned) in Himself; therefore He was 
certainly not a Christian. If we are looking for a complete illustration 
of the Christian life we cannot find it in the religious experience of 
Jesus.

This conclusion needs to be guarded against two objections.

In the first place, it will be said, are we not failing to do justice to 
the true humanity of Jesus, which is affirmed by the creeds of the 
Church as well as by the modern theologians? When we say that Jesus 
could not illustrate Christian faith any more than God can be religious, 
are we not denying to Jesus that religious experience which is a 
necessary element in true humanity? Must not Jesus, if He be true man, 
have been more than the object of religious faith; must He not have had 
a religion of His own? The answer is not far to seek. Certainly Jesus 
had a religion of His own; His prayer was real prayer, His


faith was real religious faith. His relation to His heavenly Father was 
not merely that of a child to a father; it was that of a man to his God. 
Certainly Jesus had a religion; without it His humanity would indeed 
have been but incomplete. Withoutdoubt Jesus had a religion; the fact is 
of the utmost importance. But it is equally important. to observe that 
that religion which Jesus had was not Christianity. Christianity is a 
way of getting rid of sin, and Jesus was without sin. His religion was a 
religion of Paradise, not a religion of sinful humanity. It was a 
religion to which we may perhaps in some sort attain in heaven, when the 
process of our purification is complete (though even then the memory of 
redemption will never leave us); but certainly it is not a religion with 
which we can begin. The religion of Jesus was a religion of untroubled 
sonship; Christianity is a religion of the attainment of sonship by the 
redeeming work of Christ.

But if that be true, it may be objected, in the second place, that Jesus 
is being removed far from us, that on our view He is no longer our 
Brother and our Example. The objection is welcome, since it helps us to 
avoid misunderstandings and exaggerations.

Certainly if our zeal for the greatness and uniqueness of Jesus led us 
so to separate Him from us that He could no longer be touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities, the result would be disastrous; Jesus' 
coming would lose much of its significance. But it ought to be observed 
that likeness is not always necessary to nearness. The experience of a 
father in his personal relation to his son is quite different from that 
of the son in his relation to his father; but just that very difference 
binds father and son all the more closely together. The father cannot 
share the specifically filial affection of the son, and the son cannot 
share the specifically paternal affection of the father:


yet no mere relationship of brotherhood, perhaps, could be quite 80 
close. Fatherhood and sonship are complementary to each other; hence the 
dissimilarity, but hence also the closeness of the bond. It may be 
somewhat the same in the case of our relationship to Jesus. If He were 
exactly the same as ourselves, if He were merely our, Brother, we should 
not be nearly so close to Him as we are when He stands to us in the 
relationship of a Savior.

Nevertheless Jesus as a matter of fact is a Brother to us as well as a 
Savior--an elder Brother whose steps we may follow. The imitation of 
Jesus has a fundamental place in Christian life; it is perfectly correct 
to represent Him as our supreme and only perfect example.

Certainly so far as the field of ethics is concerned there can be no 
dispute. No matter what view may be taken of His origin and His higher 
nature, Jesus certainlyled a true human life, and in it He came into 
those varied human relationships which provide opportunity for moral 
achievement. His life of perfect purity was led in no cold aloofness 
from the throng and press; His unselfish love was exercised not merely 
in mighty deeds, but in acts of kindness which the humblest of us has 
the power, if only we had the will, to imitate. More effective, too, 
than all detail is the indefinable impression of the whole; Jesus is 
felt to be far greater than any of His individual words or deeds. His 
calmness, unselfishness and strength have been the wonder of the ages; 
the world can never lose the inspiration of that radiant example.

Jesus is an example, moreover, not merely for the relations of man to 
man but also for the relation of man to God; imitation of Him may extend 
and must extend to the sphere of religion as well as to that of ethics. 
Indeed religion and ethics in Him were never separated; no single 
element in His life can be understood without reference


to His heavenly Father. Jesus was the most religious man who ever lived; 
He did nothing and said nothing and thought nothing without the thought 
of God. If His example means anything at all it means that a human life 
without the conscious presence of God--even though it be a life of 
humanitarian service outwardly like the ministry of Jesus--is a 
monstrous perversion. If we would follow truly in Jesus' steps, we must 
obey the first commandment as well as the second that is like unto it; 
we must love the Lord our God with all our heart and soul and mind and 
strength. The difference between Jesus and ourselves serves only to 
enforce, certainly not to invalidate, the lesson. If the One to whom all 
power was given needed refreshment and strengthening in prayer, we more; 
if the One to whom the lilies of the field revealed the glory of God yet 
went into the sanctuary, surely we need such assistance even more than 
He; if the wise and holy One could say "Thy will be done," surely 
submission is yet more in place for us whose wisdom is as the 
foolishness of children.

Thus Jesus is the supreme example for men. But the Jesus who can serve 
as an example is not the Jesus of modern liberal reconstruction, but 
only the Jesus of the New Testament. The Jesus of modern liberalism 
advanced stupendous claims which were not founded upon fact--such 
conduct ought never to be made a norm. The Jesus of modern liberalism 
all through His ministry employed language which was extravagant and 
absurd--and it is only to be hoped that imitation of Him will not lead 
to an equal extravagance in His modern disciples. If the Jesus 
ofnaturalistic reconstruction were really taken as an example, disaster 
would soon follow. As a matter of fact, however, the modern liberal does 
not really take as his example the Jesus of the liberal historians;


what he really does in practice is to manufacture as his example a 
simple exponent of a non-doctrinal religion whom the abler historians 
even of his own school know never to have existed except in the 
imagination of modern men.

Very different is the imitation of the real Jesus--the Jesus of the New 
Testament who actually lived in the first century of our era. That Jesus 
advanced lofty claims; but His claims, instead of being the extravagant 
dreams of an enthusiast, were sober truth. On His lips, therefore, 
language which in the reduced Jesus of modern reconstruction would be 
frenzied or absurd becomes fraught with blessing for mankind. Jesus 
demanded that those who followed Him should be willing to break even the 
holiest ties--He said, "If a man cometh to me and hateth not his father 
and mother . . . he cannot be my disciple," and "Let the dead bury their 
dead." Coming from the mere prophet constructed by modern liberalism, 
those words would be monstrous; coming from the real Jesus, they are 
sublime. How great was the mission of mercy which justified such words! 
And how wonderful the condescension of the eternal Son! How matchless an 
example for the children of men! Well might Paul appeal to the example 
of the incarnate Savior; well might he say, "Let the same mind be in you 
which was also in Christ Jesus." The imitation of the real Jesus will 
never lead a man astray.

But the example of Jesus is a perfect example only if He was justified 
in what He offered to men. And He offered, not primarily guidance, but 
salvation; He presented Himself as the object of men's faith. That offer 
is rejected by modern liberalism, but it is accepted by Christian men.

There is a profound difference, then, in the attitude


assumed by modern liberalism and by Christianity toward Jesus the Lord. 
Liberalism regards Him as an Example and Guide; Christianity, as a 
Savior: liberalism makes Him an example for faith; Christianity, the 
object of faith.

This difference in the attitude toward Jesus depends upon a profound 
differences asto the question who Jesus was. If Jesus was only what the 
liberal historians suppose that He was, then trust in Him would be out 
of place; our attitude toward Him could be that of pupils to a Master 
and nothing more. But if He was what the New Testament represents Him as 
being, then we can safely commit to Him the eternal destinies of our 
souls. What then is the difference between liberalism and Christianity 
with regard to the person of our Lord?

The answer might be difficult to set forth in detail. But the essential 
thing can be put almost in a word--liberalism regards Jesus as the 
fairest flower of humanity; Christianity regards Him as a supernatural 
Person.

The conception of Jesus as a supernatural Person runs all through the 
New Testament. In the Epistles of Paul, of course, it is quite clear. 
Without the slightest doubt Paul separated Jesus from ordinary humanity 
and placed Him on the side of God. The words in Gal. i. 1, "not from men 
nor through a man but through Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised 
Him from the dead," are only typical of what appears everywhere in the 
Epistles. The same contrast between Jesus Christ and ordinary humanity 
is everywhere presupposed. Paul does indeed call Jesus Christ a man. But 
the way in which he speaks of Jesus as a man only deepens the impression 
which has already been received. Paul speaks of the humanity of Jesus 
apparently as though the fact that Jesus was a man were something 
strange, something wonderful. At


any rate, the really outstanding fact is that in the Epistles of Paul, 
Jesus is everywhere separated from ordinary humanity; the deity of 
Christ is everywhere presupposed. It is a matter of small consequence 
whether Paul ever applies to Jesus the Greek word which is translated 
"God" in the English Bible; certainly it is very difficult, in view of 
Rom. ix. 5, to deny that he does. However that may be, the term "Lord," 
which is Paul's regular designation of Jesus, is really just as much a 
designation of deity as is the term "God." It was a designation of deity 
even in the pagan religions with which Paul's converts were familiar; 
and (what is far more important) in the Greek translation of the Old 
Testament which was current in Paul's day and was used by the Apostle 
himself, the term was used to translate the "Jahwe" of the Hebrew text. 
And Paul does not hesitate to apply to Jesus stupendous passages in the 
Greek Old Testament where the term Lord thus designates the God of 
Israel. But what is perhaps most significant of all for the 
establishment of the Pauline teaching about the Person of Christ is that 
Paul everywhere stands in a religious attitude toward Jesus. He who is 
thus the object ofreligious faith is surely no mere man, but a 
supernatural Person, and indeed a Person who was God.

Thus Paul regarded Jesus as a supernatural Person. The fact would be 
surprising if it stood alone. Paul was a contemporary of Jesus. What 
must this Jesus have been that He should be lifted thus quickly above 
the limits of ordinary humanity and placed upon the side of God?

But there is something far more surprising still. The truly surprising 
thing is that the view which Paul had of Jesus was also the view which 
was held by Jesus' intimate friends.1 The fact appears in the Pauline 
Epistles themselves


to say nothing of other evidence. Clearly the Epistles presuppose a 
fundamental unity between Paul and the original apostles with regard to 
the Person of Christ; for if there had been any controversy about this 
matter it would certainly have been mentioned. Even the Judaizers, the 
bitter opponents of Paul, seem to have had no objection to Paul's 
conception of Jesus as a supernatural Person. The really impressive 
thing about Paul's view of Christ is that it is not defended. Indeed it 
is hardly presented in the Epistles in any systematic way. Yet it is 
everywhere presupposed. The inference is perfectly plain--Paul's 
conception of the Person of Christ was a matter of course in the 
primitive Church. With regard to this matter Paul appears in perfect 
harmony with all Palestinian Christians. The men who had walked and 
talked with Jesus and had seen Him subject to the petty limitations of 
earthly life agreed with Paul fully in regarding Him as a supernatural 
Person, seated on the throne of all Being.

Exactly the same account of Jesus as that which is presupposed by the 
Pauline Epistles appears in the detailed narrative of the Gospels. The 
Gospels agree with Paul in presenting Jesus as a supernatural Person, 
and the agreement appears not in one or two of the Gospels, but in all 
four. The day is long past, if there ever was such a day, when the 
Gospel of John, as presenting a divine Jesus, could be contrasted with 
the Gospel of Mark, as presenting a human Jesus. On the contrary, all 
four Gospels clearly present a Person lifted far above the level of 
ordinary humanity; and the Gospel of Mark, the shortest and according to 
modern criticism the earliest of the Gospels, renders particularly 
prominent Jesus' superhuman works of power. In all four Gospels Jesus 
appears possessed of a sovereign power over the forces of



nature; in all four Gospels, as in the whole New Testament, He appears 
clearly as a supernatural Person.1

But what is meant by a "supernatural Person"; what is meant by the 
supernatural?

The conception of the "supernatural" is closely connected with that of 
"miracle"; a miracle is the supernatural manifesting itself in the 
external world. But what is the supernatural? Many definitions have been 
proposed. But only one definition is really correct. A supernatural 
event is one that takes place by the immediate, as distinguished from 
the mediate, power of God. The possibility of the supernatural, if 
supernatural be defined in this way, presupposes two things--it 
presupposes (1) the existence of a personal God, and (2) the existence 
of a real order of nature. Without the existence of a personal God, 
there could be no purposive entrance of God's power into the order of 
the world; and without the real existence of an order of nature there 
could be no distinction between natural events and those that are above 
nature--all events would be supernatural, or rather the word 
"supernatural" would have no meaning at all. The distinction between 
"natural" and "supernatural" does not mean, indeed, that nature is 
independent of God; it does not mean that while God brings to pass 
supernatural events, natural events are not brought to pass by Him. On 
the contrary, the believer in the supernatural regards everything that 
is done as being the work of God. Only, he believes that in the events 
called natural, God uses means, whereas in the events called 
supernatural He uses no means, but puts forth His creative power. The 
distinction between the natural and the supernatural, in other words, is 
simply the distinction between God's works of providence and God's work 
of creation; a miracle is a


work of creation just as truly as the mysterious act which produced the 
world.

This conception of the supernatural depends absolutely upon a theistic 
view of God. Theism is to be distinguished (1) from deism and (2) from 
pantheism.

According to the deistic view, God set the world going like a machine 
and then left it independent of Himself. Such a view is inconsistent 
with the actuality of the supernatural; the miracles of the Bible 
presuppose a God who is constantly watching over and guiding the course 
of this world. The miracles of the Bible arenot arbitrary intrusions of 
a Power that is without relation to the world, but are evidently 
intended to accomplish results within the order of nature. Indeed the 
natural and the supernatural are blended, in the miracles of the Bible, 
in a way entirely incongruous with the deistic conception of God. In the 
feeding of the five thousand, for example, who shall say what part the 
five loaves and two fishes had in the event; who shall say where the 
natural left off and the supernatural began? Yet that event, if any, 
surely transcended the order of nature. The miracles of the Bible, then, 
are not the work of a God who has no part in the course of nature; they 
are the work of a God who through His works of providence is "preserving 
and governing all His creatures and all their actions."

But the conception of the supernatural is inconsistent, not only with 
deism, but also with pantheism. Pantheism identifies God with the 
totality of nature. It is inconceivable, then, on the pantheistic view 
that anything should enter into the course of nature from outside. A 
similar incongruity with the supernatural appears also in certain forms 
of idealism, which deny real existence to the forces of nature. If what 
seems to be connected in nature is really only connected in the divine 
mind, then it



is difficult to make any distinction between those operations of the 
divine mind which appear as miracles and those which appear as natural 
events. Again, it has often been said that all events are works of 
creation. On this view, it is only a concession to popular phraseology 
to say that one body is attracted toward another in accordance with a 
law of gravitation; what really ought to be said is that when two bodies 
are in proximity under certain conditions they come together. Certain 
phenomena in nature, on this view, are always followed by certain other 
phenomena, and it is really only this regularity of sequence which is 
indicated by the assertion that the former phenomena "cause" the latter; 
the only real cause is in all cases God. On the basis of this view, 
there can be no distinction between events wrought by the immediate 
power of God and those that are not; for on this view all events are so 
wrought. Against such a view, those who accept our definition of miracle 
will naturally accept the common-sense notion of cause. God is always 
the first cause, but there are truly second causes; and they are the 
means which God uses, in the ordinary course of the world, for the 
accomplishment of His ends. It is the exclusion of such second causes 
which makes an event a miracle.

It is sometimes said that the actuality of miracles would destroy the 
basis of science. Science, it is said, is founded upon the regularity of 
sequences; it assumesthat if certain conditions within the course of 
nature are given, certain other conditions will always follow. But if 
there is to be any intrusion of events which by their very definition 
are independent of all previous conditions, then, it is said, the 
regularity of nature upon which science bases itself is broken up. 
Miracle, in other words, seems to introduce an element of arbitrariness 
and unaccountability into the course of the world.



The objection ignores what is really fundamental the Christian 
conception of miracle. According to the Christian conception, a miracle 
is wrought by the immediate power of God. It is not wrought by an 
arbitrary and fantastic despot, but by the very God to whom the 
regularity of nature itself is due--by the God, moreover, whose 
character is known through the Bible. Such a God, we may be sure, will 
not do despite to the reason that He has given to His creatures; His 
interposition will introduce no disorder into the world that He has 
made. There is nothing arbitrary about a miracle, according to the 
Christian conception. It is not an uncaused event, but an event that is 
caused by the very source of all the order that is in the world. It is 
dependent altogether upon the least arbitrary and the most firmly fixed 
of all the things that are--namely upon the character of God.

The possibility of miracle, then, is indissolubly joined with "theism." 
Once admit the existence of a personal God, Maker and Ruler of the 
world, and no limits, temporal or otherwise, can be set to the creative 
power of such a God. Admit that God once created the world, and you 
cannot deny that He might engage in creation again. But it will be said, 
the actuality of miracles is different from the possibility of them. It 
may be admitted that miracles conceivably might occur. But have they 
actually occurred?

This question looms very large in the minds of modern men. The burden of 
the question seems to rest heavily even upon many who still accept the 
miracles of the New Testament. The miracles used to be regarded as an 
aid to faith, it is often said, but now they are a hindrance to faith; 
faith used to come on account of the miracles, but now it comes in 
despite of them; men used to believe in



Jesus because He wrought miracles, but now we accept the miracles 
because on other grounds we have come to believe in Him.

A strange confusion underlies this common way of speaking. In one sense, 
certainly, miracles are a hindrance to faith--but who ever thought the 
contrary? It may certainly be admitted that if the New Testament 
narrative had no miracles in it, it would be far easier to believe. The 
more commonplace a story is, the easier it is to accept it as true. But 
commonplace narratives have little value. The New Testament without the 
miracles would be far easier to believe. But the trouble is, it would 
not be worth believing. Without the miracles the New Testament would 
contain an account of a holy man--not a perfect man, it is true, for He 
was led to make lofty claims to which He had no right--but a man at 
least far holier than the rest of men. But of what benefit would such a 
man, and the death which marked His failure, be to us? The loftier be 
the example which Jesus set, the greater becomes our sorrow at our 
failure to attain to it; and the greater our hopelessness under the 
burden of sin. The sage of Nazareth may satisfy those who have never 
faced the problem of evil in their own lives; but to talk about an ideal 
to those who are under the thralldom of sin is a cruel mockery. Yet if 
Jesus was merely a man like the rest of men, then an ideal is all that 
we have in Him. Far more is needed by a sinful world. It is small 
comfort to be told that there was goodness in the world, when what we 
need is goodness triumphant over sin. But goodness triumphant over sin 
involves an entrance of the creative power of God, and that creative 
power of God is manifested by the miracles. Without the miracles, the 
New Testament might be easier to believe. But the thing that would be 
believed would be entirely different from



that which presents itself to us now. Without the miracles we should 
have a teacher; with the miracles we have a Savior.

Certainly it is a mistake to isolate the miracles from the rest of the 
New Testament. It is a mistake to discuss the question of the 
resurrection of Jesus as though that which is to be proved were simply 
the resurrection of a certain man of the first century in Palestine. No 
doubt the existing evidence for such an event, strong as the evidence 
is, might be insufficient. The historian would indeed be obliged to say 
that no naturalistic explanation of the origin of the Church has yet 
been discovered, and that the evidence for the miracle is exceedingly 
strong; but miracles are, to say the least, extremely unusual events, 
and there is a tremendous hostile presumption against accepting the 
hypothesis of miracle in any given case. But as a matter of fact, the 
question in this case doe. not concern the resurrection of a man about 
whom we know nothing; it concerns the resurrection of Jesus. And Jesus 
was certainly a very extraordinary Person. The uniqueness of the 
character of Jesusremoves the hostile presumption against miracle; it 
was extremely improbable that any ordinary man should rise from the 
dead, but Jesus was like no other man that ever lived.

But the evidence for the miracles of the New Testament is supported in 
yet another way; it is supported by the existence of an adequate 
occasion. It has been observed above that a miracle is an event produced 
by the immediate power of God, and that God is a God of order. The 
evidence of a miracle is therefore enormously strengthened when the 
purpose of the miracle can be detected. That does not mean that within a 
complex of miracles an exact reason must be assigned to every one; it 
does not mean that in the New Testament we should expect to see exactly



why a miracle was wrought in one case and not in another. But it does 
mean that acceptance of a complex of miracles is made vastly easier when 
an adequate reason can be detected for the complex as a whole.

In the case of the New Testament miracles, such an adequate reason is 
not difficult to find. It is found in the conquest of sin. According to 
the Christian view, as set forth in the Bible, mankind is under the 
curse of God's holy law, and the dreadful penalty includes the 
corruption of our whole nature. Actual transgressions proceed from the 
sinful root, and serve to deepen every man's guilt in the sight of God. 
On the basis of that view, so profound, so true to the observed facts of 
life, it is obvious that nothing natural will meet our need. Nature 
transmits the dreadful taint; hope is to be sought only in a creative 
act of God.

And that creative act of God--so mysterious, so contrary to all 
expectation, yet so congruous with the character of the God who is 
revealed as the God of love--is found in the redeeming work of Christ. 
No product of sinful humanity could have redeemed humanity from the 
dreadful guilt or lifted a sinful race from the slough of sin. But a 
Savior has come from God. There lies the very root of the Christian 
religion; there is the reason why the supernatural is the very ground 
and substance of the Christian faith.

But the acceptance of the supernatural depends upon a conviction of the 
reality of sin. Without the conviction of sin there can be no 
appreciation of the uniqueness of Jesus; it is only when we contrast our 
sinfulness with His holiness that we appreciate the gulf which separates 
Him from the rest of the children of men. And without the conviction of 
sin there can be no understanding of the occasion for the supernatural 
act of God; without the



conviction of sin, the good news of redemption seems to be an idle tale. 
So fundamental is the conviction of sin in the Christian faith that it 
will not do to arrive at it merely by a process of reasoning; it will 
not do to say merely: All men (as I have been told) are sinners; I am a 
man; therefore I suppose I must be a sinner too. That is all the 
supposed conviction of sin amounts to sometimes. But the true conviction 
is far more immediate than that. It depends indeed upon information that 
comes from without; it depends upon the revelation of the law of God; it 
depends upon the awful verities set forth in the Bible as to the 
universal sinfulness of mankind. But it adds to the revelation that has 
come from without a conviction of the whole mind and heart, a profound 
understanding of one's own lost condition, an illumination of the 
deadened conscience which causes a Copernican revolution in one's 
attitude toward the world and toward God. When a man has passed through 
that experience, he wonders at his former blindness. And especially does 
he wonder at his former attitude toward the miracles of the New 
Testament, and toward the supernatural Person who is there revealed. The 
truly penitent man glories in the supernatural, for he knows that 
nothing natural would meet his need; the world has been shaken once in 
his downfall, and shaken again it must be if he is to be saved.

Yet an acceptance of the presuppositions of miracle does not render 
unnecessary the plain testimony to the miracles that have actually 
occurred. And that testimony is exceedingly strong.1 The Jesus presented 
in the New Testament was clearly an historical Person--so much is 
admitted by all who have really come to grips with the historical 
problems at all. But just as clearly the Jesus presented in the New 
Testament was a super


natural Person. Yet for modern liberalism a supernatural person is never 
historical. A problem arises then for those who adopt the liberal point 
of view--the Jesus of the New Testament is historical, He is 
supernatural, and yet what is supernatural, on the liberal hypothesis, 
can never be historical. The problem could be solved only by the 
separation of the natural from the supernatural in the New Testament 
account of Jesus, in order that what is supernatural might be rejected 
and what is natural might be retained. But the process of separation has 
never been successfully carried out. Many have been the attempts--the 
modern liberal Churchhas put its very heart and soul into the effort, so 
that there is scarcely any more brilliant chapter in the history of the 
human spirit than this "quest of the historical Jesus"--but all the 
attempts have failed. The trouble is that the miracles are found not to 
be an excrescence in the New Testament account of Jesus, but belong to 
the very warp and woof. They are intimately connected with Jesus' lofty 
claims; they stand or fall with the undoubted purity of His character; 
they reveal the very nature of His mission in the world.

Yet miracles are rejected by the modern liberal Church, and with the 
miracles the entirety of the supernatural Person of our Lord. Not some 
miracles are rejected, but all. It is a matter of no importance whatever 
that some of the wonderful works of Jesus are accepted by the liberal 
Church; it means absolutely nothing when some of the works of healing 
are regarded as historical. For those works are no longer regarded by 
modern liberalism as supernatural, but merely as faith-cures of an 
extraordinary kind. And it is the presence or absence of the true 
supernatural which is the really important thing. Such concessions as to 
faith-cures, moreover, carry us at


best but a very short way--disbelievers in the supernatural must simply 
reject as legendary or mythical the great mass of the wonderful works.

The question, then, does not concern the historicity of this miracle or 
that; it concerns the historicity of all miracles. That fact is often 
obscured, and the obscuration of it often introduces an element of 
something like disingenuousness into the advocacy of the liberal cause. 
The liberal preacher singles out some one miracle and discusses that as 
though it were the only point at issue. The miracle which is usually 
singled out is the Virgin Birth. The liberal preacher insists on the 
possibility of believing in Christ no matter which view be adopted as to 
the manner of His entrance into the world. Is not the Person the same no 
matter how He was born? The impression is thus produced upon the plain 
man that the preacher is accepting the main outlines of the New 
Testament account of Jesus, but merely has difficulties with this 
particular element in the account. But such an impression is radically 
false. It is true that some men have denied the Virgin Birth and yet 
have accepted the New Testament account of Jesus as a supernatural 
Person. But such men are exceedingly few and far between. It might be 
difficult to find a single one of any prominence living today, so 
profoundly and so obviously congruous is the Virgin Birth with the whole 
New Testament presentation of Christ. The overwhelming majority of those 
who reject the Virgin Birth reject also the wholesupernatural content of 
the New Testament, and make of the "resurrection" just what the word 
"resurrection" most emphatically did not mean--a permanence of the 
influence of Jesus or a mere spiritual existence of Jesus beyond the 
grave. Old words may here be used, but the thing that they designate is 
gone. The disciples believed in the continued


personal existence of Jesus even during the three sad days after the 
crucifixion; they were not Sadducees; they believed that Jesus lived and 
would rise at the last day. But what enabled them to begin the work of 
the Christian Church was that they believed the body of Jesus already to 
have been raised from the tomb by the power of God. That belief involves 
the acceptance of the supernatural; and the acceptance of the 
supernatural is thus the very heart and soul of the religion that we 
profess.

Whatever decision is made, the issue should certainly not be obscured. 
The issue does not concern individual miracles, even so important a 
miracle as the Virgin Birth. It really concerns all miracles. And the 
question concerning all miracles is simply the question of the 
acceptance or rejection of the Savior that the New Testament presents. 
Reject the miracles and you have in Jesus the fairest flower of humanity 
who made such an impression upon His followers that after His death they 
could not believe that He had perished but experienced hallucinations in 
which they thought they saw Him risen from the dead; accept the 
miracles, and you have a Savior who came voluntarily into this world for 
our salvation, suffered for our sins upon the Cross, rose again from the 
dead by the power of God, and ever lives to make intercession for us. 
The difference between those two views is the difference between two 
totally diverse religions. It is high time that this issue should be 
faced; it is high time that the misleading use of traditional phrases 
should be abandoned and men should speak their full mind. Shall we 
accept the Jesus of the New Testament as our Savior, or shall we reject 
Him with the liberal Church?

At this point an objection may be raised. The liberal preacher, it may 
be said, is often ready to speak of the "deity'' of Christ; he is often 
ready to say that "Jesus


is God." The plain man is much impressed. The preacher, he says, 
believes in the deity of our Lord; obviously then his unorthodoxy must 
concern only details; and those who object to his presence in the Church 
are narrow and uncharitable heresy-hunters.

But unfortunately language is valuable only as the expression of 
thought. The English word "God" has no particular virtue in itself; it 
is not more beautiful than other words. Its importance depends 
altogether upon the meaning which is attached to it. When, therefore, 
the liberal preacher says that "Jesus is God," the significance of the 
utterance depends altogether upon what is meant by "God."

And it has already been observed that when the liberal preacher uses the 
word "God," he means something entirely different from that which the 
Christian means by the same word. God, at least according to the logical 
trend of modern liberalism, is not a person separate from the world, but 
merely the unity that pervades the world. To say, therefore, that Jesus 
is God means merely that the life of God, which appears in all men, 
appears with special clearness or richness in Jesus. Such an assertion 
is diametrically opposed to the Christian belief in the deity of Christ.

Equally opposed to Christian belief is another meaning that is sometimes 
attached to the assertion that Jesus is God. The word "God" is sometimes 
used to denote simply the supreme object of men's desires, the highest 
thing that men know. We have given up the notion, it is said, that there 
is a Maker and Ruler of the universe; such notions belong to 
"metaphysics," and are rejected by the modern man. But the word "God," 
though it can no longer denote the Maker of the universe, is convenient 
as denoting the object of men's emotions and desires. Of some


men, it can be said that their God is mammon--mammon is that for which 
they labor, and to which their hearts are attached. In a somewhat 
similar way, the liberal preacher says that Jesus is God. He does not 
mean at all to say that Jesus is identical in nature with a Maker and 
Ruler of the universe, of whom an idea could be obtained apart from 
Jesus. In such a Being he no longer believes. All that he means is that 
the man Jesus--a man here in the midst of us, and of the same nature as 
ours--is the highest thing we know. It is obvious that such a way of 
thinking is far more widely removed from Christian belief than is 
Unitarianism, at least the earlier forms of Unitarianism. For the early 
Unitarianism no doubt at least believed in God. The modern liberals, on 
the other hand, say that Jesus is God not because they think high of 
Jesus, but because they think desperately low of God.

In another way also, liberalism within the "evangelical" churches is 
inferior to Unitarianism. It is inferior to Unitarianism in the matter 
of honesty. In order tomaintain themselves in the evangelical churches 
and quiet the fears of their conservative associates, the liberals 
resort constantly to a double use of language. A young man, for example, 
has received disquieting reports of the unorthodoxy of 8 prominent 
preacher. Interrogating the preacher as to his belief, he receives a 
reassuring reply. "You may tell everyone," says the liberal preacher in 
effect, "that I believe that Jesus is God." The inquirer goes away much 
impressed.

It may well be doubted, however, whether the assertion, "I believe that 
Jesus is God," or the like, on the lips of liberal preachers, is 
strictly truthful. The liberal preacher attaches indeed a real meaning 
to the words, and that meaning is very dear to his heart. He really does 
believe that "Jesus is God." But the trouble is that he


attaches to the words a different meaning from that which is attached to 
them by the simple-minded person to whom he is speaking. He offends, 
therefore, against the fundamental principle of truthfulness in 
language. According to that fundamental principle, language is truthful, 
not when the meaning attached to the words by the speaker, but when the 
meaning intended to be produced in the mind of the particular person 
addressed, is in accordance with the facts. Thus the truthfulness of the 
assertion, "I believe that Jesus is God," depends upon the audience that 
is addressed. If the audience is composed of theologically trained 
persons, who will attach the same meaning to the word "God" as that 
which the speaker attaches to it, then the language is truthful. But if 
the audience is composed of old-fashioned Christians, who have never 
attached anything but the old meaning to the word "God" (the meaning 
which appears in the first verse of Genesis), then the language is 
untruthful. And in the latter case, not al] the pious motives in the 
world will make the utterance right. Christian ethics do not abrogate 
common honesty; no possible desire of edifying the Church and of 
avoiding offence can excuse a lie.

At any rate, the deity of our Lord, in any real sense of the word 
"deity," is of course denied by modern liberalism. According to the 
modern liberal Church, Jesus differs from the rest of men only in degree 
and not in kind; He can be divine only if all men are divine. But if the 
liberal conception of the deity of Christ thus becomes meaningless, what 
is the Christian conception? What does the Christian man mean when he 
confesses that "Jesus is God"?

The answer has been given in what has already been said. It has already 
beenobserved that the New Testament represents Jesus as a supernatural 
Person. But if


Jesus is a supernatural Person He is either divine or else He is an 
intermediate Being, higher indeed than man, but lower than God. The 
latter view has been abandoned for many centuries in the Christian 
Church, and there is not much likelihood that it will be revived; 
Arianism certainly is dead. The thought of Christ as a super-angelic 
Being, like God but not God, belongs evidently to pagan mythology, and 
not to the Bible or to Christian faith. It will usually be admitted, if 
the theistic conception of the separateness between man and God be held, 
that Christ is either God or else simply man; He is certainly not a 
Being intermediate between God and man. If, then, He is not merely man, 
but a supernatural Person, the conclusion is that He is God.

In the second place, it has already been observed that in the New 
Testament and in all true Christianity, Jesus is no mere example for 
faith, but the object of faith. And the faith of which Jesus is the 
object is clearly religious faith; the Christian man reposes confidence 
in Jesus in a way that would be out of place in the case of any other 
than God. It is no lesser thing that is committed to Jesus, but the 
eternal welfare of the soul. The entire Christian attitude toward Jesus 
as it is found throughout the New Testament presupposes clearly, then, 
the deity of our Lord.

It is in the light of this central presupposition that the individual 
assertions ought to be approached. The individual passages which attest 
the deity of Christ are not excrescences in the New Testament, but 
natural fruits of a fundamental conception which is everywhere the same. 
Those individual passages are not confined to any one book or group of 
books. In the Pauline Epistles, of course, the passages are particularly 
plain; the Christ of the Epistles appears again and again as associated 
only


with the Father and with His Spirit. In the Gospel of John, also, one 
does not have to seek very long; the deity of Christ is almost the theme 
of the book. But the testimony of the Synoptic Gospels is not really 
different from that which appears everywhere else. The way in which 
Jesus speaks of my Father and the Son--for example, in the famous 
passage in Matt. xi. 27 (Lk. x. 22): "All things have been delivered 
unto me of my Father, and no man knoweth the Son but the Father, neither 
knoweth any man the Father save the Son and He to whomsoever the Sonwill 
reveal Him"--this manner of presenting Jesus' relation to the Father, 
absolutely fundamental in the Synoptic Gospels, involves the assertion 
of the deity of our Lord. The Person who so speaks is represented as 
being in mysterious union with the eternal God.

Yet the New Testament with equal clearness presents Jesus as a man. The 
Gospel of John, which contains at the beginning the stupendous 
utterance, "The Word was God," and dwells constantly upon the deity of 
the Lord, also represents Jesus as weary at the well and as thirst, in 
the hour of agony on the Cross. Scarcely in the Synoptic Gospels can one 
discover such drastic touches attesting the humanity of our Savior as 
those which appear again and again in the Gospel of John. With regard to 
the Synoptic Gospels, of course there can be no debate; the Synoptists 
clearly present a Person who lived a genuine human life and was Himself 
true man.

The truth is, the witness of the New Testament is everywhere the same; 
the New Testament everywhere presents One who was both God and man. And 
it is interesting to observe how unsuccessful have been all the efforts 
to reject one part of this witness and retain the rest. The 
Apollinarians rejected the full humanity of the Lord, but in doing so 
they obtained a Person who was very different


from the Jesus of the New Testament. The Jesus of the New Testament was 
clearly, in the full sense, a man. Others seem to have supposed that the 
divine and the human were so blended in Jesus that there was produced 8 
nature neither purely divine nor purely human, but a tertium quid. But 
nothing could be more remote from the New Testament teaching than that. 
According to the New Testament the divine and human natures were clearly 
distinct; the divine nature was pure divinity, and the human nature was 
pure humanity; Jesus was God and man in two distinct natures. The 
Nestorians, on the other hand, 80 emphasized the distinctness of divine 
and human in Jesus as to suppose that there were in Jesus two separate 
persons. But such a Gnosticizing view is plainly contrary to the record; 
the New Testament plainly teaches the unity of the Person of our Lord.

By elimination of these errors the Church arrived at the New Testament 
doctrine of two natures in one Person; the Jesus of the New Testament is 
"God and man, in two distinct natures, and one Person forever." That 
doctrine is sometimes regarded as speculative. But nothing could be 
further from the fact. Whether the doctrine of the two natures is true 
or false, it was certainly produced not by speculation, but by an 
attempt to summarize, succinctly and exactly, the Scriptural teaching.

This doctrine is of course rejected by modern liberalism. And it is 
rejected in a very simple way--by the elimination of the whole higher 
nature of our Lord. But such radicalism is not a bit more successful 
than the heresies of the past. The Jesus who is supposed to be left 
after the elimination of the supernatural element is at best a very 
shadowy figure; for the elimination of the supernatural logically 
involves the elimination of much that remains, and the historian 
constantly approaches the


absurd view which effaces Jesus altogether from the pages of history. 
But even after such dangers have been avoided, even after the historian, 
by setting arbitrary limits to his process of elimination, has succeeded 
in reconstructing a purely human Jesus, the Jesus thus constructed is 
found to be entirely unreal. He has a moral contradiction at the very 
center of His being--a contradiction due to His Messianic consciousness. 
He was pure and humble and strong and sane, yet He supposed, without 
basis in fact, that He was to be the final Judge of all the earth! The 
liberal Jesus, despite all the efforts of modern psychological 
reconstruction to galvanize Him into life, remains a manufactured figure 
of the stage. Very different is the Jesus of the New Testament and of 
the great Scriptural creeds. That Jesus is indeed mysterious. Who can 
fathom the mystery of His Person? But the mystery is a mystery in which 
a man can rest. The Jesus of the New Testament has at least one 
advantage over the Jesus of modern reconstruction--He is real. He is not 
a manufactured figure suitable as a point of support for ethical maxims, 
but a genuine Person whom a man can love. Men have loved Him through all 
the Christian centuries. And the strange thing is that despite all the 
efforts to remove Him from the pages of history. there are those who 
love Him still.
Chapter 6: "Salvation"

It has been observed thus far that liberalism differs from Christianity 
with regard to the presuppositions of the gospel (the view of God and 
the view of man), with regard to the Book in which the gospel is 
contained, and with regard to the Person whose work the gospel sets 
forth. It is not surprising then that it differs from Christianity in 
its account of the gospel itself; it is not surprising that it presents 
an entirely different account of the way of salvation. Liberalism finds 
salvation (so far as it is willing to speak at all of "salvation") in 
man; Christianity finds it in an act of God.

The difference with regard to the way of salvation concerns, in the 
first place, the basis of salvation in the redeeming work of Christ. 
According to Christian belief, Jesus is our Savior, not by virtue of 
what He said, not even by virtue of what He was, but by what He did. He 
is our Savior, not because He has inspired us to live the same kind of 
life that He lived, but because He took upon Himself the dreadful guilt 
of our sins and bore it instead of us on the cross. Such is the 
Christian conception of the Cross of Christ. It is ridiculed as being a 
"subtle theory of the atonement." In reality, it is the plain teaching 
of the word of God; we know absolutely nothing about an atonement that 
is not a vicarious atonement, for that is the only atonement of which 
the New Testament speaks. And this Bible doctrine is not intricate or 
subtle.



On the contrary, though it involves mysteries, it is itself so simple 
that a child can understand it. "We deserved eternal death, but the Lord 
Jesus, because He loved us, died instead of us on the cross"--surely 
there is nothing so very intricate about that. It is not the Bible 
doctrine of the atonement which is difficult to understand--what are 
really incomprehensible are the elaborate modern efforts to get rid of 
the Bible doctrine in the interests of human pride.1

Modern liberal preachers do indeed sometimes speak of the "atonement." 
But they speak of it just as seldom as they possibly can, and one can 
see plainly that their hearts are elsewhere than at the foot of the 
Cross. Indeed, at this point, as at many others, one has the feeling 
that traditional language is being strained to become the expression of 
totally alien ideas. And when the traditional phraseology has been 
stripped away, the essence of the modern conception of the death of 
Christ, though that conception appears in many forms, is fairly plain. 
The essence of it is that the death of Christ had an effect not upon God 
but only upon man. Sometimes the effect upon man is conceived of in a 
very simple way, Christ's death beingregarded merely as an example of 
self-sacrifice for us to emulate. The uniqueness of this particular 
example, then, can be found only in the fact that Christian sentiment, 
gathering around it, has made it a convenient symbol for all 
self-sacrifice; it puts in concrete form what would otherwise have to be 
expressed in colder general terms. Sometimes, again, the effect of 
Christ's death upon us is conceived of in subtler ways; the death of 
Christ, it is said, shows how much God hates sin--since sin brought even 
the Holy One to the dreadful Cross--and


we too, therefore, ought to hate sin, as God hates it, and repent. 
Sometimes, still again, the death of Christ is thought of as displaying 
the love of God; it exhibits God's own Son as given up for us all. These 
modern "theories of the atonement" are not all to be placed upon the 
same plane; the last of them, in particular, may be joined with a high 
view of Jesus' Person. But they err in that they ignore the dreadful 
reality of guilt, and make a mere persuasion of the human will all that 
is needed for salvation. They do indeed all contain an element of truth: 
it is true that the death of Christ is an example of self-sacrifice 
which may inspire self-sacrifice in others; it is true that the death of 
Christ shows how much God hates sin; it is true that the death of Christ 
displays the love of God. All of these truths are found plainly in the 
New Testament. But they are swallowed up in a far greater truth--that 
Christ died instead of us to present us faultless before the throne of 
God. Without that central truth, all the rest is devoid of real meaning: 
an example of self-sacrifice is useless to those who are under both the 
guilt and thralldom of sin; the knowledge of God's hatred of sin can in 
itself bring only despair; an exhibition of the love of God is a mere 
display unless there was some underlying reason for the sacrifice. If 
the Cross is to be restored to its rightful place in Christian life, we 
shall have to penetrate far beneath the modern theories to Him who loved 
us and gave Himself for us.

Upon the Christian doctrine of the Cross, modern liberals are never 
weary of pouring out the vials of their hatred and their scorn. Even at 
this point, it is true, the hope of avoiding offence is not always 
abandoned; the words "vicarious atonement" and the like--of course in a 
sense totally at variance from their Christian meaning--are still 
sometimes used. But despite such occasional



employment of traditional language the liberal preachers reveal only too 
clearly what is in their minds. They speak with disgust of those who 
believe "that the blood of our Lord, shed in a substitutionary death, 
placates an alienated Deity and makes possible welcome for the returning 
sinner."1 Against the doctrine of the Cross they use every weapon of 
caricature and vilification. Thus they pour out their scorn upon a thing 
so holy and so precious that in the presence of it the Christian heart 
melts in gratitude too deep for words. It never seems to occur to modern 
liberals that in deriding the Christian doctrine of the Cross, they are 
trampling upon human hearts. But the modern liberal attacks upon the 
Christian doctrine of the Cross may at least serve the purpose of 
showing what that doctrine is, and from this point of view they may be 
examined briefly now.

In the first place, then, the Christian way of salvation through the 
Cross of Christ is criticized because it is dependent upon history. This 
criticism is sometimes evaded; it is sometimes said that as Christians 
we may attend to what Christ does now for every Christian rather than to 
what He did long ago in Palestine. But the evasion involves a total 
abandonment of the Christian faith. If the saving work of Christ were 
confined to what He does now for every Christian, there would be no such 
thing as a Christian gospel--an account of an event which put a new face 
on life. What we should have left would be simply mysticism, and 
mysticism is quite different from Christianity. It is the connection of 
the present experience of the believer with an actual historic 
appearance of Jesus in the world which prevents our religion from being 
mysticism and causes it to be Christianity.


It must certainly be admitted, then, that Christianity does depend upon 
something that happened; our religion must be abandoned altogether 
unless at a definite point in history Jesus died as a propitiation for 
the sins of men. Christianity is certainly dependent upon history.

But if so, the objection lies very near. Must we really depend for the 
welfare of our souls upon what happened long ago? Must we really wait 
until historians have finished disputing about the value of sources and 
the like before we can have peace with God? Would it not be better to 
have a salvation which is with us here and now, and which depends only 
upon what we can see or feel?

With regard to this objection it should be observed that if religion be 
made independent of history there is no such thing as a gospel. For 
"gospel" means"good news," tidings, information about something that has 
happened. A gospel independent of history is a contradiction in terms. 
The Christian gospel means, not a presentation of what always has been 
true, but a report of something new-- something that imparts a totally 
different aspect to the situation of mankind. The situation of mankind 
was desperate because of sin; but God has changed the situation by the 
atoning death of Christ--that is no mere reflection upon the old, but an 
account of something new. We are shut up in this world as in a 
beleaguered camp. To maintain our courage, the liberal preacher offers 
us exhortation. Make the best of the situation, he says, look on the 
bright side of life. But unfortunately, such exhortation cannot change 
the facts. In particular it cannot remove the dreadful fact of sin. Very 
different is the message of the Christian evangelist. He offers not 
reflection on the old but tidings of something new, not exhortation but 
a gospel.1




It is true that the Christian gospel is an account, not of something 
that happened yesterday, but of something that happened long ago; but 
the important thing is that it really happened. If it really happened, 
then it makes little difference when it happened. No matter when it 
happened, whether yesterday or in the first century, it remains a real 
gospel, a real piece of news.

The happening of long ago, moreover, is in this case confirmed by 
present experience. The Christian man receives first the account which 
the New Testament gives of the atoning death of Christ. That account is 
history. But if true it has effects in the present, and it can be tested 
by its effects. The Christian man makes trial of the Christian message, 
and making trial of it he finds it to be true. Experience does not 
provide a substitute for the documentary evidence, but it does confirm 
that evidence. The word of the Cross no longer seems to the Christian to 
be merely a far-off thing, merely a matter to be disputed about by 
trained theologians. On the contrary, it is received into the 
Christian's inmost soul, and every day and hour of the Christian's life 
brings new confirmation of its truth.

In the second place, the Christian doctrine of salvation through the 
death of Christ is criticized on the ground that it is narrow. It binds 
salvation to the name of Jesus, and there are many men in the world who 
have never in any effective way heard of the name of Jesus. What is 
really needed, we are told, is a salvation which will save all men 
everywhere, whether they have heard of Jesus or not, and whatever may be 
the type of life to which they have been reared. Not a new creed, it is 
said,will meet; the universal need of the world, but some means of 
making effective in right living whatever creed men may chance to have.



This second objection, as well as the first, is sometimes evaded. It is 
sometimes said that although one way of salvation is by means of 
acceptance of the gospel there may be other ways. But this method of 
meeting the objection relinquishes one of the things that are most 
obviously characteristic of the Christian message-- namely, its 
exclusiveness. What struck the early observers of Christianity most 
forcibly was not merely that salvation was offered by means of the 
Christian gospel, but that all other means were resolutely rejected. The 
early Christian missionaries demanded an absolutely exclusive devotion 
to Christ. Such exclusiveness ran directly counter to the prevailing 
syncretism of the Hellenistic age. In that day, many saviors were 
offered by many religions to the attention of men, but the various pagan 
religions could live together in perfect harmony; when a man became a 
devotee of one god, he did not have to give up the others. But 
Christianity would have nothing to do with these "courtly polygamies of 
the soul"; 1 it demanded an absolutely exclusive devotion; all other 
Saviors, it insisted, must be deserted for the one Lord. Salvation, in 
other words, was not merely through Christ, but it was only through 
Christ. In that little word "only" lay all the offence. Without that 
word there would have been no persecutions; the cultured men of the day 
would probably have been willing to give Jesus a place, and an honorable 
place, among the saviors of mankind. Without its exclusiveness, the 
Christian message would have seemed perfectly inoffensive to the men of 
that day. So modern liberalism, placing Jesus alongside other 
benefactors of mankind, is perfectly inoffensive in the modern world. 
All men speak well of it. It is entirely inoffensive. But


it is also entirely futile. The offence of the Cross is done away, but 
so is the glory and the power.

Thus it must fairly be admitted that Christianity does bind salvation to 
the name of Christ. The question need not here be discussed whether the 
benefits of Christ's death are ever applied to those who, though they 
have come to years of discretion, have not heard or accepted the gospel 
message. Certainly the New Testament holdsout with "yard to this matter 
no clear hope. At the very basis of the work of the apostolic Church is 
the consciousness of a terrible responsibility. The sole message of life 
and salvation had been committed to men; that message was at all hazards 
to be proclaimed while yet there was time. The objection as to the 
exclusiveness of the Christian way of salvation, therefore, cannot be 
evaded, but must be met.

In answer to the objection, it may be said simply that the Christian way 
of salvation is narrow only BO long as the Church chooses to let it 
remain narrow. The name of Jesus is discovered to be strangely adapted 
to men of every race and of every kind of previous education. And the 
Church has ample means, with promise of God's Spirit, to bring the name 
of Jesus to all. If, therefore, this way of salvation is not offered to 
all, it is not the fault of the way of salvation itself, but the fault 
of those who fail to use the means that God has placed in their hands.

But, it may be said, is that not a stupendous responsibility to be 
placed in the hands of weak and sinful men; is it not more natural that 
God should offer salvation to all without requiring them to accept a new 
message and thus to be dependent upon the faithfulness of the 
messengers? The answer to this objection is plain. It is certainly true 
that the Christian way of salvation places a stupendous responsibility 
upon men. But that responsibility



is like the responsibility which, as ordinary observation shows, God 
does, as a matter of fact, commit to men. It is like the responsibility, 
for example, of the parent for the child. The parent has full power to 
mar the soul as well as the body of the child. The responsibility is 
terrible; but it is a responsibility which unquestionably exists. 
Similar is the responsibility of the Church for making the name of Jesus 
known to all mankind. It is a terrible responsibility; but it exists, 
and it is just like the other known dealings of God.

But modern liberalism has still more specific objections to the 
Christian doctrine of the Cross. How can one person, it is asked, suffer 
for the sins of another? The thing, we are told, is absurd. Guilt, it is 
said, is personal; if I allow another man to suffer for my fault, my 
guilt is not thereby one whit diminished.

An answer to this objection is sometimes found in the plain instances in 
ordinary human life where one person does suffer for another person's 
sin. In the war, for example, many men died freely for the welfare of 
others. Here, it is "aid, we have something analogous to the sacrifice 
of Christ.

It must be confessed, however, that the analogy is very faint; for it 
does not touch the specific point at issue. The death of a volunteer 
soldier in the war was like the death of Christ in that it was a supreme 
example of self-sacrifice. But the thing to be accomplished by the 
self-sacrifice was entire!', different from the thing which was 
accomplished on Calvary. The death of those who sacrificed themselves in 
the war brought peace and protection to the loved ones at home, but it 
could never avail to wipe out the guilt of sin.

The real answer to the objection is to be found not in the similarity 
between the death of Christ and other



examples of self-sacrifice, but in the profound difference.1 Why is it 
that men are no longer willing to trust for their own salvation and for 
the hope of the world to one act that was done by one Man of long ago? 
Why is it that they prefer to trust to millions of acts of 
self-sacrifice wrought by millions of men all through the centuries and 
in our own day? The answer is plain. It is because men have lost sight 
of the majesty of Jesus' Person. The, think of Him as a man like 
themselves; and if He was a man like themselves, His death becomes 
simply an example of self-sacrifice. But there have been millions of 
examples of self-sacrifice. Why then should we pay such exclusive 
attention to this one Palestinian example of long ago? Men used to say 
with reference to Jesus, "There was no other good enough to pay the 
price of sin." They say so now no longer. On the contrary, every man is 
now regarded as plenty good enough to pay the price of sin if, whether 
in peace or in war, he will only go bravely over the top in some noble 
cause.

It is perfectly true that no mere man can pay the penalty of another 
man's sin. But it does not follow that Jesus could not do it; for Jesus 
was no mere man but the eternal Son of God. Jesus is master of the 
innermost secrets of the moral world. He has done what none other could 
possibly do; He has borne our sin.

The Christian doctrine of the atonement, therefore, is altogether rooted 
in the Christian doctrine of the deity of Christ. The reality of an 
atonement for sin depends altogether upon the New Testament presentation 
of the Person of Christ. And even the hymn" dealing with the Cross which 
we sing in Church can be placed in an ascending


scale according as they are based upon a lower or a higher view of 
Jesus' Person. At the very bottom of the scale is that familiar hymn:

    Nearer, my God, to thee,
    Nearer to thee!
    E'en though it be a cross
    That raiseth me.

That is a perfectly good hymn. It means that our trials may be a 
discipline to bring us nearer to God. The thought is not opposed to 
Christianity; it is found in the New Testament. But many persons have 
the impression, because the word "cross" is found in the hymn, that 
there is something specifically Christian about it, and that it has 
something to do with the gospel. This impression is entirely false. In 
reality, the cross that is spoken of is not the Cross of Christ, but our 
own cross; the verse simply means that our own crosses or trials may be 
a means to bring us nearer to God. It is a perfectly good thought, but 
certainly it is not the gospel. One can only be sorry that the people on 
the Titanic could not find a better hymn to use in the last solemn hour 
of their lives. But there is another hymn in the hymn-book:

    In the cross of Christ I glory,
    Towering o'er the wrecks of time;
    All the light of sacred story
    Gathers round its head sublime.

That is certainly better. It is here not our own crosses but the Cross 
of Christ, the actual event that took place on Calvary, that is spoken 
of, and that event is celebrated as the center of all history. Certainly 
the Christian man can sing that hymn. But one misses even there the full 
Christian sense of the meaning of the Cross; the Cross is celebrated, 
but it is not understood.



It is well, therefore, that there is another hymn in our hymn-book:

    When I survey the wondrous cross
    On which the Prince of glory died
    My richest gain I count but loss,
    And pour contempt on all my pride.

There at length are heard the accents of true Christian feeling--"the 
wondrous crosson which the Prince of glory died." When we come to see 
that it was no mere man who suffered on Calvary but the Lord of Glory, 
then we shall be willing to say that one drop of the precious blood of 
Jesus is of more value, for our own salvation and for the hope of 
society, than all the rivers of blood that have flowed upon the 
battlefields of history.

Thus the objection to the vicarious sacrifice of Christ disappears 
altogether before the tremendous Christian sense of the majesty of 
Jesus' Person. It is perfectly true that the Christ of modern 
naturalistic reconstruction never could have suffered for the sins of 
others; but it is very different in the case of the Lord of Glory. And 
if the notion of vicarious atonement be so absurd as modern opposition 
would lead us to believe, what shall be said of the Christian experience 
that has been based upon it? The modern liberal Church is fond of 
appealing to experience. But where shall true Christian experience be 
found if not in the blessed peace which comes from Calvary? That peace 
comes only when a man recognizes that all his striving to be right with 
God, all his feverish endeavor to keep the Law before he can be saved, 
is unnecessary, and that the Lord Jesus has wiped out the handwriting 
that was against him by dying instead of him on the Cross. VVho can 
measure the depth of the peace and joy that comes from this blessed 
knowledge? Is it a "theory of



the atonement," a delusion of man's fancy? Or is it the very truth of 
God?

But still another objection remains against the Christian doctrine of 
the Cross. The objection concerns the character of God. What a degraded 
view of God it is, the modern liberal exclaims, when God is represented 
as being "alienated" from man, and as waiting coldly until a price be 
paid before He grants salvation! In reality, we are told, God is more 
willing to forgive sin than we are willing to be forgiven; 
reconciliation, therefore, can have to do only with man; it all depends 
upon us; God will receive us any time we choose.

The objection depends of course upon the liberal view of sin. If sin is 
so trifling a matter as the liberal Church supposes, then indeed the 
curse of God's law can be taken very lightly, and God can easily let 
by-gones be by-gones.

This business of letting by-gones be by-gones has a pleasant sound. But 
in reality it is the most heartless thing in the world. It will not do 
at all even in the case of sins committed against our fellow-men. To say 
nothing of sin against God, what shall be done about the harm that we 
have wrought to our neighbor? Sometimes, no doubt, the harm can be 
repaired. If we have defrauded our neighbor of a sum ofmoney, we can pay 
the sum back with interest. But in the case of the more serious wrongs 
such repayment is usually quite impossible. The more serious wrongs are 
those that are done, not to the bodies, but to the souls of men. And who 
can think with complacency of wrongs of that kind which he has 
committed? Who can bear to think, for example, of the harm that he has 
done to those younger than himself by a bad example? And what of those 
sad words, spoken to those we love, that have left scars never to be 
obliterated by the hand of time? In the presence of such memories, we 
are told by



the modern preacher simply to repent and to let by-gones be by-gones. 
But what a heartless thing is such repentance! We escape into some 
higher, happier, respectable life. But what of those whom we by our 
example and by our words have helped to drag down to the brink of hell? 
We forget them and let by-gones be by-gones!

Such repentance will never wipe out the guilt of sin--not even sin 
committed against our fellow-men, to say nothing of sin against our God. 
The truly penitent man longs to wipe out the effects of sin, not merely 
to forget sin. But who can wipe out the effects of sin? Others are 
suffering because of our past sins; and we can attain no real peace 
until we suffer in their stead. We long to go back into the tangle of 
our life, and make right the things that are wrong--at least to suffer 
where we have caused others to suffer. And something like that Christ 
did for us when He died instead of us on the cross; He atoned for all 
our sins.

The sorrow for sins committed against one's fellowmen does indeed remain 
in the Christian's heart. And he will seek by every means that is within 
his power to repair the damage that he has done. But atonement at least 
has been made--made as truly as if the sinner himself had suffered with 
and for those whom he has wronged. And the sinner himself, by a mystery 
of grace, becomes right with God. All sin at bottom is a sin against 
God. "Against thee, thee only have I sinned" is the cry of a true 
penitent. How terrible is the sin against God! Who can recall the wasted 
moments and years ? Gone they are, never to return; gone the little 
allotted span of life; gone the little day in which a man must work. Who 
can measure the irrevocable guilt of a wasted life? Yet even for such 
guilt God has provided a fountain of cleansing in the precious blood of 
Christ. God has clothed us with Christ's



righteousness as with a garment; in Christ we stand spotless before the 
judgment throne.

Thus to deny the necessity of atonement is to deny the existence of a 
real moral order. And it is strange how those who venture upon such 
denial can regard themselves as disciples of Jesus; for if one thing is 
clear in the record of Jesus' life it is that Jesus recognized the 
justice as distinguished from the love, of God. God is love, according 
to Jesus, but He is not only love; Jesus spoke, in terrible words, of 
the sin that shall never be forgiven either in this world or in that 
which is to come. Clearly Jesus recognized the existence of retributive 
justice; Jesus was far from accepting the light modern view of sin.

But what, then, it will be objected, becomes of God's love? Even if it 
be admitted that justice demands punishment for sin, the modern liberal 
theologian will say, what becomes of the Christian doctrine that justice 
is swallowed up by grace? If God is represented as waiting for a price 
to be paid before sin shall be forgiven, perhaps His justice may be 
rescued, but what becomes of His love?

Modern liberal teachers are never tired of ringing the changes upon this 
objection. They speak with horror of the doctrine of an "alienated" or 
an "angry" God. In answer, of course it would be easy to point to the 
New Testament. The New Testament clearly speaks of the wrath of God and 
the wrath of Jesus Himself; and all the teaching of Jesus presupposes a 
divine indignation against sin. With what possible right, then, can 
those who reject this vital element in Jesus' teaching and example 
regard themselves as true disciples of His? The truth is that the modern 
rejection of the doctrine of God's wrath proceeds from a light view of 
sin which is totally at variance with the teaching of the whole New 
Testament and of Jesus Himself. If a man has once come under a



true conviction of sin, he will have little difficulty with the doctrine 
of the Cross.

But as a matter of fact the modern objection to the doctrine of the 
atonement on the ground that that doctrine is contrary to the love of 
God, is based upon the most abysmal misunderstanding of the doctrine 
itself. The modern liberal teachers persist in speaking of the sacrifice 
of Christ as though it were a sacrifice made by some one other than God. 
They speak of it as though it meant that God waits coldly until a price 
is paid to Him before He forgives sin. As a matter of fact, itmeans 
nothing of the kind; the objection ignores that which is absolutely 
fundamental in the Christian doctrine of the Cross. The fundamental 
thing is that God Himself, and not another, makes the sacrifice for 
sin--God Himself in the person of the Son who assumed our nature and 
died for us, God Himself in the Person of the Father who spared not His 
own Son but offered Him up for us all. Salvation is as free for us as 
the air we breathe; God's the dreadful cost, ours the gain. "God so 
loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son." Such love is very 
different from the complacency found in the God of modern preaching; 
this love is love that did nob count the cost; it is love that is love 
indeed.

This love and this love alone brings true joy to men. Joy is indeed 
being sought by the modern liberal Church. But it is being sought in 
ways that are false. How may communion with God be made joyful? 
Obviously, we are told, by emphasizing the comforting attributes of 
God--His long-suffering, His love. Let us, it is urged, regard Him not 
as a moody Despot, not as a sternly righteous Judge, but simply as a 
loving Father. Away with the horrors of the old theology! Let us worship 
a God in whom we can rejoice.



Two questions arise with regard to this method of making religion 
joyful--in the first place, Does it work? and in the second place, Is it 
true?

Does it work? It certainly ought to work. How can anyone be unhappy when 
the ruler of the universe is declared to be the loving Father of all men 
who will never permanently inflict pain upon His children ? Where is the 
sting of remorse if all sin will necessarily be forgiven? Yet men are 
strangely ungrateful. After the modern preacher has done his part with 
all diligence--after everything unpleasant has carefully been eliminated 
from the conception of God, after His unlimited love has been celebrated 
with the eloquence that it deserves--the congregation somehow 
persistently refuses to burst into the old ecstasies of joy. The truth 
is, the God of modern preaching, though He may perhaps be very good, is 
rather uninteresting. Nothing is so insipid as indiscriminate good 
humor. Is that really love that costs so little? If God will necessarily 
forgive, no matter what we do, why trouble ourselves about Him at all? 
Such a God may deliver us from the fear of hell. But His heaven, if He 
has any, is full of sin.

The other objection to the modern encouraging idea of God is that it is 
not true. How do you know that God is all love and kindness? Surely not 
through nature, for it is full of horrors. Human suffering may be 
unpleasant, but it is real, and Godmust have something to do with it. 
Just as surely not through the Bible. For it was from the Bible that the 
old theologians derived that conception of God which you would reject as 
gloomy. "The Lord thy God," the Bible says, "is a consuming fire." Or is 
Jesus alone your authority? You are no better off. For it was Jesus who 
spoke of the outer darkness and the everlasting fire, of the sin that 
shall not be forgiven either in



this age or in that which is to come. Or do you appeal, for your 
comforting idea of God, to a twentieth-century revelation granted 
immediately to you? It is to be feared that you will convince no one but 
yourself.

Religion cannot be made joyful simply by looking on the bright side of 
God. For a one-sided God is not a real God, and it is the real God alone 
who can satisfy the longing of our soul. God is love, but is He only 
love? God is love, but is love God? Seek joy alone, then, seek joy at 
any cost, and you will not find it. How then may it be attained?

The search for joy in religion seems to have ended in disaster. God is 
found to be enveloped in impenetrable mystery, and in awful 
righteousness; man is confined in the prison of the world, trying to 
make the best of his condition, beautifying the prison with tinsel, yet 
secretly dissatisfied with his bondage, dissatisfied with a merely 
relative goodness which is no goodness at all, dissatisfied with the 
companionship of his sinful fellows, unable to forget his heavenly 
destiny and his heavenly duty, longing for communion with the Holy One. 
There seems to be no hope; God is separate from sinners; there is no 
room for joy, but only a certain fearful looking for of judgment and 
fiery indignation.

Yet such a God has at least one advantage over the comforting God of 
modern preaching--He is alive, He is sovereign, He is not bound by His 
creation or by His creatures, He can perform wonders. Could He even save 
us if He would? He has saved us--in that message the gospel consists. It 
could not have been foretold; still less could the manner of it have 
been foretold. That Birth, that Life, that Death-- why was it done just 
thus and then and there? It all seems so very local, so very particular, 
so very unphilosophical, so very unlike what might



have been expected. Are not our own methods of salvation, men say, 
better thanthat? "Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better 
than all the waters of Israel?" Yet what if it were true? "So, the 
All-Great were the All-Loving too"-- God's own Son delivered up for us 
all, freedom from the world, sought by philosophers of all the ages, 
offered now freely to every simple soul, things hidden from the wise and 
prudent revealed unto babes, the long striving over, the impossible 
accomplished, sin conquered by mysterious grace, communion at length 
with the holy God, our Father which art in heaven!

Surely this and this alone is joy. But it is a joy that is akin to fear. 
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Were we 
not safer with a God of our own devising--love and only love, a Father 
and nothing else, one before whom we could stand in our own merit 
without fear? He who will may be satisfied with such a God. But we, God 
help us--sinful as we are, we would see Jehovah. Despairing, hoping, 
trembling, half-doubting and half-believing, trusting all to Jesus, we 
venture into the presence of the very God. And in His presence we live.

The atoning death of Christ, and that alone, has presented sinners as 
righteous in God's sight; the Lord Jesus has paid the full penalty of 
their sins, and clothed them with His perfect righteousness before the 
judgment seat of God. But Christ has done for Christians even far more 
than that. He has given to them not only a new and right relation to 
God, but a new life in God's presence for evermore. He has saved them 
from the power as well as from the guilt of sin. The New Testament does 
not end with the death of Christ; it does not end with the triumphant 
words of Jesus on the Cross, "It is finished." The death was followed by 
the resurrection, and the resurrection



like the death was for our sakes. Jesus rose from the dead into a new 
life of glory and power, and into that life He brings those for whom He 
died. The Christian, on the basis of Christ's redeeming work, not only 
has died unto sin, but also lives unto God.

Thus was completed the redeeming work of Christ--the work for which He 
entered into the world. The account of that work is the "gospel," the 
"good news." It never could have been predicted, for sin deserves naught 
but eternal death. But God triumphed over sin through the grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ.

But how is the redeeming work of Christ applied to the individual 
Christian man? The answer of the New Testament is plain. According to 
the New Testament the work of Christ is applied to the individual 
Christian man by the Holy Spirit. Andthis work of the Holy Spirit is 
part of the creative work of God. It is not accomplished by the ordinary 
use of means; it is not accomplished merely by using the good that is 
already in man. On the contrary, it is something new. It is not an 
influence upon the life, but the beginning of a new life; it is not 
development of what we had already, but a new birth. At the very center 
of Christianity are the words, "Ye must be born again."

These words are despised today. They involve supernaturalism, and the 
modern man is opposed to supernaturalism in the experience of the 
individual as much as in the realm of history. A cardinal doctrine of 
modern liberalism is that the world's evil may be overcome by the 
world's good; no help is thought to be needed from outside the world.

This doctrine is propagated in various ways. It runs all through the 
popular literature of our time. It dominates religious literature, and 
it appears even upon the stage. Some years ago great popularity was 
attained by



a play which taught the doctrine in powerful fashion. The play began 
with a scene in a London boarding-house. And it was a very discouraging 
scene. The persons in that boarding-house were not by any means 
desperate criminals, but one could almost have wished that they had 
been--they would have been so much more interesting. As it was, they 
were simply sordid, selfish persons, snapping and snarling about things 
to eat and about creature comforts--the sort of persons about whom one 
is tempted to say that they have no souls. The scene was a powerful 
picture of the hideousness of the commonplace. But presently the 
mysterious stranger of "the third floor back" entered upon the scene, 
and all was changed. He had no creed to offer, and no religion. But he 
simply engaged in conversation with everyone in that boardinghouse, and 
discovered the one good point in every individual life. Somewhere in 
every life there was some one good thing--some one true human affection, 
some one noble ambition. It had long been hidden by a thick coating of 
sordidness and selfishness; its very existence had been forgotten. But 
it was there, and when it was brought to the light the whole life was 
transformed. Thus the evil that was in man was overcome by the good that 
was already there.

The same thing is taught in more immediately practical ways. For 
example, there are those who would apply it to the prisoners in our 
jails. 7 he inmates of jails and penitentiaries constitute no doubt 
unpromising material. But it is a great mistake, it is said, to tell 
them that they are bad, to discourage them by insisting upon theirsin. 
On the contrary, we are told, what ought to be done is to find the good 
that is already in them and build upon that; we ought to appeal to some 
latent sense of honor which shows that even criminals possess the 
remnants of our



common human nature. Thus again the evil that is in man is to be 
overcome not by a foreign good but by a good which man himself 
possesses.

Certainly there is a large element of truth in this modern principle. 
That element of truth is found in the Bible. The Bible does certainly 
teach that the good that is already in man ought to be fostered in order 
to check the evil. Whatsoever things are true and pure and of good 
report--we ought to think on those things. Certainly the principle of 
overcoming the world's evil by the good already in the world is a great 
principle. The old theologians recognized it to the full in their 
doctrine of "common grace." There is something in the world even apart 
from Christianity which restrains the worst manifestations of evil. And 
that something ought to be used. Without the use of it, this world could 
not be lived in for a day. The use of it is certainly a great principle; 
it will certainly accomplish man', useful things.

But there is one thing which it will not accomplish. It will not remove 
the disease of sin. It will indeed palliate the symptoms of the disease; 
it will change the form of the disease. Sometimes the disease is hidden, 
and there are those who think that it is cured. But then it bursts forth 
in some new way, as in 1914, and startles the world. What is really 
needed is not a salve to palliate the symptoms of sin, but a remedy that 
attacks the root of the disease.

In reality, however, the figure of disease is misleading. The only true 
figure--if indeed it can be called merely a figure--is the one which is 
used in the Bible. Man is not merely ill, but he is dead, in trespasses 
and sins, and what is really needed is a new life. That life is given by 
the Holy Spirit in "regeneration" or the new birth.

Many are the passages and many are the ways in which the central 
doctrine of the new birth is taught in the Word



of God. One of the most stupendous passages is Gal. ii. 20: "I have been 
crucified with Christ; and it is no longer I that live but Christ liveth 
in me." That passage was called by Bengel the marrow of Christianity. 
And it was rightly so called. Itrefers to the objective basis of 
Christianity in the redeeming work of Christ, and it contains also the 
supernaturalism of Christian experience. "It is no longer I that live, 
but Christ liveth in me"--these are extraordinary words. "If you look 
upon Christians," Paul says in effect, "you see so many manifestations 
of the life of Christ." Undoubtedly if the words of Gal. ii. 20 stood 
alone they might be taken in a mystical or pantheistic sense; they might 
be taken to involve the merging of the personality of the Christian in 
the personality of Christ. But Paul had no reason to fear such a 
misinterpretation, for he had fortified himself against it by the whole 
of his teaching. The new relation of the Christian to Christ, according 
to Paul, involves no loss of the separate personality of the Christian; 
on the contrary, it is everywhere intensely personal; it is not a merely 
mystical relationship to the All or the Absolute, but a relationship of 
love existing between one person and another. Just because Paul had 
fortified himself against misunderstanding, he was not afraid of an 
extreme boldness of language. "It is no longer I that live, but Christ 
liveth in me"--these words involve a tremendous conception of the break 
that comes in a man's life when he becomes a Christian. It is almost as 
though he became a new person--so stupendous is the change. These words 
were not written by a man who believed that Christianity means merely 
the entrance of a new motive into the life; Paul believed with all his 
mind and heart in the doctrine of the new creation or the new birth.

That doctrine represents one aspect of the salvation



which was wrought by Christ and is applied by His Spirit. But there is 
another aspect of the same salvation. Regeneration means a new life; but 
there is also a new relation in which the believer stands toward God. 
That new relation is instituted by "justification"--the act of God by 
which a sinner is pronounced righteous in His sight because of the 
atoning death of Christ. It is not necessary to ask whether 
justification comes before regeneration or vice versa; in reality they 
are two aspects of one salvation. And they both stand at the very 
beginning of the Christian life. The Christian has not merely the 
promise of a new life, but he has already a new life. And he has not 
merely the promise of being pronounced righteous in God's sight (though 
the blessed pronouncement will be confirmed on the judgment day), but he 
is already pronounced righteous here and now. At the beginning of every 
Christian life there stands, not a process, but a definite act of God.

That does not mean that every Christian can tell exactly at what moment 
he wasjustified and born again. Some Christians, indeed, are really able 
to give day and hour of their conversion. It is a grievous sin to 
ridicule the experience of such men. Sometimes, indeed, they are 
inclined to ignore the steps in the providence of God which prepared for 
the great change. But they are right on the main point. They know that 
when on such and such a day they kneeled in prayer they were still in 
their sins, and when they rose from their knees they were children of 
God never to be separated from Him. Such experience is a very holy 
thing. But on the other hand it is a mistake to demand that it should be 
universal. There are Christians who can give day and hour of their 
conversion, but the great majority do not know exactly at what moment 
they were saved. The effects of the act are plain, but the act



itself was done in the quietness of God. Such, very often, is the 
experience of children brought up by Christian parents. It is not 
necessary that all should pass through agonies of soul before being 
saved; there are those to whom faith comes peacefully and easily through 
the nurture of Christian homes.

But however it be manifested, the beginning of the Christian life is an 
act of God. It is an act of God and not an act of man.

That does not mean, however, that in the beginning of the Christian life 
God deals with us as with sticks or stones, unable to understand what is 
being done. On the contrary He deals with us as with persons; salvation 
has a place in the conscious life of man; God uses in our salvation a 
conscious act of the human soul--an act which though it is itself the 
work of God's Spirit, is at the same time an act of man. That act of man 
which God produces and employs in salvation is faith. At the center of 
Christianity is the doctrine of "justification by faith."

In exalting faith, we are not immediately putting ourselves in 
contradiction to modern thought. Indeed faith is being exalted very high 
by men of the most modern type. But what kind of faith? There emerges 
the difference of opinion.

Faith is being exalted so high today that men are being satisfied with 
any kind of faith, just so it is faith. It makes no difference what is 
believed, we are told, just so the blessed attitude of faith is there. 
The undogmatic faith, it is said, is better than the dogmatic, because 
it is purer faith--faith less weakened by the alloy of knowledge.

Now it is perfectly clear that such employment of faith merely as a 
beneficent state of the soul is bringing some results. Faith in the most 
absurd things sometimes



produces the most beneficent and far-reaching results. But the 
disturbing thing is that all faith has an object. The scientific 
observer may not think that it is the object that does the work; from 
his vantage point he may see clearly that it is really the faith, 
considered simply as a psychological phenomenon, that is the important 
thing, and that any other object would have answered as well. But the 
one who does the believing is always convinced just exactly that it is 
not the faith, but the object of the faith, which is helping him. The 
moment he becomes convinced that it is merely the faith that is helping 
him, the faith disappears; for faith always involves a conviction of the 
objective truth or trustworthiness of the object. If the object is not 
really trustworthy then the faith is a false faith. It is perfectly true 
that such a false faith will often help a man. Things that are false 
will accomplish a great many useful things in the world. If I take a 
counterfeit coin and buy a dinner with it, the dinner is every bit as 
good as if the coin were a product of the mint. And what a very useful 
thing a dinner is! But just as I am on my way downtown to buy a dinner 
for a poor man, an expert tells me that my coin is a counterfeit. The 
miserable, heartless theorizer! While he is going into uninteresting, 
learned details about the primitive history of that coin, a poor man is 
dying for want of bread. So it is with faith. Faith is so very useful, 
they tell us, that we must not scrutinize its basis in truth. But, the 
great trouble is, such an avoidance of scrutiny itself involves the 
destruction of faith. For faith is essentially dogmatic. Despite all you 
can do, you cannot remove the element of intellectual assent from it. 
Faith is the opinion that some person will do something for you. If that 
person really will do that thing for you, then the faith is true. If he 
will not do it, then the faith is false. In the latter case, not all



the benefits in the world will make the faith true. Though it has 
transformed the world from darkness to light, though it has produced 
thousands of glorious healthy lives, it remains a pathological 
phenomenon. It is false, and sooner or later it is sure to be found out.

Such counterfeits should be removed, not out of a love of destruction, 
but in order to leave room for the pure gold, the existence of which is 
implied in the presence of the counterfeits. Faith is often based upon 
error, but there would be no faith at all unless it were sometimes based 
upon truth. But if Christian faith is based upon truth, then it is not 
the faith which saves the Christian but the object of the faith.And the 
object of the faith is Christ. Faith, then, according to the Christian 
view means simply receiving a gift. To have faith in Christ means to 
cease trying to win God's favor by one's own character; the man who 
believes in Christ simply accepts the sacrifice which Christ offered on 
Calvary. The result of such faith is a new life and all good works; but 
the salvation itself is an absolutely free gift of God.

Very different is the conception of faith which prevails in the liberal 
Church. According to modern liberalism, faith is essentially the same as 
"making Christ Master" in one's life; at least it is by making Christ 
Master in the life that the welfare of men is sought. But that simply 
means that salvation is thought to be obtained by our own obedience to 
the commands of Christ. Such teaching is just a sublimated form of 
legalism. Not the sacrifice of Christ, on this view, but our own 
obedience to God's law, is the ground of hope.

In this way the whole achievement of the Reformation has been given up, 
and there has been a return to the religion of the Middle Ages. At the 
beginning of the sixteenth century, God raised up 8 man who began to 
read



the Epistle to the Galatians with his own eyes. The result was the 
rediscovery of the doctrine of justification by faith. Upon that 
rediscovery has been based the whole of our evangelical freedom. As 
expounded by Luther and Calvin the Epistle to the Galatians became the 
"Magna Charta of Christian liberty." But modern liberalism has returned 
to the old interpretation of Galatians which was urged against the 
Reformers. Thus Professor Burton's elaborate commentary on the Epistle, 
despite all its extremely valuable modern scholarship, is in one respect 
a medieval book; it has returned to an anti-Reformation exegesis, by 
which Paul is thought to be attacking in the Epistle only the piecemeal 
morality of the Pharisees. In reality, of course, the object of Paul's 
attack is the thought that in any way man can earn his acceptance with 
God. What Paul is primarily interested in is not spiritual religion over 
against ceremonialism, but the free grace of God over against human 
merit.

The grace of God is rejected by modern liberalism. And the result is 
slavery--the slavery of the law, the wretched bondage by which man 
undertakes the impossible task of establishing his own righteousness as 
a ground of acceptance with God. It may seem strange at first sight that 
"liberalism," of which the very name means freedom, should in reality be 
wretched slavery. But the phenomenon is not really so strange. 
Emancipation from the blessed will of God always involves bondage tosome 
worse taskmaster.

Thus it may be said of the modern liberal Church, as of the Jerusalem of 
Paul's day, that "she is in bondage with her children." God grant that 
she may turn again to the liberty of the gospel of Christ!

The liberty of the gospel depends upon the gift of God by which the 
Christian life is begun--a gift which involves



justification, or the removal of the guilt of sin and the establishment 
of a right relation between the believer and God, and regeneration or 
the new birth, which makes of the Christian man a new creature.

But there is one obvious objection to this high doctrine, and the 
objection leads on to a fuller account of the Christian way of 
salvation. The obvious objection to the doctrine of the new creation is 
that it does not seem to be in accord with the observed fact. Are 
Christians really new creatures? It certainly does not seem so. They are 
subject to the same old conditions of life to which they were subject 
before; if you look upon them you cannot notice any very obvious change. 
They have the same weaknesses, and, unfortunately, they have sometimes 
the same sins. The new creation, if it be really new, does not seem to 
be very perfect; God can hardly look upon it and say, as of the first 
creation, that it is all very good.

This is a very real objection. But Paul meets it gloriously in the very 
same verse, already considered, in which the doctrine of the new 
creation is so boldly proclaimed. "It is no longer I that live, but 
Christ liveth in me"--that is the doctrine of the new creation. But 
immediately the objection is taken up; "The life which I now live in the 
flesh," Paul continues, "I live by the faith which is in the Son of God 
who loved me and gave Himself for me." "The life which I now live in the 
flesh"--there is the admission. Paul admits that the Christian does live 
a life in the flesh, subject to the same old earthly conditions and with 
a continued battle against sin. "But," says Paul (and here the objection 
is answered), "the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the 
faith which is in the Son of God who loved me and gave Himself for me." 
The Christian life is lived by faith and not by sight; the great change 
has not yet come to full fruition; sin has not yet



been fully conquered; the beginning of the Christian life is a new 
birth, not an immediate creation of the full grown man. But although the 
new life has not yet come to full fruition, the Christian knows that the 
fruition will not fail; he is confident that the God who has begun a 
good work in him will complete it unto the day of Christ; he knows that 
the Christ who has loved him and given Himself for him will not fail him 
now, but through the Holy Spirit will build him up unto the perfect man. 
That is what Paul means by living the Christian life by faith.

Thus the Christian life, though it begins by a momentary act of God, is 
continued by a process. In other words--to use theological 
language--justification and regeneration are followed by sanctification. 
In principle the Christian is already free from the present evil world, 
but in practice freedom must still be attained. Thus the Christian life 
is not a life of idleness, but a battle.

That is what Paul means when he speaks of faith working through love 
(Gal. v. 6). The faith that he makes the means of salvation is not an 
idle faith, like the faith which is condemned in the Epistle of James, 
but a faith that works. The work that it performs is love, and what love 
is Paul explains in the last section of the Epistle to the Galatians. 
Love, in the Christian sense, is not a mere emotion, but a very 
practical and a very comprehensive thing. It involves nothing less than 
the keeping of the whole law of God. "The whole law is fulfilled in one 
word, I even in this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Yet the 
practical results of faith do not mean that faith l itself is a work. It 
is a significant thing that in that last l "practical" section of 
Galatians Paul does not say that l faith produces the life of love; he 
says that the Spirit of I God produces it. The Spirit, then, in that 
section is represented as doing exactly what in the pregnant words,



"faith working through love," is attributed to faith. The apparent 
contradiction simply leads to the true conception of faith. True faith 
does not do anything. When it is said to do something (for example, when 
we say that it can remove mountains), that is only by a very natural 
shortness of expression. Faith is the exact opposite of works; faith 
does not give, it receives. So when Paul says that we do something by 
faith, that is just another way of saying that of ourselves we do 
nothing; when it is said that faith works through love that means that 
through faith the necessary basis of all Christian work has been 
obtained in the removal of guilt and the birth of the new man, and that 
the Spirit of God has been received--the Spirit who works with and 
through the Christian man for holy living. The force which enters the 
Christian life through faith and works itself out through love is 
thepower of the Spirit of God.

But the Christian life is lived not only by faith; it is also lived in 
hope. The Christian is in the midst of a sore battle. And as for the 
condition of the world at large--nothing but the coldest heartlessness 
could be satisfied with that. It is certainly true that the whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. Even in the 
Christian life there are things that we should like to see removed; 
there are fears within as well as fightings without; even within the 
Christian life there are sad evidences of sin. But according to the hope 
which Christ has given us, there will be final victory, and the struggle 
of this world will be followed by the glories of heaven. That hope runs 
all through the Christian life; Christianity i. not engrossed by this 
transitory world, but measures all things by the thought of eternity.

But at this point an objection is frequently raised. The 
"otherworldliness" of Christianity is objected to as



a form of selfishness. The Christian, it is said, does what is right 
because of the hope of heaven, hut how much nobler is the man who 
because of duty walks boldly into the darkness of annihilation!

The objection would have some weight if heaven according to Christian 
belief were mere enjoyment. But as a matter of fact heaven is communion 
with God and with His Christ. It can be said reverently that the 
Christian longs for heaven not only for his own sake, but also for the 
sake of God. Our present love is so cold, our present service so weak; 
and we would one day love and serve Him as His love deserves. It is 
perfectly true that the Christian is dissatisfied with the present 
world, but it is a holy dissatisfaction; it is that hunger and thirst 
after righteousness which our Savior blessed. We are separated from the 
Savior now by the veil of sense and by the effects of sin, and it is not 
selfish to long to see Him face to face. To relinquish such longing is 
not unselfishness, but is like the cold heartlessness of a man who could 
part from father or mother or wife or child without a pang. It is not 
selfish to long for the One whom not having seen we love.

Such is the Christian life--it is a life of conflict but it is also a 
life of hope. It views this world under the aspect of eternity; the 
fashion of this world passeth away, and all must stand before the 
judgment seat of Christ.

Very different is the "program" of the modern liberal Church. In that 
program,heaven has little place, and this world is really all in all. 
The rejection of the Christian hope is not always definite or conscious; 
sometimes the liberal preacher tries to maintain a belief in the 
immortality of the soul. But the real basis of the belief in immortality 
has been given up by the rejection of the New Testament account of the 
resurrection of Christ.



And, practically,, the liberal preacher has very little to say about the 
other world. This world is really the center of all his thoughts; 
religion itself, and even God, are made merely a means for the 
betterment of conditions upon this earth.

Thus religion has become a mere function of the community or of the 
state. So it is looked upon by the men of the present day. Even 
hard-headed business men and politicians have become convinced that 
religion is needed. But it is thought to be needed merely as a means to 
an end. We have tried to get along without religion, it is said, but the 
experiment was a failure, and now religion must be called in to help.

For example, there is the problem of the immigrants; great populations 
have found a place in our country; they do not speak our language or 
know our customs; and we do not know what to do with them. We have 
attacked them by oppressive legislation or proposals of legislation, but 
such measures have not been altogether effective. Somehow these people 
display a perverse attachment to the language that they learned at their 
mother's knee. It may be strange that a man should love the language 
that he learned at his mother's knee, but these people do love it, and 
we are perplexed in our efforts to produce a unified American people. So 
religion is called in to help; we are inclined to proceed against the 
immigrants now with a Bible in one hand and a club in the other offering 
them the blessings of liberty. That is what is sometimes meant by 
"Christian Americanization."

Another puzzling problem is the problem of industrial relations. 
Self-interest has here been appealed to; employers and employees have 
had pointed out to them the plain commercial advantages of conciliation. 
But all to no purpose. Class clashes still against class in the



destructiveness of industrial warfare. And sometimes false doctrine 
provides a basis for false practice; the danger of Bolshevism is ever in 
the air. Here againrepressive measures have been tried without avail; 
the freedom of speech and of the press has been radically curtailed. But 
repressive legislation seems unable to check the march of ideas. 
Perhaps, therefore, in these matters also, religion must be invoked.

Still another problem faces the modern world--the problem of 
international peace. This problem also seemed at one time nearly solved; 
self-interest seemed likely to be sufficient; there were many who 
supposed that the bankers would prevent another European war. But all 
such hopes were cruelly shattered in 1914, and there is not a whit of 
evidence that they are better founded now than they were then. Here 
again, therefore, self-interest is insufficient; and religion must be 
called in to help.

Such considerations have led to a renewed public interest in the subject 
of religion; religion is discovered after all to be a useful thing. But 
the trouble is that in being utilized religion is also being degraded 
and destroyed. Religion is being regarded more and more as a mere means 
to a higher end.1 The change can be detected with especial clearness in 
the way in which missionaries commend their cause. Fifty years ago, 
missionaries made their appeal in the light of eternity. "Millions of 
men," they were accustomed to say, "are going down to eternal 
destruction; Jesus is a Savior sufficient for all; send us out therefore 
with the message of salvation while yet there is

1. For a penetrating criticism of this tendency, especially as It would 
result in the control of religious education by the community, and for 
an eloquent advocacy of the opposite view, which makes Christianity an 
end in itself, see Harold McA. Robinson, "Democracy and Christianity," 
in The Christian Educator Vol. No. 1, for October, 1920, pp. 3-5.



time." Some missionaries, thank God, still speak in that way. But very 
many missionaries make quite a different appeal. "We are missionaries to 
India," they say. "Now India is in ferment; Bolshevism is creeping in; 
send us out to India that the menace may be checked." Or else they say: 
"We are missionaries to Japan; Japan will be dominated by militarism 
unless the principles of Jesus have sway; send us out therefore to 
prevent the calamity of war."

The same great change appears in community life. A new community, let us 
say, has been formed. It possesses many things that naturally belong to 
a well-ordered community; it has a drug-store, and a country club, and 
school. "But there is one thing," its inhabitants say to themselves, 
"that is still lacking; we have no church. But a church is a recognized 
and necessary part of every healthy community. We must therefore have a 
church." And so an expert in community church-building issummoned to 
take the necessary steps. The persons who speak in this way usually have 
little interest in religion for its own sake; it has never occurred to 
them to enter into the secret place of communion with the holy God. But 
religion is thought to be necessary for a healthy community; and 
therefore for the sake of the community they are willing to have a 
church.

Whatever may be thought of this attitude toward religion, it is 
perfectly plain that the Christian religion cannot be treated in any 
such way. The moment it is so treated it ceases to be Christian. For if 
one thing is plain it is that Christianity refuses to be regarded as a 
mere means to a higher end. Our Lord made that perfectly clear when He 
said: "If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother . . . 
he cannot be my disciple" (Luke xiv. 26). Whatever else those stupendous 
words may



mean, they certainly mean that the relationship to Christ takes 
precedence of all other relationships, even the holiest of relationships 
like those that exist between husband and wife and parent and child. 
Those other relationships exist for the sake of Christianity and not 
Christianity for the sake of them. Christianity will indeed accomplish 
many useful things in this world, but if it is accepted in order to 
accomplish those useful things it is not Christianity. Christianity will 
combat Bolshevism; but if it is accepted in order to combat Bolshevism, 
it is not Christianity: Christianity will produce a unified nation, in a 
slow but satisfactory way; but if it is accepted in order to produce a 
unified nation, it is not Christianity: Christianity will produce a 
healthy community; but if it is accepted in order to produce a healthy 
community, it is not Christianity: Christianity will promote 
international peace; but if it is accepted in order to promote 
international peace, it is not Christianity. Our Lord said: "Seek ye 
first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things 
shall be added unto you." But if you seek first the Kingdom of God and 
His righteousness in order that all those other things may be added unto 
you, you will miss both those other things and the Kingdom of God as 
well.

But if Christianity be directed toward another world; if it be a way by 
which individuals can escape from the present evil age to some better 
country, what becomes of "the social gospel"? At this point is detected 
one of the most obvious lines of cleavage between Christianity and the 
liberal Church. The older evangelism, says the modern liberal preacher, 
sought to rescue individuals, while the newer evangelism seeks to 
transform the whole organism of society: the olderevangelism was 
individual; the newer evangelism is social.



This formulation of the issue is not entirely correct, but it contains 
an element of truth. It is true that historic Christianity is in 
conflict at many points with the collectivism of the present day; it 
does emphasize, against the claims of society, the worth of the 
individual soul. It provides for the individual a refuge from all the 
fluctuating currents of human opinion, a secret place of meditation 
where a man can come alone into the presence of God. It does give a man 
courage to stand, if need be, against the world; it resolutely refuses 
to make of the individual a mere means to an end, a mere element in the 
composition of society. It rejects altogether any means of salvation 
which deals with men in a mass; it brings the individual face to face 
with his God. In that sense, it is true that Christianity is 
individualistic and not social.

But though Christianity is individualistic, it is not only 
individualistic. It provides fully for the social needs of man.

In the first place, even the communion of the individual man with God is 
not really individualistic, but social. A man is not isolated when he is 
in communion with God; he can be regarded as isolated only by one who 
has forgotten the real existence of the supreme Person. Here again, as 
at many other places, the line of cleavage between liberalism and 
Christianity really reduces to a profound difference in the conception 
of God. Christianity is earnestly theistic; liberalism is at best but 
half-heartedly so. If a man once comes to believe in a personal God, 
then the wow ship of Him will not be regarded as selfish isolation, but 
as the chief end of man. That does not mean that on the Christian view 
the worship of God is ever to be carried on to the neglect of service 
rendered to one's fellow-men--"he that loveth not his brother whom he 
hath seen, is not able to love God whom he hath not seen"--but it does 
mean



that the worship of God has a value of its own. Very different is the 
prevailing doctrine of modern liberalism. According to Christian belief, 
man exists for the sake of God; according to the liberal Church, in 
practice if not in theory, God exists for the sake of man.

But the social element in Christianity is found not only in communion 
betweenman and God, but also in communion between man and man. Such 
communion appears even in institutions which are not specifically 
Christian.

The most important of such institutions, according to Christian 
teaching, is the family. And that institution is being pushed more and 
more into the background. It is being pushed into the background by 
undue encroachments of the community and of the state. Modern life is 
tending more and more toward the contraction of the sphere of parental 
control and parental influence. The choice of schools is being placed 
under the power of the state; the "community" is seizing hold of 
recreation and of social activities. It may be a question how far these 
community activities are responsible for the modern breakdown of the 
home; very possibly they are only trying to fill a void which even apart 
from them had already appeared. But the result at any rate is plain--the 
lives of children are no longer surrounded by the loving atmosphere of 
the Christian home, but by the utilitarianism of the state. A revival of 
the Christian religion would unquestionably bring a reversal of the 
process; the family, as over against all other social institutions, 
would come to its rights again.

But the state, even when reduced to its proper limits, has a large place 
in human life, and in the possession of that place it is supported by 
Christianity. The support, moreover, is independent of the Christian or 
non-Christian character of the state; it was in the Roman Empire under



Nero that Paul said, "The powers that be are ordained of God." 
Christianity assumes no negative attitude, therefore, toward the state, 
but recognizes, under existing conditions, the necessity of government.

The case is similar with respect to those broad aspects of human life 
which are associated with industrialism The "otherworldliness" of 
Christianity involves no withdrawal from the battle of this world; our 
Lord Himself, with His stupendous mission, lived in the midst of life's 
throng and press. Plainly, then, the Christian man may not simplify his 
problem by withdrawing from the business of the world, but must learn to 
apply the principles of Jesus even to the complex problems of modern 
industrial life. At this point Christian teaching is in full accord with 
the modern liberal Church; the evangelical Christian is not true to his 
profession if he leaves his Christianity behind him on Monday morning. 
On the contrary, the whole of life, including business and all of social 
relations, must be made obedient to the law of love. The Christian man 
certainly should display no lack of interest in"applied Christianity."

Only--and here emerges the enormous difference of opinion--the Christian 
man believes that there can be no applied Christianity unless there be 
"a Christianity to apply." 1 That is where the Christian man differs 
from the modern liberal. The liberal believes that applied Christianity 
is all there is of Christianity, Christianity being merely a way of 
life; the Christian man believes that applied Christianity is the result 
of an initial act of God. Thus there is an enormous difference between 
the modern liberal and the Christian man with reference to


human institutions like the community and the state, and with reference 
to human efforts at applying tile Golden Rule in industrial 
relationships. The modern liberal is optimistic with reference to these 
institutions; the Christian man is pessimistic unless the institutions 
be manned by Christian men. The modern liberal believes that human 
nature as at present constituted can be molded by the principles of 
Jesus; the Christian man believes that evil can only be held in check 
and not destroyed by human institutions, and that there must be a 
transformation of the human materials before any new building can be 
produced. This difference is not a mere difference in theory, but makes 
itself felt everywhere in the practical realm. It is particularly 
evident on the mission field. The missionary of liberalism seeks to 
spread the blessings of Christian civilization (whatever that may be), 
and is not particularly interested in leading individuals to relinquish 
their pagan beliefs. The Christian missionary, on the other hand, 
regards satisfaction with a mere influence of Christian civilization as 
a hindrance rather than a help; his chief business, he believes, is the 
saving of souls, and souls are saved not by the mere ethical principles 
of Jesus but by His redemptive work. The Christian missionary, in other 
words, and the Christian worker at home as well as abroad, unlike the 
apostle of liberalism, says to all men everywhere: "Human goodness will 
avail nothing for lost souls; ye must be born again."
Chapter 7: "The Church"

It has just been observed that Christianity, as well as liberalism, is 
interested in social institutions. But the most important institution 
has not yet been mentioned-- it is the institution of the Church. When, 
according to Christian belief, lost souls are saved, the saved ones 
become united in the Christian Church. It is only by a baseless 
caricature that Christian missionaries are represented as though they 
had no interest in education or in the maintenance of a social life in 
this world; it is not true that they are interested only in saving 
individual souls and when the souls are saved leave them to their own 
devices. On the contrary true Christians must everywhere be united in 
the brotherhood of the Christian Church.

Very different is this Christian conception of brotherhood from the 
liberal doctrine of the "brotherhood of man." The modern liberal 
doctrine is that all men everywhere, no matter what their race or creed, 
are brothers. There is a sense in which this doctrine can be accepted by 
the Christian. The relation in which all men stand to one another is 
analogous in some important respects to the relation of brotherhood. All 
men have the same Creator and the same nature. The Christian man can 
accept all that the modern liberal means by the brotherhood of man. But 
the Christian knows also of a relationship far more intimate than that 
general relationship of man to man.



and it is for this more intimate relationship that he reserves the term 
"brother." The true brotherhood, according to Christian teaching, is the 
brotherhood of the redeemed.

There is nothing narrow about such teaching; for the Christian 
brotherhood is open without distinction to all; and the Christian man 
seeks to bring all men in. Christian service, it is true, is not limited 
to the household of faith; all men, whether Christians or not, are our 
neighbors if they be in need. But if we really love our fellow-men we 
shall never be content with binding up their wounds or pouring on oil 
and wine or rendering them any such lesser service. We shall indeed do 
such things for them. But the main business of our lives will be to 
bring them to the Savior of their souls.

It is upon this brotherhood of twice-born sinners, this brotherhood of 
the redeemed, that the Christian founds the hope of society. He finds no 
solid hope in the improvement of earthly conditions, or the molding of 
human institutions under the influence of the Golden Rule. These things 
indeed are to be welcomed. They may so palliate the symptoms of sin that 
there may be time to apply the true remedy; they may serve to produce 
conditions upon the earth favorable to the propagation of the gospel 
message; they are even valuable for their own sake. But in themselves 
their value, to the Christian, is certainly small. A solid building 
cannot be constructed when all the materials are faulty; a blessed 
society cannot be formed out of men who are still under the curse of 
sin. Human institutions are really to be molded, not by Christian 
principles accepted by the unsaved, but by Christian men; the true 
transformation of society will come by the influence of those who have 
themselves been redeemed.

Thus Christianity differs from liberalism in the way in



which the transformation of society is conceived. But according to 
Christian belief, as well as according to liberalism, there is really to 
be a transformation of society; it is not true that the Christian 
evangelist is interested in the salvation of individuals without being 
interested in the salvation of the race. And even before the salvation 
of all society has been achieved, there is already a society of those 
who have been saved. That society is the Church. The Church is the 
highest Christian answer to the social needs of man.

And the Church invisible, the true company of the redeemed, finds 
expression in the companies of Christians who constitute the visible 
Church to-day. But what is the trouble with the visible Church? What is 
the reason for its obvious weakness? There are perhaps many causes of 
weakness. But one cause is perfectly plain--the Church of today has been 
unfaithful to her Lord by admitting great companies of non-Christian 
persons, not only into her membership, but into her teaching agencies. 
It is indeed inevitable that some persons who are not truly Christian 
shall find their way into the visible Church; fallible men cannot 
discern the heart, and many a profession of faith which seems to be 
genuine may really be false. But it is not this kind of error to which 
we now refer. What is now meant is not the admission of individuals 
whose confessions of faith may not be sincere, but the admission of 
great companies of persons who have never made any really adequate 
confession of faith at all and whose entire attitude toward the gospel 
is the very reverse of the Christian attitude. Such persons, moreover, 
have been admitted notmerely to the membership, but to the ministry of 
the Church, and to an increasing extent have been allowed to dominate 
its councils and determine its teaching. The greatest menace to the 
Christian Church



today comes not from the enemies outside, but from the enemies within; 
it comes from the presence within the Church of a type of faith and 
practice that is anti-Christian to the core.

We are not dealing here with delicate personal questions; we are not 
presuming to say whether such and such an individual man is a Christian 
or not. God only can decide such questions; no man can say with 
assurance whether the attitude of certain individual "liberals" toward 
Christ is saving faith or not. But one thing is perfectly plain--whether 
or not liberals are Christians, it is at any rate perfectly clear that 
liberalism is not Christianity. And that being the case, it is highly 
undesirable that liberalism and Christianity should continue to be 
propagated within the bounds of the same organization. A separation 
between the two parties in the Church is the crying need of the hour.

Many indeed are seeking to avoid the separation. Why, they say, may not 
brethren dwell together in unity? The Church, we are told, has room both 
for liberals and for conservatives. The conservatives may be allowed to 
remain if they will keep trifling matters in the background and attend 
chiefly to "the weightier matters of the law." And among the things thus 
designated as "trifling" is found the Cross of Christ, as a really 
vicarious atonement for sin.

Such obscuration of the issue attests a really astonishing narrowness on 
the part of the liberal preacher. Narrowness does not consist in 
definite devotion to certain convictions or in definite rejection of 
others. But the narrow man is the man who rejects the other man's 
convictions without first endeavoring to understand them, the man who 
makes no effort to look at things from the other man's point of view. 
For example, it is not narrow to



reject the Roman Catholic doctrine that there is no salvation outside 
the Church. It is not narrow to try to convince Roman Catholics that 
that doctrine is wrong. But it would be very narrow to say to a Roman 
Catholic: "You may go on holding your doctrine about the Church and I 
shall hold mine, but let us unite in our Christianwork, since despite 
such trifling differences we are agreed about the matters that concern 
the welfare of the soul." For of course such an utterance would simply 
beg the question; the Roman Catholic could not possibly both hold his 
doctrine of the Church and at the same time reject it, as would be 
required by the program of Church unity just suggested. A Protestant who 
would speak in that way would be narrow, because quite independent of 
the question whether he or the Roman Catholic is right about the Church 
he would show plainly that he had not made the slightest effort to 
understand the Roman Catholic point of view.

The case is similar with the liberal program for unity in the Church. It 
could never be advocated by anyone who had made the slightest effort to 
understand the point of view of his opponent in the controversy. The 
liberal preacher says to the conservative party in the Church: "Let us 
unite in the same congregation, since of course doctrinal differences 
are trifles." But it is the very essence of "conservatism" in the Church 
to regard doctrinal differences as no trifles but as the matters of 
supreme moment. A man cannot possibly be an "evangelical" or a 
"conservative" (or, as he himself would say, simply a Christian) and 
regard the Cross of Christ as a trifle. To suppose that he can is the 
extreme of narrowness. It is not necessarily "narrow" to reject the 
vicarious sacrifice of our Lord as the sole means of salvation. It may 
be very wrong (and we believe that it is), but it is



not necessarily narrow. But to suppose that a man can hold to the 
vicarious sacrifice of Christ and at the same time belittle that 
doctrine, to suppose that a man can believe that the eternal Son of God 
really bore the guilt of men's sins on the Cross and at the same time 
regard that belief as a "trifle" without bearing upon the welfare of 
men's souls--that is very narrow and very absurd. We shall really get 
nowhere in this controversy unless we make a sincere effort to 
understand the other man's point of view.

But for another reason also the effort to sink doctrinal differences and 
unite the Church on a program of Christian service is unsatisfactory. It 
is unsatisfactory because, in its usual contemporary form, it is 
dishonest. Whatever may be thought of Christian doctrine, it can hardly 
be denied that honesty is one of the "weightier matters of the law." Yet 
honesty is being relinquished in wholesale fashion by the liberal party 
in many ecclesiastical bodies today.

To recognize that fact one does not need to take sides at all with 
regard to the doctrinal or historical questions. Suppose it be true that 
devotion to a creed is asign of narrowness or intolerance, suppose the 
Church ought to be founded upon devotion to the ideal of Jesus or upon 
the desire to put His spirit into operation in the world, and not at all 
upon a confession of faith with regard to His redeeming work. Even if 
all this were true, even if a creedal Church were an undesirable thing, 
it would still remain true that as a matter of fact many (indeed in 
spirit really all) evangelical churches are creedal churches, and that 
if a man does not accept their creed he has no right to a place in their 
teaching ministry. The creedal character of the churches is differently 
expressed in the different evangelical bodies, but the example of the 
Presbyterian



Church in the United States of America may perhaps serve to illustrate 
what is meant. It is required of all officers in the Presbyterian 
Church, including the ministers, that at their ordination they make 
answer "plainly" to a series of questions which begins with the two 
following:

"Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments to be the 
Word of God, the only infallible rule of faith and practice?"

"Do you sincerely receive and adopt the Confession of Faith of this 
Church, as containing the system of doctrine taught in the Holy 
Scriptures?"

If these "constitutional questions" do not fix clearly the creedal basis 
of the Presbyterian Church, it is difficult to see how any human 
language could possibly do so. Yet immediately after making such a 
solemn declaration, immediately after declaring that the Westminster 
Confession contains the system of doctrine taught in infallible 
Scriptures, many ministers of the Presbyterian Church will proceed to 
decry that same Confession and that doctrine of the infallibility of 
Scripture to which they have just solemnly subscribed!

We are not now speaking of the membership of the Church, but of the 
ministry, and we are not speaking of the man who is troubled by grave 
doubts and wonders whether with his doubts he can honestly continue his 
membership in the Church. For great hosts of such troubled souls the 
Church offers bountifully its fellowship and its aid; it would be a 
crime to cast them out. There are many men of little faith in our 
troublous times. It is not of them that we speak. God grant that they 
may obtain comfort and help through the ministrations of the Church!

But we are speaking of men very different from these



men of little faith--from these men who are troubled by doubts and are 
seeking earnestly for the truth. The men whom we mean are seeking not 
membership in the Church, but a place in the ministry, and they desire 
not to learn but to teach. They are not men who say, "I believe, help 
mine unbelief," but men who are proud in the possession of the knowledge 
of this world, and seek a place in the ministry that they may teach what 
is directly contrary to the Confession of Faith to which they subscribe. 
For that course of action various excuses are made--the growth of custom 
by which the constitutional questions are supposed to have become a dead 
letter, various mental reservations, various "interpretations" of the 
declaration ( which of course mean a complete reversal of the meaning). 
But no such excuses can change the essential fact. Whether it be 
desirable or not, the ordination declaration is part of the constitution 
of the Church. If a man can stand on that platform he may be an officer 
in the Presbyterian Church; if he cannot stand on it he has no right to 
be an officer in the Presbyterian Church. And the case is no doubt 
essentially similar in other evangelical Churches. Whether we like it or 
not, these Churches are founded upon a creed; they are organized for the 
propagation of a message. If a man desires to combat that message 
instead of propagating it, he has no right, no matter how false the 
message may be, to gain a vantage ground for combating it by making a 
declaration of his faith which--be it plainly spoken--is not true.

But if such a course of action is wrong, another course of action is 
perfectly open to the man who desires to propagate "liberal 
Christianity." Finding the existing "evangelical" churches to be bound 
up to a creed which he does not accept, he may either unite himself with 
some other existing body or else found a new body to suit him



self. There are of course certain obvious disadvantages in such a 
course--the abandonment of church buildings to which one is attached, 
the break in family traditions, the injury to sentiment of various 
kinds. But there is one supreme advantage which far overbalances all 
such disadvantages. It is the advantage of honesty. The path of honesty 
in such matters may be rough and thorny, but it can be trod. And it has 
already been trod--for example, by the Unitarian Church. The Unitarian 
Church is frankly and honestly just the kind of church that the liberal 
preacher desires--namely, a church without an authoritative Bible, 
without doctrinal requirements, and without a creed.

Honesty, despite all that can be said and done, is not a trifle, but one 
of the weightier matters of the law. Certainly it has a value of its 
own, a value quite independent of consequences. But the consequences of 
honesty would in the case now under discussion not be unsatisfactory; 
here as elsewhere honesty would probably prove to be the best policy. By 
withdrawing from the confessional churches--those churches that are 
founded upon a creed derived from Scripture-- the liberal preacher would 
indeed sacrifice the opportunity, almost within his grasp, of so 
obtaining control of those confessional churches as to change their 
fundamental character. The sacrifice of that opportunity would mean that 
the hope of turning the resources of the evangelical churches into the 
propagation of liberalism would be gone. But liberalism would certainly 
not suffer in the end. There would at least be no more need of using 
equivocal language, no more need of avoiding offence. The liberal 
preacher would obtain the full personal respect even of his opponents, 
and the whole discussion would be placed on higher ground. All would, be 
perfectly straightforward and above-board. And if



liberalism is true, the mere lose of physical resources would not 
prevent it from making its way.

At this point a question may arise. If there ought to be a separation 
between the liberals and the conservatives in the Church, why should not 
the conservatives be the ones to withdraw ? Certainly it may come to 
that. If the liberal party really obtains full control of the councils 
of the Church, then no evangelical Christian can continue to support the 
Church's work. If a man believes that salvation from sin comes only 
through the atoning death of Jesus, then he cannot honestly support by 
his gifts and by his presence a propaganda which is intended to produce 
an exactly opposite impression. To do so would mean the most terrible 
blood-guiltiness which it is possible to conceive. If the liberal party, 
therefore, really obtains control of the Church, evangelical Christians 
must be prepared to withdraw no matter what it costs. Our Lord has died 
for us, and surely we must not deny Him for favor of men. But up to the 
present time such a situation has not yet appeared; the creedal basis 
still stands firm in the constitutions of evangelical churches. And 
there is a very real reason why it is not the "conservatives" who ought 
to withdraw. The reason is found in the trust which the churches hold. 
That trust includes trust funds of the most definite kind. And contrary 
to what seems to be the prevailing opinion, we venture to regard a trust 
as a sacred thing. The funds of the evangelical churches are held under 
a very definite trust; they are committed to the various bodies for the 
propagation of the gospel as set forth in the Bible and in 
theconfessions of faith. To devote them to any other purpose, even 
though that other purpose should be in itself far more desirable, would 
be a violation of trust.

It must be admitted that the present situation is anomalous.



Funds dedicated to the propagation of the gospel by godly men and women 
of previous generations or given by thoroughly evangelical congregations 
today are in nearly all the churches being used partly in the 
propagation of what is diametrically opposed to the evangelical faith. 
Certainly that situation ought not to continue; it is an offence to 
every thoughtfully honest man whether he be Christian or not. But in 
remaining in the existing churches the conservatives are in a 
fundamentally different position from the liberals; for the 
conservatives are in agreement with the plain constitutions of the 
churches, while the liberal party can maintain itself only by an 
equivocal subscription to declarations which it does not really believe.

But how shall so anomalous a situation be brought to an end? The best 
way would undoubtedly be the voluntary withdrawal of the liberal 
ministers from those confessional churches whose confessions they do 
not, in the plain historical sense, accept. And we have not altogether 
abandoned hope of such a solution. Our differences with the liberal 
party in the Church are indeed profound, but with regard to the 
obligation of simple honesty of speech, some agreement might surely be 
attained. Certainly the withdrawal of liberal ministers from the creedal 
churches would be enormously in the interests of harmony and 
co-operation. Nothing engenders strife so much as a forced unity, within 
the same organization, of those who disagree fundamentally in aim.

But is not advocacy of such separation a flagrant instance of 
intolerance? The objection is often raised. But it ignores altogether 
the difference between involuntary and voluntary organizations. 
Involuntary organizations ought to be tolerant, but voluntary 
organizations, so far as the fundamental purpose of their existence is



concerned, must be intolerant or else cease to exist. The state is an 
involuntary organization; a man is forced to be a member of it whether 
he will or no. It is therefore an interference with liberty for the 
state to prescribe any one type of opinion or any one type of education 
for its citizens. But within the state,individual citizens who desire to 
unite for some special purpose should be permitted to do so. Especially 
in the sphere of religion, such permission of individuals to unite is 
one of the rights which lie at the very foundation of our civil and 
religious liberty. The state does not scrutinize the rightness or 
wrongness of the religious purpose for which such voluntary religious 
associations are formed--if it did undertake such scrutiny all religious 
liberty would be gone--but it merely protects the right of individuals 
to unite for any religious purpose which they may choose.

Among such voluntary associations are to be found the evangelical 
churches. An evangelical church is composed of a number of persons who 
have come to agreement in a certain message about Christ and who desire 
to unite in the propagation of that message, as it is set forth in their 
creed on the basis of the Bible. No one is forced to unite himself with 
the body thus formed; and because of this total absence of compulsion 
there can be no interference with liberty in the maintenance of any 
specific purpose--for example, the propagation of a message-- as a 
fundamental purpose of the association. If other persons desire to form 
a religious association with some purpose other than the propagation of 
a message-- for example, the purpose of promoting in the world, simply 
by exhortation and by the inspiration of the example of Jesus, a certain 
type of life--they are at perfect liberty to do so. But for an 
organization which is founded with the fundamental purpose of 
propagating a message to commit its



resources and its name to those who are engaged in combating the message 
is not tolerance but simple dishonesty. Yet it is exactly this course of 
action that is advocated by those who would allow non-doctrinal religion 
to be taught in the name of doctrinal churches--churches that are 
plainly doctrinal both in their constitutions and in the declarations 
which they require of every candidate for ordination.

The matter may be made plain by an illustration from secular life. 
Suppose in a political campaign in America there be formed a Democratic 
club for the purpose of furthering the cause of the Democratic party. 
Suppose there are certain other citizens who are opposed to the tenets 
of the Democratic club and in opposition desire to support the 
Republican party. What is the honest way for them to accomplish their 
purpose? Plainly it is simply the formation of a Republican club which 
shall carry on a propaganda in favor of Republican principles. But 
suppose, instead of pursuing this simple course of action, the advocates 
of Republican principles should conceive the notion of making a 
declaration of conformity to Democratic principles, thus gaining an 
entrance into the Democratic club and finally turning its resources into 
an anti-Democratic propaganda. That plan might be ingenious. But would 
it be honest? Yet it is just exactly such a plan which is adopted by 
advocates of a non-doctrinal religion who by subscription to a creed 
gain an entrance into the teaching ministry of doctrinal or evangelical 
churches. Let no one be offended by the illustration taken from ordinary 
life. We are not for a moment suggesting that the Church is no more than 
a political club. But the fact that the Church is more than a political 
club does not mean that in ecclesiastical affairs there is any 
abrogation of the homely principles of honesty.



The Church may possibly be more honest, but certainly it ought not to be 
less honest, than a political club.

Certainly the essentially creedal character of evangelical churches is 
firmly fixed. A man may disagree with the Westminster Confession, for 
example, but he can hardly fail to see what it means; at least he can 
hardly fail to understand the "system of doctrine" which is taught in 
it. The Confession, whatever its faults may be, is certainly not lacking 
in definiteness. And certainly a man who solemnly accepts that system of 
doctrine as his own cannot at the same time be an advocate of a 
nondoctrinal religion which regards as a trifling thing that which is 
the very sum and substance of the Confession and the very center and 
core of the Bible upon which it is based. Similar is the case in other 
evangelical churches The Protestant Episcopal Church, some of whose 
members, it is true, might resent the distinctive title of 
"evangelical," is clearly founded upon a creed, and that creed, 
including the exultant supernaturalism of the New Testament and the 
redemption offered by Christ, is plainly involved in the Book of Common 
Prayer which every priest in his own name and in the name of the 
congregation must read.

The separation of naturalistic liberalism from the evangelical churches 
would no doubt greatly diminish the size of the churches. But Gideon's 
three hundred were more powerful than the thirty-two thousand with which 
the march against the Midianites began.

Certainly the present situation is fraught with deadly weakness. 
Christian men have been redeemed from sin, without merit of their own, 
by the sacrifice of Christ. But every man who has been truly redeemed 
from sin longs to carry to others the same blessed gospel through which 
he himself has been saved. The propagation of thegospel



is clearly the joy as well as the duty of every Christian man. But how 
shall the gospel be propagated? The natural answer is that it shall be 
propagated through the agencies of the Church--boards of missions and 
the like. An obvious duty, therefore, rests upon the Christian man of 
contributing to the agencies of the Church. But at this point the 
perplexity arises. The Christian man discovers to his consternation that 
the agencies of the Church are propagating not only the gospel as found 
in the Bible and in the historic creeds, but also a type of religious 
teaching which is at every conceivable point the diametrical opposite of 
the gospel. The question naturally arises whether there is any reason 
for contributing to such agencies at all. Of every dollar contributed to 
them, perhaps half goes to the support of true missionaries of the 
Cross, while the other half goes to the support of those who are 
persuading men that the message of the Cross is unnecessary or wrong. If 
part of our gifts is to be used to neutralize the other part, is not 
contribution to mission boards altogether absurd? The question may at 
least very naturally be raised. It should not indeed be answered hastily 
in a way hostile to contribution to mission boards. Perhaps it is better 
that the gospel should be both preached and combated by the same 
agencies than that it should not be preached at all. At any rate, the 
true missionaries of the Cross, even though the mission boards which 
support them should turn out to be very bad, must not be allowed to be 
in want. But the situation, from the point of view of the evangelical 
Christian, is unsatisfactory in the extreme. Many Christians seek to 
relieve the situation by "designating" their gifts, instead of allowing 
them to be distributed by the mission agencies. But at this point one 
encounters the centralization of power which is going on in the modern 
Church. On



account of that centralization the designation of gifts is often found 
to be illusory. If gifts are devoted by the donors to one mission known 
to be evangelical, that does not always really increase the resources of 
that mission; for the mission boards can simply cut down the proportion 
assigned to that mission from the undesignated funds, and the final 
result is exactly the same as if there had been no designation of the 
gift at all.

The existence and the necessity of mission boards and the like prevents, 
in general,one obvious solution of the present difficulty in the 
Church--the solution offered by local autonomy of the congregation. It 
might be suggested that each congregation should determine its own 
confession of faith or its own program of work. Then each congregation 
might seem to be responsible only for itself, and might seem to be 
relieved from the odious task of judging others. But the suggestion is 
impracticable. Aside from the question whether a purely congregational 
system of church government is desirable in itself, it is impossible 
where mission agencies are concerned. In the support of such agencies, 
many congregations obviously must unite; and the question arises whether 
evangelical congregations can honestly support agencies which are 
opposed to the evangelical faith.

At any rate, the situation cannot be helped by ignoring facts. The plain 
fact is that liberalism, whether it be true or false, is no mere 
"heresy"--no mere divergence at isolated points from Christian teaching. 
On the contrary it proceeds from a totally different root, and it 
constitutes, in essentials, a unitary system of its own. That does not 
mean that all liberals hold all parts of the system, or that Christians 
who have been affected by liberal teaching at one point have been 
affected at all points. There is sometimes a salutary lack of logic 
which prevents



the whole of a man's faith being destroyed when he has given up a part. 
But the true way in which to examine a spiritual movement is in its 
logical relations; logic is the great dynamic, and the logical 
implications of any way of thinking are sooner or later certain to be 
worked out. And taken as a whole, even as it actually exists today, 
naturalistic liberalism is a fairly unitary phenomenon; it is tending 
more and more to eliminate from itself illogical remnants of Christian 
belief. It differs from Christianity in its view of God, of man, of the 
seat of authority and of the way of salvation. And it differs from 
Christianity not only in theology but in the whole of life. It is indeed 
sometimes said that there can be communion in feeling where communion in 
thinking is gone, a communion of the heart as distinguished from a 
communion of the head. But with respect to the present controversy, such 
a distinction certainly does not apply. On the contrary, in reading the 
books and listening to the sermons of recent liberal teachers--so 
untroubled by the problem of sin, so devoid of all sympathy for guilty 
humanity, so prone to abuse and ridicule the things dearest to the heart 
of every Christian man--one can only confess that if liberalism is to 
return into the Christian communion there must be a change of heart 
fully as much as a change of mind. God grant that such a change of heart 
may come! But meanwhile the present situation must not be ignored but 
faced.

Christianity is being attacked from within by a movement which is 
anti-Christian to the core.

What is the duty of Christian men at such at time? What is the duty, in 
particular, of Christian officers in the Church?

In the first place, they should encourage those who are engaging in the 
intellectual and spiritual struggle. They should not say, in the sense 
in which some laymen say it,



that more time should be devoted to the propagation of Christianity, and 
less to the defense of Christianity. Certainly there should be 
propagation of Christianity. Believers should certainly not content 
themselves with warding off attacks, but should also unfold in an 
orderly and positive way the full riches of the gospel. But far more is 
usually meant by those who call for less defense and more propagation. 
What they really intend is the discouragement of the whole intellectual 
defense of the faith. And their words come as a blow in the face of 
those who are fighting the great battle. As a matter of fact, not less 
time, but more time, should be devoted to the defense of the gospel. 
Indeed, truth cannot be stated clearly at all without being set over 
against error. Thus a large part of the New Testament is polemic; the 
enunciation of evangelical truth was occasioned by the errors which had 
arisen in the churches. So it will always be, on account of the 
fundamental laws of the human mind. Moreover, the present crisis must be 
taken into account. There may have been a day when there could be 
propagation of Christianity without defense. But such a day at any rate 
is past. At the present time, when the opponents of the gospel are 
almost in control of our churches, the slightest avoidance of the 
defense of the gospel is just sheer unfaithfulness to the Lord. There 
have been previous great crises in the history of the Church, crises 
almost comparable to this. One appeared in the second century, when the 
very life of Christendom was threatened by the Gnostics. Another came in 
the Middle Ages when the gospel of God's grace seemed forgotten. In such 
times of crisis, God has always saved the Church. But He has always 
saved it not by theological pacifists, but by sturdy contenders for the 
truth.

In the second place, Christian officers in the Church



should perform their duty in deciding upon the qualifications of 
candidates for the ministry. The question "For Christ or against him?" 
constantly arises in the examination of candidates for ordination. 
Attempts are often made to obscure the issue. It is often said: "The 
candidate will no doubt move in the direction of the truth; let him now 
be sent out to learn as well as to preach." And so another opponent of 
the gospel enters the councils of the Church, and another false prophet 
goes forth to encourage sinners to come before the judgment seat of God 
clad in the miserable rags of their own righteousness. Such action is 
not really "kind" to the candidate himself. It is never kind to 
encourage a man to enter into a life of dishonesty. The fact often seems 
to be forgotten that the evangelical Churches are purely voluntary 
organizations; no one is required to enter into their service. If a man 
cannot accept the belief of such churches, there are other 
ecclesiastical bodies in which he can find a place. The belief of the 
Presbyterian Church, for example, is plainly set forth in the Confession 
of Faith, and the Church will never afford any warmth of communion or 
engage with any real vigor in her work until her ministers are in 
whole-hearted agreement with that belief. It is strange how in the 
interests of an utterly false kindness to men, Christians are sometimes 
willing to relinquish their loyalty to the crucified Lord.

In the third place, Christian officers in the Church should show their 
loyalty to Christ in their capacity as members of the individual 
congregations. The issue often arises in connection with the choice of a 
pastor. Such and such a man, it is said, is a brilliant preacher. But 
what is the content of his preaching? Is his preaching full of the 
gospel of Christ? The answer is often evasive. The preacher in question, 
it is said, is of good standing in the



Church, and he has never denied the doctrines or grace. Therefore, it is 
urged, he should be called to the pastorate. But shall we be satisfied 
with such negative assurances? Shall we be satisfied with preachers who 
merely "do not deny" the Cross of Christ? God grant that such 
satisfaction may be broken down! The people are perishing under the 
ministrations of those who "do not deny" the Cross of Christ. Surely 
something more than that is needed. God send us ministers who, instead 
of merely avoiding denial of the Cross shall be on fire with the Cross, 
whose whole life shall be one burning sacrifice of gratitude to the 
blessed Savior who loved them and gave Himself for them!

In the fourth place--the most important thing of all--there must be a 
renewal of Christian education. The rejection of Christianity is due to 
various causes. But a

very potent cause is simple ignorance. In countless cases, Christianity 
is rejected simply because men have not the slightest notion of what 
Christianity is. An outstanding fact of recent Church history is the 
appalling growth of ignorance in the Church. Various causes, no doubt, 
can be assigned for this lamentable development. The development is due 
partly to the general decline of education--at least so far as 
literature and history are concerned. The schools of the present day are 
being ruined by the absurd notion that education should follow the line 
of least resistance, and that something can be "drawn out" of the mind 
before anything is put in. They are also being ruined by an exaggerated 
emphasis on methodology at the expense of content and on what is 
materially useful at the expense of the high spiritual heritage of 
mankind. These lamentable tendencies, moreover, are in danger of being 
made permanent through the sinister extension of state control. But 
something more


than the general decline in education is needed to account for the 
special growth of ignorance in the Church. The growth of ignorance in 
the Church is the logical and inevitable result of the false notion that 
Christianity is a life and not also a doctrine; if Christianity is not a 
doctrine then of course teaching is not necessary to Christianity. But 
whatever be the causes for the growth of ignorance in the Church, the 
evil must be remedied. It must be remedied primarily by the renewal of 
Christian education in the family, but also by the use of whatever other 
educational agencies the Church can find. Christian education is the 
chief business of the hour for every earnest Christian man. Christianity 
cannot subsist unless men know what Christianity is; and the fair and 
logical thing is to learn what Christianity is, not from its opponents, 
but from those who themselves are Christians. That method of procedure 
would be the only fair method in the case of any movement. But it is 
still more in place in the case of a movement such as Christianity which 
has laid the foundation of all that we hold most dear. Men have abundant 
opportunity today to learn what can be said against Christianity, and it 
is only fair that they should also learn something about the thing that 
is being attacked.

Such measures are needed today. The present is a time not for ease or 
pleasure, but for earnest and prayerful work. A terrible crisis 
unquestionably has arisen in the Church. In the ministry of evangelical 
churches are to be found hosts of those who reject the gospel of Christ. 
By the equivocal use of traditional phrases, by the representation of 
differences of opinion as though they were only differences about the 
interpretation of the Bible, entrance into the Church was secured for 
those who are hostile to the very foundations of the faith.


And now there are some indications that the fiction of conformity to the 
past is to be thrown off, and the real meaning of what has been taking 
place is to be allowed to appear. The Church, it is now apparently 
supposed, has almost been educated up to the point where the shackles of 
the Bible can openly be cast away and the doctrine of the Cross of 
Christ can be relegated to the limbo of discarded subtleties.

Yet there is in the Christian life no room for despair. Only, our 
hopefulness should not be founded on the sand. It should be founded, not 
upon a blind ignorance of the danger, but solely upon the precious 
promises of God. Laymen, as well as ministers, should return, in these 
trying days, with new earnestness, to the study of the Word of God.

If the Word of God be heeded, the Christian battle will be fought both 
with love and with faithfulness. Party passions and personal animosities 
will be put away, but on the other hand, even angels from heaven will be 
rejected if they preach a gospel different from the blessed gospel of 
the Cross. Every man must decide upon which side he will stand. God 
grant that we may decide aright!

What the immediate future may bring we cannot presume to say. The final 
result indeed is clear. God has not deserted His Church; He has brought 
her through even darker hours than those which try our courage now, yet 
the darkest hour has always come before the dawn. We have today the 
entrance of paganism into the Church in the name of Christianity. But in 
the second century a similar battle was fought and won. From another 
point of view, modern liberalism is like the legalism of the middle 
ages, with its dependence upon the merit of man. And another Reformation 
in God's good time will come.

But meanwhile our souls are tried. We can only try to



do our duty in humility and in sole reliance upon the Savior who bought 
us with His blood. The future is in God's hand, and we do not know the 
means that He will use in the accomplishment of His will. It may be that 
the present evangelical churches will face the facts, and regain their 
integrity while yet there is time. If that solution is to be adopted 
there is no time to lose, since the forces opposed to the gospel are now 
almost in control. It is possible that the existing churches may be 
given over altogether to naturalism, that men may then see that the 
fundamentalneeds of the soul are to be satisfied not inside but outside 
of the existing churches, and that thus new Christian groups may be 
formed.

But whatever solution there may be, one thing is clear. There must be 
somewhere groups of redeemed men and women who can gather together 
humbly in the name of Christ, to give thanks to Him for His unspeakable 
gift and to worship the Father through Him. Such groups alone can 
satisfy the needs of the soul. At the present time, there is one longing 
of the human heart which is often forgotten--it is the deep, pathetic 
longing of the Christian for fellowship with his brethren. One hears 
much, it is true, about Christian union and harmony and co-operation. 
But the union that is meant is often a union with the world against the 
Lord, or at best a forced union of machinery and tyrannical committees. 
How different is the true unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace! 
Sometimes, it is true, the longing for Christian fellowship is 
satisfied. There are congregations, even in the present age of conflict, 
that are really gathered around the table of the crucified Lord; there 
are pastors that are pastors indeed. But such congregations, in many 
cities, are difficult to find. Weary with the conflicts of the world, 
one goes into the Church to seek refreshment for the soul.


And what does one find? Alas, too often, one finds only the turmoil of 
the world. The preacher comes forward, not out of a secret place of 
meditation and power, not with the authority of God's Word permeating 
his message, not with human wisdom pushed far into the background by the 
glory of the Cross, but with human opinions about the social problems of 
the hour or easy solutions of the vast problem of sin. Such is the 
sermon. And then perhaps the service is closed by one of those hymns 
breathing out the angry passions of 1861, which are to be found in the 
back part of the hymnals. Thus the warfare of the world has entered even 
into the house of God, And sad indeed is the heart of the man who has 
come seeking peace.

Is there no refuge from strife? Is there no place of refreshing where a 
man can prepare for the battle of life? Is there no place where two or 
three can gather in Jesus' name, to forget for the moment all those 
things that divide nation from nation and race from race, to forget 
human pride, to forget the passions of war, to forget the puzzling 
problems of industrial strife, and to unite in overflowing gratitude at 
the foot of the Cross? If there be such a place, then that is the house 
of God and that the gate of heaven. And from under the threshold of that 
house will go forth a river that will revive the weary world.
