Chapter 1. The Beginnings of Unbelief

IN ORDER TO appreciate properly the significance of the theological 
struggle which has just ended within the Presbyterian Church in the USA, 
it is essential at the outset that an historical perspective be gained. 
It is important to realize that this conflict which resulted in the 
formation of the Presbyterian Church of America in June, 1936, now known 
as the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, was not a controversy over some 
trivial matter or a difference between certain individuals but the 
culmination of many years of doctrinal defection. The real basic issue 
was a clash between two divergent points of view in doctrine, one 
conservative or orthodox and the other liberal or modernist. The 
struggle had been in evidence for a generation or more, but it had been 
kept subdued. A study of the history of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA will show how true this is.

The Presbyterian Church in the USA was organized largely by 
Presbyterians from the British Isles. These Presbyterians of the Puritan 
type settled in New England, New York, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, 
Pennsylvania, the Carolinas, and Virginia, where they established 
churches under the guidance and encouragement of Presbyterians in 
England, Scotland, and Ireland. At first they existed as separate 
congregations, but finally in 1706 the Presbytery of Philadelphia was 
formed and later on the Presbyterian Church in the USA was organized 
into synods and a general assembly until it reached its present 
constituency of approximately two million members.

The creed which was adopted by the Synod of Philadelphia in 1729 was the 
Westminster Confession of Faith with the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, 
which documents had been completed by the great divines at the 
Westminster Assembly 1643-49. It is not possible here to discuss all of 
the doctrines of the Westminster Confession of Faith nor is it 
necessary, but one thing is certain—the doctrines of the Confession, as 
admitted by all, are based on the assumption that the Bible is true and 
the sole authority in religion, and that the articles of the Confession 
are a systematic presentation of what the Bible teaches. While the 
Confession necessarily contains dogmas which are distinctive to 
Presbyterianism and taught in the Bible, there also appear doctrines 
such as the virgin birth, the bodily resurrection of Christ, his 
atonement for sin, his miracles, and the full trustworthiness of the 
Bible, which have been regarded as essential by all branches of 
Christendom. It is rather important to keep this fact in mind throughout 
the discussion because the main contention of this survey is that the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA has departed in practice from these 
doctrines.

There are several dates which one might mark as the beginning of 
doctrinal impurity in the church. For example, in 1801 the General 
Association of Connecticut and the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA adopted a plan of union in order to avoid competition. 
By the terms of this plan a Presbyterian minister could serve in a 
Congregational church and vice versa, but the congregation was to 
conduct its discipline according to the form of government obtaining, 
either Presbyterian or Congregational.[1] Some material growth and 
prosperity resulted from this merger, but with it came the inroads of 
Hopkinsianism, which originated in New England and which denied that man 
is depraved and separated from God because of his relationship to Adam. 
Two ministers, the Rev. Albert Barnes, pastor of the First Presbyterian 
Church of Philadelphia, and Dr. Lyman Beecher, professor at Lane 
Theological Seminary in Cincinnati, Ohio, were tried for heresy on this 
point. While Dr. Barnes was acquitted by the General Assembly and Dr. 
Beecher's case was not carried to the General Assembly, it was not due 
to a lack of heresy but mostly because Hopkinsianism was growing in 
strength and could control the General Assembly at times.

The controversy between the Old School and the New School theologies, 
which ended in a division into the Old School assembly and the New 
School assembly in 1837, was the result of doctrinal unsoundness in 
certain presbyteries of the church. When the General Assembly met in 
1837 in Philadelphia, the Old School was in a majority and it decided to 
abrogate the Plan of Union of 1801. A "Testimony and Memorial" was 
addressed to the assembly exhibiting the doctrinal errors and lapses in 
the church. The Old School leaders were determined to rid the church of 
heresy so that a true Presbyterian body would result. While the 
constitutionality of the Plan of Union of 1801 was also attacked, it was 
the doctrinal divergence from the Westminster Confession of Faith which 
motivated the Old School party in seeking the rescinding of the Plan of 
Union. These doctrinal errors consisted mainly in a wrong view of man's 
guilt in Adam, of the atonement, of election, and of regeneration.[2]

After much debate the Synods of Western Reserve, Utica, Geneva, and 
Genesee were exscinded because they were the most affected by the New 
England theology. A strong protest signed by one hundred and three 
ministers, among whom was Horace Bushnell, a leading liberal theologian 
of that day, was entered against the abrogation of the union.[3] This 
action by the Old School party was a bold step, but it was the only real 
solution to the differences in doctrine between the two groups in the 
church.[4] The Old School was truly Presbyterian in doctrine and polity, 
while the New School was tainted with anti-scriptural beliefs.

If the division into Old School and New School had continued, it is very 
likely that the doctrinal controversy which resulted in the formation of 
the Presbyterian Church of America would never have occurred. But the 
Civil War produced new issues which made these two parties forget their 
differences, and a union was effected in 1869.[5] That union should 
never have taken place, for it brought together two parties who 
disagreed fundamentally as to doctrine. It was one of the tragic events 
in Presbyterian history.

There are other events which illustrate the disagreement between the two 
doctrinal factions within the church, but the most important controversy 
was the one which led to a revision of the Westminster Confession of 
Faith in 1903. It is this dispute which shall be examined in detail as 
it demonstrates how much the New School theology had permeated the 
church. In 1788, chapters XX, XXIII, and XXXI of the Confession of Faith 
concerning the powers of synods, councils, and civil magistrates were 
amended and, in 1886-87, the clause forbidding marriage with a deceased 
wife's sister was stricken from chapter XXIV, section 4 of the 
Confession of Faith, but this did not affect the Calvinistic system of 
doctrine of the Confession. The amendments in 1903, on the other hand, 
vitally altered the emphasis of the Confession.

The agitation to revise the Confession of Faith began in 1889 when 
fifteen presbyteries overtured the General Assembly asking that some 
change be made in the doctrinal standards of the church. A committee 
appointed by the assembly brought in a report which was later adopted to 
the effect that the matter be referred to the presbyteries under two 
questions: 1. Do you desire a revision of the Confession of Faith? 2. If 
so, in what respects and to what extent?[6] When the General Assembly 
met in 1890 it was learned that 134 presbyteries had voted in the 
affirmative. This was a sufficient majority to warrant the assembly 
appointing a committee of fifteen ministers and ten elders who were 
instructed to consider the whole matter and to report to the next 
assembly, but they were specifically told that the Calvinistic aspect of 
the Confession must not be impaired.[7]

When the General Assembly convened in 1891 the committee on revision 
proposed changes involving many chapters of the Confession and questions 
in the Larger and Shorter Catechisms.[8] The changes which the assembly 
of 1892 finally sent to the presbyteries for discussion and a vote 
concerned not only the chapters which the committee had recommended for 
revision, but additional ones. These proposed changes failed to receive 
the affirmative vote of a two-thirds majority of the presbyteries and so 
the efforts to revise the Confession failed at that time.[9]

Two reasons in the main caused the defeat of the revisions: the strong 
opposition of the men at Princeton Theological Seminary like Francis L. 
Patton and B. B. Warfield, and the heresy trial of Dr. Charles A. 
Briggs, professor at Union Theological Seminary, New York City. It is 
perhaps true that the heresy trial of Dr. Briggs was the stronger reason 
because it dramatized the doctrinal viewpoint of some who favored 
revision.

Dr. Briggs held to a belief in the errancy of holy Scripture, the 
sanctification of the soul after death, and the sufficiency of human 
reason and the church as adequate guides in the matter of salvation. At 
the General Assembly in 1893 Dr. Briggs was declared guilty and 
suspended from the ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[10]

After these attempts at revision had failed, comparative quiet obtained 
in the church, but those who believed in a modified Calvinism and a less 
strict interpretation of the Bible continued their fight to revise the 
standards of the church. Many in the church were firm believers in the 
New School theology and were not to be discouraged so easily.

Again in 1900 twenty-three presbyteries overtured the General Assembly 
to establish a new and shorter creed, while fifteen presbyteries asked 
for a revision of the Confession of Faith and a new creed.[11] Such 
demand by so many presbyteries could not be ignored, so a committee of 
fifteen—eight ministers and seven elders—was appointed to study the 
matter and asked to report to the next General Assembly. Through two 
successive assemblies certain changes were considered, and in 1903 
modifications were made by adding a declaratory statement as to chapter 
III and chapter X, section 3; and changes were made in chapters XVI, 
section 7, XXII, section 3, XXV, section 6; and chapter XXXIV on the 
Holy Spirit and chapter XXXV on the Love of God and Missions were added. 
These revisions were less extensive than those proposed in 1890, yet 
they meant a victory for the New School party and a definite toning down 
of the Calvinistic emphasis of the Confession of Faith.[12]

Several doctrines distinctively Calvinistic or Reformed were involved in 
these changes, but the one which is paramount is the doctrine of 
election and its consistent application to the doctrine of the 
atonement. This is seen in the declaratory statement which deals with 
chapter III and chapter X, section 3, of the Confession, and is also 
seen in chapter XXXV on the Love of God and Missions.

In commenting on chapter III the declaratory statement says,

    With reference to chapter III of the Confession of Faith: that 
concerning those who are saved in Christ, the doctrine of God's eternal 
decree is held in harmony with the doctrine of His love to all mankind, 
His gift of His Son to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole 
world, and His readiness to bestow His saving grace on all who seek it.

It is, of course, biblical to say that God loved the world (John 3:16) 
and that Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world (I 
John 2:2). Such expressions must, however, be understood in their 
biblical sense. The declaratory statement gives to such expressions a 
turn that distinctly tends to obscure the particularism of God's 
redemptive love and universalizes the design of Christ's atoning work. 
It is the contention of the Reformed faith that God's redemptive love as 
set forth in the Bible is coextensive with the extent of the atonement, 
and that Christ did not die to save all men but only the elect.

The effort to tone down this particularism of the gospel is also seen in 
chapter XXXV, "Of the Love of God and Missions." Let it be said with 
emphasis that Calvinists are staunch believers in and supporters of 
missions. In fact, they are among the most zealous for preaching the 
gospel to the lost. But in chapter XXXV there is no mention made of the 
fact that God not only loves all in a general benevolent way, but that 
he loves some unto salvation. There is also an omission in this chapter 
of the efficacious grace of the Holy Spirit which makes salvation real 
to some. In other words, that particularism of the gospel which is so 
precious to lovers of the Bible and so offensive to the enemies of the 
cross is studiously avoided. A statement which seeks to declare the 
teaching of the Confession on the love of God and omits the fact that 
God has elected some to salvation is not true to nor consistent with the 
whole of the Confession.

There are those who contend that such an interpretation of the 
Confession of Faith would eliminate the love of God from the Confession 
entirely.[13] It is true that the Confession and the Bible do not 
include the love of God as preached by those who hold to the general 
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. It is also true that the 
Confession and the Bible do not warrant the teaching that God loves all 
unto salvation. As Dr. Ned B. Stonehouse pointed out in discussing this 
subject,

    It is not true, however, that the Westminster Confession of Faith 
drops the Biblical doctrine of the love of God. At the heart of the 
Bible, at the heart of Christianity and the gospel, and so at the heart 
of Calvinism, is the doctrine of the particular saving love of God for 
His people. This doctrine of redeeming love avoids the one-sided 
preaching of the love of God, which is so common today, with its 
consequent passing over the righteousness and holiness of God and the 
radical sinfulness of man.[14]

The very same weakness is seen in the declaratory statement concerning 
chapter X, section 3, on elect infants. The declaratory statement is 
right when it says, "With reference to chapter X, section 3, of the 
Confession of Faith, that it is not to be regarded as teaching that any 
who die in infancy are lost." This leaves the question of the extent of 
the salvation of infants dying in infancy open to various opinions. In 
fact, on this point the Scriptures are not definite. But the declaratory 
statement goes farther by saying, "that all lost in infancy are included 
in the election of grace and are regenerated and saved by Christ through 
the Spirit, who works when and where and how He pleases." According to 
the Word of God and the Confession of Faith, no one has a right to make 
such a statement because revealed truth is not clear on the subject. The 
extent of infant salvation has been left a mystery in the Bible and that 
is where it must be left. One of the glories of the Confession of Faith 
is the fact that it includes all that the Scriptures teach but no more; 
it does not speculate. In dealing with this question professor John 
Murray makes it clear that there have been various convictions 
concerning the salvation of infants dying in infancy.

    There have been Reformed theologians of the highest repute who held 
to the position expressed in the Declaratory Statement. Dr. Charles 
Hodge for example [Systematic Theology 1, 26-27] is unambiguous in his 
argument for the salvation of all infants dying in infancy. Other 
Reformed theologians of equal distinction scrupulously refrained from 
taking any such position. It is apparent, therefore, that there is 
surely room for difference of judgment in the matter. Our objection to 
the Declaratory Statement is that it incorporates into the creed of the 
church what is, to say the least, a highly debatable position, and 
therefore a position that should never be made part of creedal 
confession.[15]

A perusal of the discussions concerning these amendments in the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA between 1889 and 1903 will show that the 
Calvinists were on one side of the debate and those with Arminian and 
anti-scriptural tendencies were on the other.

Dr. Grier, editor of The Presbyterian in 1889, wrote with almost 
prophetic insight,

    The General Assembly has by one of its acts just passed opened up 
the sluices of debate in the church for the coming years. It has put its 
Standards in question before the Presbyteries and invited their 
suggestions as to the revision of the Confession of Faith. This is a 
movement which may have immense consequences in the future, and largely 
determine the position of the body in the circle of the Churches, in the 
time to come, and its own stability and unity as well.[16]

In fact, this act of the assembly not only opened up the "sluices of 
debate," but the ultimate revisions in 1903 gave comfort and impetus to 
those who wished the New School theology to control the church. As it 
turned out, the stability and the unity of the church were mightily 
affected, since the child of New School theology, which is known as 
modernism, does dominate that church today, and the unity of the church 
is only in name.

Dr. B. B. Warfield, of Princeton Theological Seminary, entered into the 
discussion against revision with vigor and helped measurably to delay 
action until 1903. In commenting on chapter X which deals with 
"Effectual Calling," he wrote,

    The chapter, as a whole, comes out of the Committees' hands a fair 
model of what a Confessional statement ought not to be—obscure and 
ambiguous where certainty and clearness are not only attainable but had 
already been attained in the original statement, dogmatic where the 
Scriptures are silent or even opposed, and not without both omissions 
and insertions which can be made to play into the hands of error.[17]

Of the report as a whole he wrote,

    Theologically, the report as a whole exhibits a decided tendency to 
lessen the sharpness and precision of the doctrinal statement of 
distinctive Calvinism... To all the clamorous proclamation of false 
doctrine about us—yes in our midst—against which the Church needs 
protection, the Committee has been deaf. To all the demands thus made on 
it for progress in the doctrinal statement of our orthodox truth in 
relation to present-day needs, it has been blind. Turning its back on it 
all, its whole doctrinal work is comprised in requesting the Church to 
lower its voice in telling the world the truth![18]

When Dr. Warfield was asked to serve on the committee for revision in 
1900, he refused on the ground that to revise the standards as was 
indicated would be to lower the testimony of the church to the truth.

Abraham Kuyper, that eminent Dutch theologian, was concerned and wrote a 
long article on the general subject of revision and its perils. He 
pictured the danger in that day of toning down the Calvinistic emphasis 
of the Confession of Faith instead of enriching and unfolding it. He 
concluded his article by stating,

    These are the reasons why the author, hearing of the revision 
proposed in America, and realizing what its consequences might be for 
the Dutch Churches, would feel in duty bound in the sight of God to 
dissuade from such revision in the most positive manner, if it were 
proposed in his own country.[19]

It is significant that Dr. Briggs, who was suspended from the ministry 
of the church for holding beliefs contrary to the Confession of Faith, 
which are known today as modernism, was one of the most vigorous 
proponents of revision. He argued that the people, the elders of the 
church, and the ministers desired relief from the antiquated elements of 
the Confession. He ended his discussion by saying, "Biblical critics 
will not much longer tolerate persecution on the part of a 
contra-Confessional majority."[20]

Dr. Henry Van Dyke, who was chairman of the Committee on Revision, was 
also in favor of the amendments. It is revealing to note that it was he 
who ceased attending the First Presbyterian Church in Princeton, New 
Jersey, in 1924 because he could no longer tolerate the orthodox 
Christianity which Dr. J. Gresham Machen was preaching while stated 
supply of the church.

On the whole it is clear that those who stood for revision wanted more 
than a modified Calvinism; they desired a liberalizing of the 
Confession. Their victory was only partial, but nevertheless it was a 
definite step toward the ultimate goal which they hoped to achieve, that 
of broadening the doctrinal standards of the church.

There may be some who will contend that the revisions of 1903 did not 
modify the Calvinism of the Confession, but the union of the Cumberland 
Presbyterian Church with the Presbyterian Church in the USA in 1906 is 
testimony to the fact that a denomination was convinced that they did. 
The Cumberland Presbyterian Church was a strange mixture of Arminianism 
and Calvinism. Its creed was an attempt to strike a middle ground 
between the two points of view, and, as a result, it was more Arminian 
than Calvinistic. In fact, it was the Calvinism of the Confession which 
was one of the dominant factors in leading certain ministers of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA to separate themselves from the church 
and to form the Cumberland Presbyterian Church in 1810. But when the 
revisions of 1903 were a part of the standards of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, immediately the Cumberland Presbyterian Church began 
to make overtures looking toward union. The Cumberland people felt that 
the Westminster Confession had been modified sufficiently to remove all 
substantial doctrinal differences between these two churches. 
Accordingly, a union was effected between the two bodies in 1906.[21]

The result of this union was to weaken the testimony of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA to the Bible and the Calvinism of the Confession. It 
helped further to entrench the position of those who wanted the 
Confession and the church modernized.

Another attempt to effect a union with other churches which demonstrated 
that the doctrinal defection in the Presbyterian Church in the USA had 
gained a strong foothold was the proposal to unite with other Protestant 
bodies in 1918. In that year thirty-five presbyteries overtured the 
General Assembly meeting in Columbus, Ohio, to consider a proposal to 
merge eighteen Protestant churches into one evangelical church. The plan 
as finally presented by a council composed of representatives from these 
organizations contained stipulations as to government as well as 
doctrine, but it is the doctrinal basis which is most significant.[22]

The preamble to the doctrinal section of the plan reads:

    Whereas: We desire to share, as a common heritage, the faith of the 
Christian Church, which has, from time to time, found expression in 
great historical statements; and whereas: We all share belief in God our 
Father; in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Saviour; in the Holy Spirit, 
our Guide and Comforter; in the Holy Catholic Church, through which 
God's eternal purpose of salvation is to be proclaimed and the Kingdom 
of God is to be realized on earth; in the Scriptures of the Old and New 
Testaments as containing God's revealed will, in the life eternal.[23]

In none of these vague statements is there an attempt to make clear the 
doctrines concerning God, Jesus Christ, the Holy Spirit, the church, 
salvation, the Scriptures, or eternal life. Practically anyone, whether 
orthodox or liberal, could subscribe to such a creed because each could 
read into the statements what he desires. Such a state of indifference 
and doctrinal disintegration becomes all the more significant when it is 
realized that 100 presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
voted for this organic union. It demonstrates graphically how formidable 
had become the number and influence of those who no longer considered 
sound doctrine as essential to the church. Fortunately, the majority of 
the presbyteries voted against the plan of union so that it was defeated 
in 1920.[24]

While this attempt at organic union with many other so-called 
evangelical bodies on a vague doctrinal basis proved unsuccessful, 
nevertheless it demonstrated the temper of a large portion of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA. In fact, to those who could discern the 
trend it showed how rapidly the spirit of compromise and doctrinal 
indifference had spread. To those who were awake to the true situation, 
the next important step in the process of doctrinal defection was no 
surprise but an expected conclusion.

These evidences of unbelief in the church were only the beginning. 
During each succeeding crisis those who advocated modernism added to 
their power and prestige, and when the next bold move of this group was 
launched in the issuance of the "Auburn Affirmation," which will be 
discussed in the next chapter, they not only enlisted a large following 
but succeeded finally in controlling the church.

Chapter 2. The Auburn Affirmation

THE SERMON, "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" preached by the Rev. Harry 
Emerson Fosdick, D.D., in the First Presbyterian Church, New York City, 
May, 1922, was the signal for a new and public outbreak of the conflict 
between the forces of historic Christianity and modern liberalism within 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA. While many look upon this event as 
the first real skirmish between liberals and conservatives in the 
church, it is more accurate to consider it as a continuance of the 
struggle. On the other hand, it is correct to point to the publication 
of this sermon as the immediate cause for the conflict which eventually 
led to the formation of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church. As a matter of 
fact, the ensuing events show that the trend toward modernism, not only 
in the Presbyterian Church in the USA but also in many other Protestant 
churches, was very pronounced and that in many cases this form of 
religion dominated the situation.

In 1918 three churches in lower New York City united to form the First 
Presbyterian Church. The Rev. George Alexander, D.D., was called as 
pastor and the Rev. Harry Emerson Fosdick, D.D., a Baptist, was invited 
to become associate minister. The officers of the church believed that 
this arrangement of a pastor and an associate would solve the problems 
of a downtown church in a most acceptable fashion. They realized that it 
was extraordinary to ask a Baptist to act as associate minister in a 
Presbyterian church so they secured the permission of the Presbytery of 
New York to sanction the arrangement. Under this plan church attendance 
increased, and the fame of Dr. Fosdick as a preacher spread throughout 
the nation.[1]

On Sunday morning, May 21, 1922, Dr. Fosdick preached the now famous 
sermon, "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" Without his knowledge, so Dr. 
Fosdick claims, Mr. Ivy Lee had the sermon reprinted, an introduction 
added, and the title changed to, "The New Knowledge and the Christian 
Faith."[2] He then proceeded to send copies of the sermon throughout the 
country, some of which came into the hands of Presbyterian ministers in 
Philadelphia.

The Presbytery of Philadelphia then had a large majority of 
conservatives with the Rev. Clarence E. Macartney, D.D., pastor of the 
Arch Street Church, as the acknowledged leader. Informal discussions 
concerning the presence of a Baptist minister in a Presbyterian church 
who did not believe in the doctrines of the Westminster Confession of 
Faith were held by members of Philadelphia Presbytery. It was finally 
decided by this group to introduce the following overture to the 
Presbytery of Philadelphia so that the matter would be brought to the 
attention of the General Assembly. The overture was adopted on October 
16, 1922, by an overwhelming majority—seventy-two to twenty-one.[3] Part 
of it follows:

    The Presbytery of Philadelphia hereby respectfully overtures the 
General Assembly to direct the Presbytery of New York to take such 
action as will require the preaching and teaching in the First 
Presbyterian Church of New York City to conform to the system of 
doctrine taught in the Confession of Faith.[4]

The sermon, "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" contrasts the conservative 
and radical views on the virgin birth, the inspiration of the 
Scriptures, the atonement, and the second advent of Christ and pleads 
for a tolerance of both views within the Christian church. In a letter 
to Dr. Macartney, Dr. Fosdick claimed that he had been misunderstood and 
that the burden of his sermon was tolerance and not necessarily 
liberalism.[5] But in 1923 Dr. Fosdick gave the Lyman Beecher Lectures 
on Preaching before the Yale Divinity School, which were published under 
the title, "The Modern Use of the Bible," and in which he upheld 
completely the modern "higher critical" views of the books of the Bible 
as to date and authorship. In fact, in his letter to Dr. Macartney he 
admitted that he represented the liberal view. Dr. Fosdick's theological 
position ever since that time has been well-known and no attempt has 
been made on his part to conceal the fact that he has advocated 
modernism as the religion for this day and generation.

When the General Assembly met in May, 1923, the most important issue 
before it was the overture from Philadelphia concerning the presence of 
Dr. Fosdick in the pulpit of the First Presbyterian Church in New York 
City. Agitation in all of the Presbyterian papers on this point had 
aroused the church so that sympathizers with the overture and opponents 
of it were well represented among the commissioners. The issue was far 
greater than the Philadelphia overture; actually it involved not only 
doctrines peculiar to Presbyterianism, but the fundamental doctrines of 
historic Christianity. The Rev. David S. Kennedy, D.D., editor of The 
Presbyterian, stated,

    The center of the contention lies between supernaturalistic 
evangelicalism on the one side, and naturalistic rationalism on the 
other. It is a contention between two spirits and two convictions which 
are mutually exclusive and destructive; one or the other must prevail, 
and the one which prevails will determine the character and future of 
the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., and will have an important 
influence upon the testimony of the whole evangelical church.[6]

There were two leading candidates for the position of moderator of the 
General Assembly at the meeting in Indianapolis, May, 1923: the Rev. 
Charles F. Wishart, D.D., president of the College of Wooster, and the 
Honorable William Jennings Bryan, former Secretary of State under 
President Wilson. Dr. Wishart represented those in the church who stood 
for unity and inclusivism rather than a division on doctrinal grounds, 
while Mr. Bryan represented those who wanted a church pure in doctrine 
and true to the historic interpretation of Christianity and the 
Westminster Confession of Faith. His followers were regarded as the 
militant wing of the church, although the nominating speeches stressed 
the orthodoxy of both candidates. Dr. Wishart won by a majority of only 
twenty-four.[7]

After the election of the moderator, the disposition of the Philadelphia 
overture became the paramount concern of the commissioners. In fact, 
overtures of a similar nature were before the assembly from nine other 
presbyteries.[8] As is customary, this overture was placed in the hands 
of the assembly's Committee on Bills and Overtures, of which the 
chairman was the Rev. Hugh K. Walker, D.D., of Los Angeles, who was 
appointed to this position by the moderator. The usual procedure is for 
the moderator to proffer this important office to the defeated 
moderatorial candidate, which would have been Mr. Bryan, but it is 
rather indicative of the feeling between the two camps in that assembly 
that this custom was not followed.

The Committee on Bills and Overtures brought in a report rejecting the 
Philadelphia overture and recommending that the Presbytery of New York 
be allowed to conduct its own investigation and report to the 1924 
assembly, especially since the presbytery had already appointed a 
committee to institute such an investigation. The majority report signed 
by twenty-one of the twenty-two members of the committee was roundly 
scored for its straddling of the issue and for its pusillanimous 
compromise.[9]

The Rev. Gordon A. MacLennan, D.D., of Philadelphia, brought in a 
minority report signed only by himself, yet it was adopted by the 
assembly by a vote of 439 to 359.[10] It called upon the assembly to 
direct the Presbytery of New York to require the preaching and teaching 
at the First Presbyterian Church in New York City to conform to the 
Bible and the Westminster Confession of Faith. It also asked the 
assembly to reaffirm its faith in the infallibility of the Bible, in the 
virgin birth of Jesus Christ, in his substitutionary atonement on the 
cross, in his bodily resurrection, and in his mighty miracles as 
essential doctrines of holy Scripture and the Westminster Confession of 
Faith.

The majority report was championed by the Rev. Hugh K. Walker, D.D., 
chairman of the committee, Nolan R, Best, editor of The Continent, and 
by the moderator. Those in favor of the minority report were led by the 
Rev. Gordon A. MacLennan, D.D., William Jennings Bryan, and the Rev. C. 
E. Macartney, D.D. The debate was limited to ten-minute speeches, and a 
closing argument of fifteen minutes was allowed for each side.

In presenting the minority report, Dr. MacLennan said,

    It is with the firm conviction that this General Assembly will 
answer the questions of our church in a definite and concrete form that 
I present this minority report. Shall not our Assembly give answer to 
these questions declaring its absolute faith in the virgin birth, in the 
inspiration of the Scriptures and the vicarious death on Calvary, and 
the bodily resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and in the mighty 
miracles which He wrought while here on earth?[11]

In closing the debate for the minority report Dr. Macartney asserted,

    I wish I could pay tribute to the majority report. But I cannot. It 
is a masterpiece of whitewash, and the man who wrote it ought to seek 
employment as an exterior decorator... We take our stand upon the New 
Testament and the Confession of Faith.... What you have heard here this 
afternoon is but the "sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry 
trees." The storm is coming, and you cannot stop it with any 
pusillanimous compromise.[12]

Those who argued in favor of the majority report contended that the 
matter of pulpit supplies in the First Presbyterian Church of New York 
City rested with the Presbytery of New York. This presbytery had already 
appointed a committee to investigate the situation, so that it would be 
discourteous and unpresbyterian to interfere in the matter.

Following the assembly, the editor of The Continent wrote, "Men who 
insist that these and other theological formulas are vital to the 
perpetuation of Christianity are without exception men who have mistaken 
religion's first definition—Christianity is not a dogma but a life."[13] 
The Rev. Alexander MacColl, D.D., pastor of the Second Presbyterian 
Church, Philadelphia, was quoted as having said,

    Let us be quite clear that the advocates of this materialistic 
philosophy, which robs life of all its glory and its beauty, have their 
chief allies today in those religious teachers whose expression of 
spiritual realities is always in material terms, whose perpetual 
emphasis is upon physical facts, upon a physical birth, physical blood, 
a physical ascension and coming again; the letter of a book.[14]

This decision of the General Assembly was hailed by the orthodox as a 
great victory for historic Christianity and "the faith which was once 
delivered unto the saints." But the rejoicing was to be short-lived. The 
liberals were thoroughly aroused and determined to do everything to 
bring the corporate witness of the church into conformity with their 
point of view. While the Rev. George Alexander, D.D., pastor of the 
First Presbyterian Church of New York City, said that he would attempt 
to carry out the mandate of the assembly, the leaders of New York 
Presbytery displayed little intention to comply. As soon as the action 
was taken by the assembly, a protest was filed with the assembly 
disapproving of the decision because it was not substantiated by 
evidence, because it passed judgment upon a matter not rightly before 
the assembly, and because it imposed doctrinal tests upon office-bearers 
not allowed by the constitution of the church.[15]

When the Presbytery of New York met on June 11, 1923, it proceeded to 
ignore the intent of the assembly's action, which was to rid the church 
of false doctrine, by licensing two young men, Henry P. Van Dusen and 
Cedric O. Lehman, who refused to affirm their faith in the virgin 
birth—one of the doctrines which Dr. Fosdick had attacked. A group of 
ministers and elders in New York Presbytery, led by the Rev. Walter D. 
Buchanan, D.D., filed a protest with the presbytery against the action. 
This protest or complaint was carried to the General Assembly in 1924, 
but the Permanent Judicial Commission of the assembly ruled that the 
complaint must first be remitted to the Synod of New York. At a later 
date Mr. Van Dusen was not only ordained by New York Presbytery, but he 
also became a professor at Union Theological Seminary, an outstanding 
modernist institution.[16]

At the same meeting of New York Presbytery the action of the General 
Assembly with respect to Dr. Fosdick was referred to the special 
committee of three ministers and two elders who had been appointed by 
the presbytery on April 9, 1923, in answer to a request from the 
Harlem-New York Church to investigate matters at the First Presbyterian 
Church.[17]

On October 1, 1923, and on January 14, 1924, the committee reported to 
the presbytery and on February 4, 1924, its recommendations were 
adopted. The committee came to four major conclusions and 
recommendations: (1) they were convinced that the doctrines of grace 
were being proclaimed in the pulpit of the First Church, (2) they 
expressed their confidence and loyalty in the session of the First 
Church, (3) they expressed their readiness to receive more reports on 
the subject in general, and (4) they affirmed their faith in the Bible. 
They also reported that the sermon, "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" was 
perhaps ill-advised and that it had been distributed without the 
knowledge of the session of the First Church.[18]

This action was not at all satisfactory to the conservatives in the 
Presbytery of New York, who immediately drew up a complaint to be 
presented to the General Assembly meeting in Grand Rapids in 1924. The 
Permanent Judicial Commission of General Assembly held in Grand Rapids 
ruled that the presbytery and its committee had obeyed the mandate of 
the assembly, but that the situation at the First Church would be 
clarified if Dr. Fosdick would express his purpose as to whether he 
intended to enter the ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA or 
to remain a minister of the Baptist denomination.

    We therefore recommend that the Presbytery of New York be 
instructed, through its committee or through the session of the First 
Presbyterian Church, to take up with Dr. Fosdick this question to the 
end that he may determine whether it is his pleasure to enter the 
Presbyterian church and thus be in a regular relationship with the First 
Presbyterian Church as one of its pastors.[19]

The New York Presbytery's committee to deal with this matter addressed a 
letter to Dr. Fosdick asking him to define his relationship to the First 
Presbyterian Church of New York City, and to state his intentions with 
reference to ministerial membership in the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA. Dr. Fosdick replied in a letter to the Rev. Edgar W. Work, D.D., 
chairman of the presbytery's committee, in which he refused to unite 
with the Presbyterian Church in the USA because of his unwillingness to 
subscribe to any confession of faith on the ground that it would violate 
his conscience. In the same letter he mentioned his intention to resign 
as associate minister of the First Church.[20]

The First Church accepted Dr. Fosdick's resignation as associate 
minister to take effect in March, 1925, but also extended an invitation 
to him to preach for them "when not otherwise engaged."[21]

Both the action of the General Assembly and that of the First 
Presbyterian Church of New York were strongly assailed by the 
conservatives of the church at large. The editor of one religious weekly 
called the assembly's decision "A Monstrous Suggestion."

    It seems almost incredible that anyone should even suggest that the 
disturbance over Dr. Fosdick has been occasioned by the fact that he is 
not a Presbyterian minister. The disturbance arose from the belief—in 
our judgment a well grounded belief—that his teachings not only openly 
deny the essential doctrines of the Presbyterian Church, but they are 
"subversive of the truth of Christianity as received, confessed, held 
and defended by the Christian church of all ages."[22]

In commenting on the invitation of the First Presbyterian Church of New 
York City to Dr. Fosdick to preach for them "when not otherwise 
engaged," Dr. Macartney wrote, "We cannot think, either, that the 
special preacher could lend himself to this plan to evade the will of 
the Presbyterian Church."[23] In spite of this opposition and in spite 
of the apparent evasion of the assembly's action, the First Church of 
New York City continued to have Dr. Fosdick fill the pulpit as a supply 
until March 1, 1925.[24]

In this connection it is interesting and informing to read the comment 
of the Rev. Albert C. Dieffenbach, D.D., then editor of the Unitarian 
weekly, The Christian Register,

    I have the profoundest respect for a man who is consistently a 
fundamentalist, or for a man who is consistently a Roman Catholic, but I 
have no respect for the attitude of Dr. Fosdick.... When he goes to 
Cambridge he speaks in terms of liberalism and when he comes to New York 
he says, "I am an evangelical Christian!"[25]

While this controversy between Dr. Fosdick and the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA was continuing, the conflict between modernists and 
conservatives in the church at large became more and more stormy. On 
October 30, 1923, at a gathering in New York City sponsored by the Rev. 
Walter D. Buchanan, D.D. and attended largely by ministers and elders of 
New York City and vicinity, Dr. J. Gresham Machen, then assistant 
professor of New Testament at Princeton Theological Seminary, and Dr. 
Macartney spoke of the need of contending for the faith. Dr. Macartney 
stressed the importance of being loyal to the creed of the church and 
Dr. Machen showed that the neo-Christianity preached by the liberals was 
not a perversion of Christianity but a new and different religion.

Two large mass meetings were held on December 10 and 14, 1923, in New 
York City and Philadelphia, both of which were addressed by the Rev. 
Maitland Alexander, D.D., a former moderator of the General Assembly and 
then pastor of the large and influential First Presbyterian Church in 
Pittsburgh, on the subject, "The Maintenance of the Reformed 
Theology."[26] Dr. Alexander not only pointed out the faithfulness of 
the Westminster standards to the New Testament, but he also emphasized 
the importance of ordaining ministers and elders who would be true to 
the standards of the church, and of electing members to the boards and 
agencies of the church who would maintain the Reformed faith.

It was during this height of the controversy in the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA that the small but significant book, Christianity and 
Liberalism, by J. Gresham Machen, appeared. This book, which was much 
discussed and was accepted as the best statement of the issue between 
modernism and historic Christianity, compelled the public to recognize 
Dr. Machen as the intellectual leader of those who believed in the 
Christianity of the Bible. He demonstrated quite conclusively that the 
religion of liberalism or modernism was not even a perversion of 
Christianity, like Roman Catholicism, but rather a new and different 
religion. Walter Lippmann, the well-known publicist, characterized the 
book as follows: "For its acumen, for its saliency, and for its wit this 
cool and stringent defense of orthodox Protestantism is, I think, the 
best popular argument produced by either side in the current 
controversy."[27]

The modernists were also much stirred over the turn of events. A 
committee of 150 Presbyterian ministers with headquarters at 10 Nelson 
Street, Auburn, New York, issued a document on December 26, 1923, in 
answer to the action of the General Assembly concerning the Philadelphia 
overture. This document is commonly called the "Auburn Affirmation," and 
requires detailed study because it has profoundly affected the course of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[28]

The contention of the Affirmation is twofold: first, that the General 
Assembly has no constitutional right to elevate the five doctrines 
mentioned as special tests for ordination to the ministry, unless the 
constitution be changed by a vote of the presbyteries; and secondly, 
that the five doctrines enumerated in the assembly's action are 
non-essential to the system of doctrine taught in the holy Scriptures 
and are merely theories of those facts and doctrines.

There have been opinions expressed by many Presbyterians of high repute 
relative to the constitutionality of the doctrinal deliverance of the 
1923 General Assembly. Two conservatives like Dr. D. S. Kennedy and Dr. 
J. Gresham Machen differed on this question. Dr. Kennedy maintained that 
"The whole structure of the Form of Government and Book of Discipline 
makes the interpretation of the courts binding and the interpretation of 
the general assembly as final."[29] On the other hand, Dr. Machen argued 
in favor of the constitutionality of the deliverance, not because the 
general assembly has a right to demand allegiance to these five 
doctrines as part of the constitutional questions for ordination, but on 
the ground that these five doctrines are taught in the word of God. 
Those who agreed with Dr. Kennedy contended that every candidate for 
ordination must answer the question, "Do you sincerely receive and adopt 
the Confession of Faith of this church as containing the system of 
doctrine taught in the Scriptures?" and that every one of the five 
doctrines mentioned in the deliverance is essential to the system of 
doctrine taught in the Scriptures.

The weight of the law seems to be on the side of the Auburn Affirmation. 
There are already certain questions asked of a candidate for the 
ministry in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, and if further and 
special tests for ordination are to be given, an overture to this effect 
would have to be sent down to the presbyteries for ratification. It is 
altogether likely that the General Assembly does not have the power to 
bind the presbyteries to "any essential and necessary articles" unless 
the presbyteries have so voted. The matter of the constitutionality of 
the deliverance is not important to the main issue. As a matter of fact, 
if the question of constitutionality were the only point, it would 
hardly be worth discussing. It is the second contention of the 
Affirmation with respect to the essential nature of the five doctrines 
which makes the subject of historical significance.

There have been three ways in which the vow, "Do you sincerely receive 
and adopt the Confession of Faith as containing the system of doctrine 
taught in the Scriptures?" has been interpreted: (1) the candidate 
assents to every proposition in the Confession of Faith, (2) the 
candidate accepts the Confession of Faith as containing the "substance" 
of the doctrine taught in the Bible, and (3) the candidate receives the 
Confession as containing the "system" of doctrine taught in the 
Bible.[30]

Very few have held the position that every article in the Confession of 
Faith must be accepted as essential to the system of truth. In fact, the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA has never officially maintained that 
every article in the Confession of Faith is essential to the system of 
doctrine. For example, the chapter on Marriage and Divorce recognizes 
that "such willful desertion as can no way be remedied by the church or 
civil magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of 
marriage."[31]

There are many ministers in the church who recognize that there is only 
one biblical ground of divorce, namely, adultery. The Presbyterian 
Church in the USA has never refused ordination to anyone for differences 
on this point as well as others nor has it held this as vital to the 
system of doctrine.

The signers of the Auburn Affirmation expressed their agreement with the 
second interpretation, that the Confession of Faith contains the 
"substance" of the doctrine taught in the Bible. They argued that the 
Synod of Philadelphia in the Adopting Act of 1729 had declared,

    All the ministers of this Synod or that shall hereafter be admitted 
into this Synod, shall declare their agreement in and approbation of the 
Confession of Faith with the Larger and Shorter Catechisms of the 
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, as being, in all the essential and 
necessary articles, good forms of sound words and systems of Christian 
doctrine, and do also adopt the said Confession and Catechisms as the 
confession of our faith.[32]

They maintained that this Act gives great liberty in assuming the 
ordination vow and has never been abrogated.

Those who were opposed to this interpretation pointed to the fact that 
an Act Explaining the Adopting Act was passed by the Synod of 
Philadelphia in 1736, in which it is stated specifically that, with the 
exception of chapters twenty and twenty-three, the Confession of Faith 
is to be regarded as the faith of the church.[33] Furthermore, the Act 
explained that if anyone did not subscribe to certain articles, the 
members of the synod were to decide whether those articles were 
essential to the system of doctrine or not.

    ...and in case any minister of this Synod, or any candidate for the 
ministry, shall have any scruple with respect to any article or articles 
of said Confession or Catechisms, he shall at the time of his making 
said declaration declare his sentiments to the Presbytery or Synod, who 
shall, notwithstanding, admit him to the exercise of the ministry within 
our bounds, and to ministerial commission, if the Synod or Presbytery 
shall judge his scruple or mistake to be only about articles not 
essential and necessary in doctrine, worship or government.[34]

In other words, no such latitudinarian principle of interpretation of 
the Confession as that advocated by the Auburn Affirmation was to be 
allowed. If such an interpretation were permitted, the conservatives 
maintained, and each individual could determine just what is essential 
to the system of truth, it is conceivable that even the doctrine of the 
Trinity might be omitted, thereby making the Confession meaningless.[35]

The third interpretation is the one which the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA has always employed, namely, that the candidate receives the 
Confession of Faith as containing the "system" of doctrine taught in the 
Bible. This means more than acceptance of certain individual articles or 
isolated sections; rather, it involves a well-defined plan of redemption 
with its doctrines of God, man, sin, and salvation, which has come to be 
known as the "Reformed theology" or "Calvinism," and which is set forth 
in the Scriptures. Dr. Charles Hodge, the famous Princeton theologian, 
was very emphatic on this point.

    If the question, "What is the system of doctrine taught by the 
Reformed Churches?" be submitted to a hundred Romanists, to a hundred 
Lutherans, to a hundred members of the Church of England, or to a 
hundred skeptics, if intelligent and candid, they would all give 
precisely the same answer. There is not the slightest dispute among 
disinterested scholars as to what doctrines do, and what do not belong 
to the faith of the Reformed. And, therefore, any man who receives these 
several classes of doctrine, (viz.: those common to all Christians, 
those common to all Protestants, and those peculiar to the Reformed 
Churches) holds in its integrity the system of doctrine contained in the 
Westminster Confession.[36]

The five doctrines enunciated in the Deliverance of the 1923 General 
Assembly, however, are not peculiar to the Reformed theology nor even to 
Protestantism, but are common to all Christians, Protestants, Roman 
Catholics, and Greek Orthodox alike. Consequently, the real issue is not 
the technical point of the constitutionality of the deliverance nor even 
the question of the system of doctrine peculiar to Presbyterianism, but 
rather whether or not these five doctrines are taught in the Bible and 
essential to any system of doctrine which calls itself Christian. A 
study of each doctrine will show how true this is.

The first doctrine mentioned by the General Assembly of 1923 reads, "It 
is an essential doctrine of the Word of God and our standards that the 
Holy Spirit did so inspire, guide and move the writers of Holy 
Scripture, as to keep them from error." With respect to this, the Auburn 
Affirmation states,

    There is no assertion in the Scriptures that their writers were 
"kept from error"! The Confession of Faith does not make this assertion; 
and it is significant that this assertion is not found in the Apostles' 
Creed or the Nicene Creed or in any other of the great Reformation 
confessions.... The doctrine of inerrancy, intended to enhance the 
authority of the Scriptures, in fact impairs their supreme authority for 
faith and life, and weakens the testimony of the church to the power of 
God unto salvation through Jesus Christ.

In answer the conservatives maintained that each minister must give an 
affirmative reply to the question, "Do you believe the Scriptures of the 
Old and New Testaments to be the Word of God, the only infallible rule 
of faith and practice?"

The Confession of Faith, chapter I, section V, which treats "Of the Holy 
Scripture" does not employ the phrase, "kept from error," but it does 
contain such expressions as, "the entire perfection thereof " and "our 
full persuasion and assurance of the infallible truth" which imply and 
connote inerrancy. Furthermore, they argued, in 1893 the General 
Assembly suspended the Rev. Charles A. Briggs, D.D., professor at Union 
Theological Seminary, New York City, because he believed in the errancy 
of holy Scripture.[37] In other words, the church had already 
interpreted the constitution with respect to the inspiration of the 
Bible and exactly as the Deliverance of 1923 had stated. What is more, 
it is clear that the other branches of the Christian church—the Roman 
Catholic Church as expressed in the Council of Trent, and the Greek 
Orthodox Church as expressed through its confessions and 
catechisms—believe in the full truthfulness of the Bible. The Council of 
Trent describes the books of the Bible as having come down to the 
church, "the Holy Ghost dictating."[38] The Greek Orthodox Church 
doctrine, as expressed in "The Confession of Dositheus," is that the 
inerrancy and infallibility of the church's judgment is based upon the 
absolute inerrancy of the Bible.[39] In other words, this doctrine of an 
infallible Bible has been the belief of the Christian church these many 
centuries.

The second doctrine contained in the deliverance reads, "It is an 
essential doctrine of the Word of God and our standards that our Lord 
Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary." Concerning this statement the 
Auburn Affirmation affirms,

    We all believe from our hearts... that Jesus Christ was God manifest 
in the flesh.... But we are united in believing that these [five 
doctrines] are not the only theories allowed by the Scriptures and our 
standards as explanations of these facts and doctrines of our religion, 
whatever theories they may employ to explain them, are worthy of all 
confidence and fellowship.

It is plain from this assertion that the Auburn Affirmation regards the 
virgin birth as a theory of the incarnation. The narratives in Matthew 
and Luke, on the other hand, are very explicit in their description of 
the birth of Jesus Christ. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the 
womb of the virgin Mary (Matt 1:20, Luke 1:34-35). That statement of an 
historical event in the external world in the two gospels is either true 
or false. It is not a theory, for to make such a claim would be to 
reduce the gospel story to an absurdity and to make nonsense of the 
language. Furthermore, it is beyond dispute that the Roman Catholic 
Church, the Greek Orthodox Church, and the various branches of 
Protestantism clearly teach a belief in the virgin birth of Christ.

The statement of the deliverance with reference to the atonement of 
Christ for sin reads, "It is an essential doctrine of the Word of God 
and our standards that Christ offered up Himself a sacrifice to satisfy 
divine justice and to reconcile us to God." The Auburn Affirmation 
states, "that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, and 
through Him we have our redemption."

No one can object to the statement of the Auburn Affirmation about the 
atonement because it is a partial quotation from the Bible (II Cor 
5:19), but when the assertion of the deliverance is referred to as a 
theory of the atonement and that other theories which may be employed to 
explain the doctrine are worthy of all confidence, then an entirely 
different situation obtains and the question of anti-scriptural views 
comes into consideration. The Confession of Faith uses practically the 
same language as the deliverance to describe the sacrifice of Christ.

    The Lord Jesus, by his perfect obedience and sacrifice of himself 
which he through the eternal Spirit once offered up unto God, hath fully 
satisfied the justice of his Father.[40]

Officially, the Presbyterian Church in the USA has never taught any 
other view of the atonement than that expressed in the deliverance. In 
fact, its essential features are common to the Latin, Lutheran, and 
Reformed churches. In discussing the various theories of atonement, Dr. 
Charles Hodge wrote,

    The first is that which has been for ages regarded as the orthodox 
doctrine; in its essential features common to the Latin, Lutheran, and 
Reformed churches.... According to this doctrine the work of Christ is a 
real satisfaction, of infinite inherent merit, to the vindicatory 
justice of God; so that He saves his people by doing for them, and in 
their stead, what they were unable to do for themselves, satisfying the 
demands of the law in their behalf, and bearing its penalty in their 
stead; whereby they are reconciled to God, receive the Holy Ghost, and 
are made partakers of the life of Christ to their present sanctification 
and eternal salvation.[41]

The fourth statement of the deliverance reads:

    It is an essential doctrine of the Word of God and of our standards 
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, that on the third day He arose again 
from the dead with the same body with which He suffered, with which He 
also ascended into heaven, and there sitteth at the right hand of His 
Father, making intercession.

In opposition to this view of the deliverance, the Auburn Affirmation 
states, "that having died for our sins He rose from the dead and is our 
everlasting saviour." The proper implication of this statement is that 
the resurrection of Christ was not necessarily a bodily one, especially 
since the Auburn Affirmation claims that the bodily resurrection is only 
one of many theories. With reference to this doctrine the deliverance 
quoted directly from the Confession of Faith.[42]

If the bodily resurrection of Christ is only a theory, then the 
fifteenth chapter of 1 Corinthians is mistaken, because it is devoted 
almost exclusively to a discussion and proof of the resurrection of 
Christ and the assertion that the resurrection was a bodily one. It also 
makes of no meaning the claim of Christ to Thomas, "Handle me, and see; 
for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have" (Luke 24:39). 
In fact, no other theory of the resurrection is taught or implied in the 
Scripture. In addition, all branches of Christendom in their creeds 
teach the bodily resurrection of Christ. Of that there can be no 
question. So again the fact becomes clear that the issue raised by the 
Auburn Affirmation concerns the fundamental basis of Christianity, and 
not doctrines peculiarly Presbyterian.

The fifth doctrine of the deliverance reads,

    It is an essential doctrine of the Word of God as the supreme 
standard of our faith that our Lord Jesus showed His power by working 
mighty miracles. This working was not contrary to nature, but superior 
to it.

The Auburn Affirmation states, "that in His earthly ministry He wrought 
many mighty works."

Here the attempt is made by the Auburn Affirmation to undermine the 
entire supernatural element in the works of Christ and to make them to 
appear as mighty, but explainable to this generation by natural causes. 
The Confession of Faith reads, "God, in his ordinary providence, maketh 
use of means, yet is free to work without, above, and against them, at 
his pleasure."[43] At this point the tendency toward naturalism in the 
Affirmation becomes more evident, and the real underlying difference 
between it and historic Christianity is clear. It is here that the 
contention between two spirits, two convictions, and two conceptions of 
Christianity becomes most plain, and anyone who would understand this 
conflict correctly must honestly recognize that fact. The essential 
nature of the miraculous is evident not only in the works of Christ but 
in the whole of the New Testament. Eliminate that or try to distinguish 
between miraculous and non-miraculous Christianity, and no Christianity 
remains. What is more, no informed person would question the assertion 
that the Roman Catholic Church and the Greek Orthodox Church believe in 
the supernatural character of Christ's miracles.

It is obvious to any honest, clear-thinking man that there exists a 
world of difference concerning the essential nature of Christianity 
between the Deliverance of the 1923 Assembly and the Auburn Affirmation. 
The deliverance holds to a supernatural religion which comes as a 
revelation from a personal God, while the Affirmation supports the view 
that the Bible may be a revelation from God but no one can be sure of 
it, and that the miraculous aspects of Christianity are to be questioned 
and perhaps explained on a naturalistic basis. As Dr. Machen so ably 
argued many times, the religion of the Affirmation is a new and 
different religion, separate and distinct from historic Christianity.

The issuance of the Auburn Affirmation called forth a veritable flood of 
articles for and against it. These articles dealt with the 
constitutionality of the deliverance, but more especially with the 
doctrinal questions raised by the Affirmation. It became evident that 
this issue would be one of the main considerations at the General 
Assembly in May, 1924.

When the assembly met at Grand Rapids in May, 1924, the following 
overture from the Presbytery of Cincinnati concerning the Affirmation 
was presented and, according to custom, sent to the Committee on Bills 
and Overtures of which the Rev. Maitland Alexander, D.D., was chairman.

    The Presbytery of Cincinnati would respectfully place in your hands 
the accompanying pamphlet, entitled, "An Affirmation," that you may be 
"well advised" of its contents and purposes and that your venerable body 
may exercise intelligently, under the guidance of the Divine Spirit, its 
"powers of deciding in all controversies respecting doctrine; of 
reproving, warning, or bearing testimony against error in doctrine, or 
immorality in practice, in any church, Presbytery or Synod;" "and of 
repressing schismatical conventions and disputation."[44]

The Committee debated this overture as well as several others of a 
similar nature for five days, and then recommended that no action be 
taken.[45]

Since Dr. Clarence E. Macartney, an outstanding conservative leader in 
that assembly, was elected moderator, and since Dr. Maitland Alexander 
and William Jennings Bryan, both of whom were well-known conservatives, 
were members of the Committee on Bills and Overtures, the question has 
often been asked, "Why was not some action taken against the Auburn 
Affirmation and its signers?" Dr. Alexander and elder A. Marshall 
Thompson have partially answered that question in their letters to The 
Presbyterian,[46] by stating that the committee was dominated by 
liberals thirteen to nine, so that every report coming from the 
committee represented the liberal point of view. Dr. Alexander further 
states that the General Assembly laid the matter on the table on motion 
of Dr. Mark A. Matthews, and that by unanimous vote. The fact remains 
that as far as the record is concerned, there was no protest and no 
dissenting vote. It is also surprising that very little or no comment is 
made concerning this overture in the report of the proceedings of the 
General Assembly in such a magazine as The Presbyterian, which was then 
the most aggressive organ for the faith. The statute of limitations 
which outlaws action against individuals one year after an offense has 
been committed, did not apply because only six months had elapsed since 
the issuance of the Auburn Affirmation in December, 1923.[47]

There seems to be no sound explanation of this action and attitude of 
the conservatives except that they made a grave mistake. No advice was 
given to the church concerning the Auburn Affirmation and, as a result, 
the matter has troubled the church ever since. One editor asked the 
rhetorical question, "What has become of `An Affirmation,' signed by 150 
ministers of the Presbyterian church, which number, through the labors 
and at the expense of Union Seminary, New York, was increased to twelve 
hundred?" Then he answered his own question, "It is dead."[48] But the 
church was to discover to its regret that the Affirmation was far from 
dead.

On the other hand, large mass meetings were held in several cities, 
deploring the doctrinal decadence in the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
as evidenced by the Auburn Affirmation. One such gathering took place in 
Cincinnati under the leadership of the Rev. Frank H. Stevenson, D.D., 
then pastor of the Church of the Covenant of Cincinnati, and one of the 
founders of Westminster Theological Seminary. In fact, the situation in 
the church became so acute that the 1925 General Assembly appointed a 
committee of fifteen with the following instructions,

    That a Commission of fifteen members be appointed to study the 
present spiritual condition of our Church and the causes making for 
unrest, and report to the next General Assembly, to the end that purity, 
peace, unity and progress of the Church may be assured.[49]

No Auburn Affirmationist was appointed to the commission, nor was any 
out-and-out member of the orthodox wing of the church. It was evident 
that this commission was appointed to still the voice of objection which 
the Auburn Affirmation had created.

The commission made reports to the 1926 and 1927 General Assemblies, 
both of which were adopted. As a whole, the reports dealt with church 
polity, the powers of the general assembly and presbyteries, ordination, 
licensure, essential and necessary articles of faith, and many other 
kindred subjects, but failed completely to point out the "causes making 
for unrest" in the church, which was the main purpose of the commission. 
It hid behind a barrage of technicalities, most of which were according 
to the constitution of the church, but made no adequate proposals "to 
the end that purity, peace, unity and progress of the Church may be 
assured," and recognized no deep-seated doctrinal difference among the 
ministers in the church, but rather urged brotherly consideration and 
fair play. A short quotation from the reports will demonstrate the 
spirit of doctrinal inclusivism of the members and their attitude toward 
the great doctrinal issues involved in the conflict.

    Two controlling factors emerge. One is, that the Presbyterian system 
admits of diversity of view where the core of truth is identical. 
Another is, that the Church has flourished best and showed most clearly 
the good hand of God upon it, when it laid aside its tendencies to 
stress these differences, and put the emphasis on its unity of 
spirit.[50]

It is a matter of great sorrow that no attempt whatsoever was made at 
the time to bring individual signers of the Auburn Affirmation to trial. 
This method would have been the proper one, for when heresy exists among 
ministers in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, charges must be filed 
against a particular minister with the presbytery. The orthodox 
ministers of the church wrote many pamphlets and made many speeches 
against the Auburn Affirmation, but no individual signer of that 
document was charged with heresy. This grave error caused irreparable 
harm in the church and furthered the cause of the modernists in the 
church. The Presbyterian League of Faith was organized in 1931 as a 
direct testimony against the Auburn Affirmation, and its constitution 
was signed by about twelve hundred ministers, but this did not result in 
any action against signers of the Affirmation (see chapter fourteen).

One attempt was made to bring the Auburn Affirmationists to trial in the 
Presbytery of Philadelphia in October, 1934, when the Rev. H. McAllister 
Griffiths and elders Murray Forst Thompson and Gordon H. Clark lodged 
six charges against the eleven signers of the Affirmation in the 
Presbytery of Philadelphia for violation of their ordination vows.[51] 
Through questionable methods and technical maneuvers the Affirmationists 
in the presbytery succeeded in keeping the charges from being filed. In 
addition, the legal difficulty imposed by the Book of Discipline in the 
statute of limitations, which requires charges to be filed within one 
year after an offense has been committed, would have militated against 
the success of this move. Yet the initiators of the charge felt morally 
obligated to start this suit in order to show the church that they 
regarded the signers of the Affirmation as heretics. When the Auburn 
Affirmation was issued in 1923, Mr. Griffiths was not a minister of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and Messrs. Thompson and Clark were not 
elders.

So the episode of the Auburn Affirmation ended, with the modernists 
scoring a decisive victory as shown by their success in restraining the 
church from admitting doctrinal heresy, at least in an official manner, 
and in keeping signers of the Affirmation in positions of great power in 
the church. It is very revealing to study the membership lists of the 
boards and agencies of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. In 1927, when 
the commission of fifteen made its last report, many signers of the 
Affirmation were on those boards. The Board of Foreign Missions had 
four, the Board of National Missions seven, the Board of Christian 
Education three, and the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General 
Assembly, which is practically the final arbiter of doctrine in the 
church, had two. Dr. D. S. Kennedy, editor of The Presbyterian in 1924, 
said that the Auburn Affirmation was dead; subsequent events prove that 
its signers were more alive than ever and that its spirit dominated the 
church. The following chapters will attempt to prove that fact.

Chapter 3. The Reorganization of Princeton Theological Seminary

PRINCETON Theological Seminary prior to 1929 was regarded by theologians 
of all shades of opinion as the citadel of historic Christianity. Such 
great scholars as Charles Hodge, William Henry Green, Francis L. Patton, 
B. B. Warfield, and Geerhardus Vos had made the theology at Princeton 
the standard presentation of orthodoxy in the Christian world. In the 
last years Robert Dick Wilson and J. Gresham Machen were among the best 
known professors, and carried the fame of the institution as a contender 
for the faith to every land where Christianity is taught. It was to this 
seminary that students came to receive instruction for the ministry so 
that they would be able to give "a reason for the hope" that was in 
them, while others entered in order to discover whether orthodoxy had a 
reasonable case and could be accepted as true in the modern world. The 
young men emerged from the institution strengthened in the faith and 
convinced of the truthfulness of the Bible.

Princeton Seminary was known not only as an institution which defended 
historic Christianity, but as one which stood firmly for the propagation 
and defense of the Reformed faith or the Calvinistic system of doctrine 
that is set forth in the Westminster Confession of Faith and is taught 
in the Bible. In 1929, however, a change took place in the 
administration of the seminary and from that time a different and new 
theological emphasis became effective. The administration of the 
institution by a board of directors which controlled the educational 
program, and a board of trustees which held the real property in trust, 
was altered so that a single board of trustees was placed in charge of 
the seminary. With this new arrangement a radical change took place in 
the educational program which has shifted the theological emphasis from 
historic Calvinism to twentieth-century Barthianism. A brief review of 
the conflict which produced the change will reveal this fact.

The Plan for the Theological Seminary of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA, commonly called Princeton Theological Seminary, was adopted by the 
General Assembly of the church in 1811.[1] It provided for a board of 
directors which had immediate control of the seminary, subject to the 
approval of the assembly. Every board member was asked to subscribe to 
the following pledge:

    Approving the Plan of the Theological Seminary of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A., I solemnly declare and promise in the presence of 
God and of this Board, that I will faithfully endeavor to carry into 
effect all the articles and provisions of said Plan, and to promote the 
great design of the Seminary.[2]

Each professor was required to agree to the following formula:

    In the presence of God, and of the directors of this Seminary, I do 
solemnly and ex animo adopt, receive, and subscribe to the Confession of 
Faith and Catechisms of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., as the 
confession of my faith, or as a summary and just exhibition of that 
system of doctrine and religious belief, which is contained in Holy 
Scripture, and therein revealed by God to man for his salvation; and I 
do solemnly, ex animo, profess to receive the Form of Government of said 
Church, as agreeable to the inspired oracles. And I do solemnly promise 
and engage not to inculcate, teach, or insinuate anything which shall 
appear to me to contradict or contravene, either directly or impliedly, 
anything taught in the said Confession of Faith or Catechisms, nor to 
oppose any of the fundamental principles of Presbyterian Church 
government, while I remain a professor in this seminary.[3]

In 1870 the General Assembly adopted changes in the plan of the seminary 
which added greatly to the power of the board of directors by allowing 
the board to fill its own vacancies, and to fix the salaries of 
professors, the first of which powers was subject to veto by the General 
Assembly.[4]

The property of the seminary was first held by the trustees of the 
General Assembly, but in 1822 the legislature of New Jersey passed "An 
Act for Incorporating Trustees of the Theological Seminary of the 
Presbyterian Church, at Princeton, in the State of New Jersey," and so 
the trustees of the seminary became the custodians of the property under 
state law.[5]

Accordingly, from that time on two boards were in control of the 
institution: a board of directors which was entrusted with the task of 
directing the educational program, subject to the approval of the 
General Assembly, and a board of trustees which was responsible for the 
real property held in trust by them for the seminary.

The institution had no president until 1902, when the General Assembly 
added an article to the plan of the seminary providing for an election 
of a president by the board of directors, subject to the approval of the 
assembly.[6] The duties of the president are described as follows,

    Such president shall, by virtue of such election, be the president 
of the faculty. He shall be inaugurated in such manner and form as the 
Board of Directors may prescribe, and at his inauguration shall make the 
subscription and declaration required of a professor; he shall be 
subject to the regulations made by the Board of Directors and to the 
prescriptions of the Plan of the Seminary with regard to professors. He 
shall be the representative of the Seminary before the Church; he shall 
be the administrative agent of the Seminary in matters of order and 
discipline, he shall give instruction to the students in such 
departments as the Board of Directors may direct or the General Assembly 
may order. Such president shall, by virtue of his election, as 
aforesaid, become and be a member of the Board of Directors during his 
continuance in office, and a member, ex officio, of all Committees of 
the Board.[7]

Prior to 1902, a chairman of the faculty had been elected by the 
faculty, usually the senior member, whose duties were to preside at the 
faculty meetings, but in no way was the chairman superior to his 
colleagues.[8] The move to create the office of president originated in 
the relationship which Dr. Francis L. Patton had maintained with the 
seminary since 1880. While Dr. Patton had been president of Princeton 
University, he had been a lecturer at the seminary, but in 1902 he 
resigned as president of the university so that there was much agitation 
to make him a full professor at the seminary. The fact that Dr. Patton 
had been president of the university made some feel that a full 
professorship at the seminary was not enough to offer him, and so the 
board of directors decided to inaugurate him the first president of the 
theological seminary. After his installation as president, Dr. Patton 
carried on in this office much in the same way as the former chairmen of 
the faculty had done as unus inter pares, or perhaps as primus inter 
pares. In no way did he assume the full responsibilities or duties of a 
president in the accepted sense of that office. On the other hand, he 
did become a member of the board of trustees and the board of directors, 
in which he exercised great influence mostly because of his strong 
personality and brilliance. In 1913 he retired and the task of choosing 
a successor became a very important and difficult one.[9] After 
considering many candidates and after much discussion, in fact after 
balloting several times, the Rev. J. Ross Stevenson, D.D., LL.D., pastor 
of the Brown Memorial Presbyterian Church in Baltimore, Maryland, was 
elected by the board of directors to the position by a majority of one 
vote. Several on the faculty and board of directors were not at all 
pleased by the election.[10] Dr. Stevenson was inaugurated in 1914, and 
made a member of the board of trustees, and became a member ex officio 
of the board of directors and all of its committees.

Dr. Stevenson, a graduate of McCormick Theological Seminary of Chicago, 
and later a professor there, had served in some of the leading churches 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, the most notable of which was the 
Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, New York City. He came to Princeton 
not appreciating fully its theological position and emphasis, and at the 
same time accepting the office of president on the terms set forth in 
the plan of the seminary which he interpreted in the plain sense, but 
which interpretation had never been enforced at the institution.

In fact, his spirit of doctrinal inclusivism and his great zeal for 
church union, even when based upon vague and meaningless theological 
statements, marked his whole career at Princeton and brought an alien 
viewpoint to the institution. It was plain to any objective observer 
that Dr. Stevenson and most of the faculty were far apart in their 
understanding of Princeton's place in the Christian world. The conflict 
between the two viewpoints was a logical result which men like Dr. 
Warfield foresaw and which made them so reluctant to welcome Dr. 
Stevenson's appointment as president.

From the standpoint of administration, Dr. Stevenson conceived of his 
position as that of the real head of the institution who was to have a 
leading part in forming its policies, choosing its professors, inviting 
men to address the students and representing the seminary before the 
church. One who did not know the history of Princeton and its 
administrative policy would be likely to accept that interpretation of 
the president's position from a reading of the plan of the seminary. On 
the other hand, the faculty had always believed that the president was 
little more than a presiding officer who, together with his colleagues, 
decided on the entire educational program for the institution. This had 
been the practice of Dr. Patton as president and of the chairmen of the 
faculty before him.

Doctrinally there was also a divergence of opinion between the president 
and the majority of the members of the faculty. Dr. Stevenson was 
convinced that the institution existed to represent the whole 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, since it was under the direct control of 
the General Assembly.[11] On the other hand, the majority of the faculty 
were fully convinced that the seminary could not possibly represent the 
whole church and be true to its charter and history.[12] Princeton was 
organized to uphold the Westminster Confession of Faith and the Larger 
and Shorter Catechisms, maintained the faculty, and by no standard of 
judgment could anyone say that all the ministers or officers of the 
church held to the truths of these documents in their historic meaning. 
Princeton must represent the Old School tradition in the church, they 
said, if it were to carry out the design of the founders.

Dr. J. Gresham Machen wrote,

    Never has Dr. Stevenson given any clear indication, by the policy 
that he has followed as President of the Seminary, that he recognizes 
the profound line of cleavage that separates the two opposite tendencies 
within the Presbyterian church, and the necessity that if Princeton 
Seminary is to be true to its great heritage and true to the moral 
obligations involved in the distinctive basis upon which it has always 
appealed for support, it must, in this great contention, definitely and 
unequivocally take sides.[13]

Dr. William Park Armstrong, professor of New Testament at Princeton 
Seminary, made the assertion on behalf of the faculty,

    We do not believe that Princeton Seminary can be made a Seminary of 
the whole Church, i.e., representing the whole Church doctrinally, even 
under the constitution of the Church, without departing from its 
historical position because of the prevailing latitude in interpretation 
of our doctrinal standards.[14]...

    The majority of the Faculty maintain that the Institution has been 
historically affiliated with that doctrinal point of view in the Church 
known as the Old School.[15]

On the other hand, Dr. Stevenson maintained,

    We [Princeton Seminary] are the agency of the combined Old School 
and New School and my ambition as President of the Seminary is to have 
it represent the whole Presbyterian Church and not any particular 
faction of it.[16]

So the president and the faculty clashed on the matter of administration 
and doctrinal viewpoint. The president's stand for an inclusive 
doctrinal policy as opposed to the faculty's demand for an exclusive one 
became evident as soon as Dr. Stevenson assumed the presidency.

The first major clash between the president and the faculty came in 1920 
over a Plan of Organic Union of Evangelical Churches, as introduced in 
the General Assembly by Dr. Stevenson, vice-chairman of the Committee on 
Church Cooperation and Union.[17] The plan, and particularly its 
unevangelical preamble, as set forth in chapter one of this book, was 
opposed by professors Allis, Davis, Greene, Hodge, Machen, and Warfield, 
as being contrary to the Westminster Confession of Faith and inimical to 
the life of the church and its witness to the truth of the Bible. On the 
other hand, Dr. Charles R. Erdman, professor of practical theology, was 
a member of the Committee on Church Cooperation and Union which prepared 
the plan and strongly favored its adoption.[18] In other words, Dr. 
Stevenson had the support of at least one member of the faculty in this 
issue, which showed the majority of the professors were opposed 
vigorously to the union on doctrinal grounds. There could be no mistake 
that at least the attitude toward the importance of doctrine and a real 
concern for the integrity and purity of the church's witness to the 
Reformed faith were at the basis of this difference between the 
president and the faculty.

The divergence of opinion on the importance of doctrine and the need for 
defending it arose again during the General Assembly of 1924 when Dr. 
Erdman, a member of the faculty, and Dr. Macartney, a member of the 
board of directors, were candidates for the position of moderator of the 
assembly. As has been seen already in the preceding chapter, Dr. Erdman, 
even though he was personally evangelical, was regarded as the candidate 
of those who wanted a union of all the forces in the church, and on this 
basis the liberals in the assembly supported him. Dr. Macartney, on the 
other hand, was considered the candidate of the conservatives. Dr. 
Stevenson supported Dr. Erdman, while the majority of the faculty were 
staunch allies of Dr. Macartney and his stand for the faith.[19] This 
contributed to the breach between Dr. Stevenson and the faculty.

In the fall of 1924 the conflict between historic Christianity and 
liberalism which had been disturbing the peace of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, became a live issue among the students on the 
Princeton Seminary campus. A delegation of students had been sent to the 
conference of the Middle Atlantic Association of Theological Seminaries 
at Drew Theological Seminary in Madison, New Jersey. On October 21, 
1924, these men gave their report to the Students' Association meeting, 
in which they made it abundantly clear that some of the speakers and 
students at the conference had expressed their doubt about the necessity 
and truthfulness of such doctrines as the final authority of the Bible, 
the deity of Christ, and the virgin birth.[20] After much debate and 
consideration, the Students' Association decided to sever its 
relationship with the Middle Atlantic Association of Theological 
Seminaries and to form an organization of seminaries which would be 
committed to the great truths of the Bible. On April 4, 1925, in the 
city of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, twelve representatives from six 
theological institutions met and formed what is known as the League of 
Evangelical Students.[21] The doctrinal basis was indicated in the 
constitution of the league, in which certain dogmas such as the 
infallibility of the Bible, the Trinity, the virgin birth, the bodily 
resurrection, the substitutionary atonement, and the coming again of 
Jesus Christ were declared essential to the Christian religion.[22] 
Since that time the league has grown to large proportions, having 
chapters in fifty-eight theological seminaries, universities, and Bible 
schools.

The establishment of the League of Evangelical Students brought the 
president of the seminary at Princeton and the majority of the faculty 
into sharp disagreement over its advisability and necessity. The 
president maintained that the league dissociated Princeton from the 
seminaries of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, because most of them 
refused to join the league. In the second place, he declared that the 
league allowed Bible schools to become members and so the firm stand at 
Princeton, "that religion without sound learning must ultimately prove 
injurious to the church," would be undermined. He further stated, "shall 
this institution now be permitted to swing off to the extreme right wing 
so as to become an interdenominational Seminary for Bible 
School-premillennial-secession fundamentalism?"[23]

The majority of the faculty had an entirely different conception of the 
need and influence of the league on the campus of the seminary and in 
the world at large. Their general feeling is perhaps best expressed by 
Dr. Machen when he wrote,

    It [a spiritual advance] has been signally manifested at the 
institution which I have the honor to serve. The morale of our 
theological student body had been becoming rather low: there was a 
marked indifference to the central things of the faith: and religious 
experience was of the most superficial kind. But during the academic 
year, 1924-25 there has been something like an awakening.... 
Controversy, in other words, has resulted in a striking intellectual and 
spiritual advance. Some of us discern in all this the work of the Spirit 
of God. And God grant that his fire be not quenched.[24]

The majority of the faculty, while they did not enter into the affairs 
of the student body directly, nevertheless by their teaching and general 
attitude encouraged the students to continue their testimony among 
seminary and college students. So once again the difference in attitude 
toward doctrine between the president and faculty and the need for 
contending for the faith became clear.

In the spring of 1925 the question of the election of a faculty student 
adviser came before the cabinet of the Students' Association of the 
seminary. The president, W. C. Wright, was personally in favor of asking 
Dr. Erdman to continue in this office which he had held for twenty 
years, although other members of the cabinet preferred some other 
faculty member. Acting on his supposed prerogative in this regard, Mr. 
Wright asked Dr. Erdman to accept the office, which Dr. Erdman did. The 
cabinet called a special meeting, revoked Mr. Wright's appointment, and 
voted to ask the faculty to appoint an adviser from among its members. 
This resulted in the election of Dr. Robert Dick Wilson. The faculty 
felt obliged to make this selection because sympathy with the plans of 
the Students' Association was necessary, and Dr. Erdman had declared 
himself as opposed to the League of Evangelical Students which had been 
recently organized. In all of this controversy over the student adviser, 
Dr. Stevenson was much opposed to the majority of the faculty.[25]

The attitude of the majority of the faculty and of Dr. Stevenson toward 
the report of the commission of fifteen which had been appointed by the 
General Assembly of 1925 to "study the present spiritual condition of 
our Church and the causes making for unrest" differed sharply. Dr. 
Macartney, a member of the board of directors and Dr. Allis, a member of 
the faculty, voiced their serious indictment of the report. Dr. 
Macartney characterized it as a victory won by a "coalition of 
modernists, indifferentists and pacifists,"[26] while Dr. Stevenson 
found in the report a source of much satisfaction.[27]

The differences between Dr. Stevenson and the faculty assumed a personal 
note when Dr. Machen was nominated to the chair of apologetics and 
Christian ethics by the faculty on May 10, 1926.[28] This nomination was 
placed before the General Assembly in May, 1926, for approval, at which 
time Drs. Stevenson and Erdman opposed it vigorously on the ground of 
Dr. Machen's alleged temperamental unfitness for the position. The 
assembly took no action on Dr. Machen's nomination.[29] This attitude 
and action on the part of the president widened the breach still more.

During this heated discussion and debate between Dr. Stevenson and the 
majority of the faculty, Dr. Erdman accused the majority of the faculty, 
and especially Dr. Machen, of labeling him as one who was strengthening 
the "forces of rationalism" when he accepted the pastorate of the First 
Presbyterian Church, Princeton, New Jersey. The basis for Dr. Erdman's 
assertion was an editorial in The Presbyterian, January 15, 1925, which 
commented upon Dr. Henry Van Dyke's return to the First Presbyterian 
Church, Princeton, New Jersey, from which he had departed in 1924 as a 
protest against Dr. Machen's preaching. The Presbyterian stated,

    In a recent notice of the installation of Dr. Erdman, the inquiry 
was raised as to the significance of attempting to unite the rationalism 
of the university, represented by Drs. Van Dyke and Hibben, with the 
evangelicism of the seminary, represented by Dr. Erdman. Does this 
action of Dr. Van Dyke signify that the rationalists have gained an 
important advantage from the combination? If so, the situation and the 
new combination is threatening sacred interests.

To this comment Dr. Erdman replied with considerable agitation,

    Allow me to reply, that I repudiate your insinuations as unfounded, 
unwarranted, unkind and un-Christian.... You intimate that a division 
exists in the seminary faculty. No such division exists on points of 
doctrine. Every member of the faculty is absolutely loyal to the 
standards of our church. The only division I have observed is as to 
spirit, methods or policies. This division would be of no consequence 
were it not for the unkindness, suspicion, bitterness and intolerance of 
those members of the faculty who are also editors of The 
Presbyterian.[30]

Since Dr. Machen was the only member of the faculty who was also an 
editor of The Presbyterian, this rather abusive characterization could 
only refer to him. Dr. Machen immediately explained,

    I do not remember having contributed a line to the paper which has 
not appeared under my own name, and I was quite unacquainted beforehand 
with the reference to my former relation and Dr. Erdman's present 
relation to the First Presbyterian Church of Princeton, to which he 
takes special exception.

    ... With regard to Dr. Erdman's letter, I desire to say two things. 
In the first place, I regret the personal tone in which the letter is 
couched.... But in what do our differences consist? That question brings 
me to the second thing that I desire to say in answer to the letter.

    Dr. Erdman says that no division exists in the faculty of Princeton 
Seminary on "points of doctrine." That assertion I hold to be not 
altogether correct. There is between Dr. Erdman and myself a very 
serious doctrinal difference indeed. It concerns the question not of 
this doctrine or that, but of the importance which is to be attributed 
to doctrine as such.... Dr. Erdman does not indeed reject the doctrinal 
system of our church, but he is perfectly willing on many occasions to 
keep it in the background. I, on the other hand, can never consent to 
keep it in the background.[31]

This personal equation which entered into the debate only aggravated the 
differences between Dr. Stevenson and the faculty still more, and caused 
Dr. Stevenson in May, 1925, to appeal to the board of directors to 
appoint a committee to adjust the problems within the faculty.[32] A 
committee of seven was appointed but no real accomplishment was 
forthcoming, mostly because the underlying disagreement was so profound 
that no discussion could heal the breach; rather, it required a change 
of doctrinal viewpoint which was highly unlikely to take place in either 
party.

This clash between Dr. Stevenson and the faculty, which had caused 
considerable agitation in the church at large, compelled the trustees 
and a minority of the board of directors of the seminary in May, 1926, 
to make a request of the General Assembly through its Standing Committee 
on Theological Seminaries to appoint a special committee to investigate 
matters at Princeton Seminary. On June 2, 1926, the General Assembly 
took the following action,

    That the Assembly appoint a Committee of three ministers and two 
elders to make a sympathetic study of conditions affecting the welfare 
of Princeton Seminary and to cooperate responsively with seminary 
leaders in striving to adjust and harmonize differences and to report to 
the next Assembly.[33]

The committee visited the Princeton campus and had conferences with the 
faculty, the board of directors, the board of trustees, the alumni, and 
the students. In every one of these bodies they found the same division 
as was manifest in the faculty, namely, one party which believed that 
Princeton was founded to teach and to defend, in its purity and 
integrity, the Westminster Confession of Faith as the system of doctrine 
taught in the Bible, and that an aggressive stand should be taken 
against the encroachment of unbelief in the church; and a second party 
which contended with Dr. Stevenson, the president, that the seminary 
should represent the whole church, that the disagreement between him and 
the faculty was administrative, and that certain members of the faculty, 
of whom Dr. Machen was the chief offender, were disturbers of the peace 
of the institution.

The majority of the board of directors, the faculty, and the students 
agreed that the issue was doctrinal and that the attitude toward 
doctrine was important. On the other hand, the president, a majority of 
the trustees, and many alumni felt strongly that if the two boards could 
be merged into one, the difficulties at the institution would be 
eliminated, because in their judgment the real trouble was 
administrative.[34]

The findings of the committee which were given to the following assembly 
can be summarized in this one sentence from their report, "The root and 
source of the serious difficulties at Princeton and the greatest 
obstacle to the removal of these difficulties, seem to be in the plan of 
government by two boards."[35] The committee presented recommendations 
which were adopted by the 1927 General Assembly.[36]

They urged the appointment of a committee of eleven with power to 
recommend amendments to the charter of the seminary in order to 
establish a single board of control. They also asked that the 
appointments of the Rev. O. T. Allis and the Rev. J. Gresham Machen as 
full professors be not confirmed until the reorganization had been 
effected.

The Rev. Samuel G. Craig, D.D., a director of the seminary and a 
representative of the majority on the board of directors, made a very 
able criticism of the report of the committee of five. His main 
contention was that the committee exceeded its instructions and 
authority in making its recommendations.[37] Dr. Craig further accused 
the committee of misrepresenting the faculty and the board of directors 
and of issuing a report which was essentially an ex parte document. He 
also pointed out what the majority of the faculty and of the board of 
directors had frequently maintained namely, that the question of one or 
two boards was beside the point.[38]

At the General Assembly in 1928 the committee of eleven presented 
recommendations calling for a single board of control of thirty-three 
members, certain necessary charter amendments, and enlarged powers for 
the president of the seminary.[39]

The report of the committee of eleven was not unanimous, however, since 
the Rev. Ethelbert D. Warfield, D.D., brought in a minority report of 
one in which he made several criticisms of the majority report, the most 
important of which stated that "the report and its recommendations give 
no ground for hope that they will terminate or allay the discord in the 
Seminary and the Church."[40]

At the same General Assembly a petition containing the signatures of 
over ten thousand ministers and elders of the church representing more 
than thirty synods asked, "We, therefore, the signers of this Petition, 
earnestly pray you to reject the reorganization of the Seminary 
recommended to the General Assembly of 1927 by the Special Committee to 
visit Princeton, and thus to leave the control of this great institution 
where it now resides."[41]

The Rev. W. P. Armstrong, D.D., professor of New Testament at Princeton, 
made a thorough study of the proposed charter amendments, in which he 
demonstrated that some of these were illegal and others unnecessary.[42] 
There will be no attempt here to enter into a study of these amendments 
because that discussion is not essential to the main purpose of this 
book.

The majority and minority reports were ordered placed on the docket of 
the 1929 General Assembly, and the board of directors of Princeton was 
instructed to attempt to compose differences at the seminary and to make 
a report to the next assembly.[43] The board of directors attempted to 
carry out these instructions, but the division in the board became 
apparent when a minority and a majority report was presented to the 1929 
Assembly. The majority report, signed by seventeen, practically agreed 
with the recommendations of the committee of eleven, while the minority 
of ten stated that the main cause of the trouble at Princeton was the 
ambition of president Stevenson, who desired to shift the historic 
doctrinal position of the seminary from the Old School theology to an 
inclusive doctrinal position. "It is here that we find the main cause of 
the serious differences at Princeton Seminary."[44] The minority 
recommended only slight changes in the original plan of the seminary, 
all of which tended to limit the power of the president so that his 
actions would be subject to the advice of the board of directors in 
cooperation with the faculty. The president was also eliminated as a 
member of the board of directors.[45]

In spite of these pleas by the ten thousand ministers and elders and the 
minority on the board of directors, the report of the special committee 
of eleven was adopted by the 1929 Assembly.[46] The report called for 
one board of trustees of thirty-three members, one-third from the old 
board of trustees, one-third from the old board of directors, and 
one-third from the church at large, and the enlargement of the powers of 
the president.

The temporary board of trustees, which was approved as the permanent 
board of trustees by the 1930 General Assembly,[47] made the Rev. W. L. 
McEwan, D.D., chairman. The Rev. Clarence E. Macartney, D.D., declined 
to serve on the board, and the Rev. Robert Dick Wilson, Ph.D., D.D., the 
Rev. J. Gresham Machen, D.D., the Rev. Oswald T. Allis, Ph.D., D.D., and 
the Rev. Cornelius Van Til, Ph.D., refused to continue as members of the 
teaching staff under the new board of trustees. And so, with these 
drastic alterations in management and faculty, the reorganization of 
Princeton Seminary became a reality.

This has been only a rapid survey of the tremendous changes which took 
place at Princeton in 1929, but a description of the many public 
meetings, articles, and debates which occurred, and the bitterness, 
animosities, and heartaches which were created have been purposely 
omitted in order to keep the account as factual as possible.

With the completion of the reorganization of Princeton Seminary the 
question naturally arises: Were the fears of the minority of the board 
of directors, the faculty, the students, and many alumni fulfilled, and 
was the historic doctrinal position of the institution changed from Old 
School theology or biblical Christianity to twentieth-century 
Barthianism and modernism? It is safe to assert without hesitation that 
those fears were fulfilled. A few facts as evidence will prove that 
statement.

Upon this new board of trustees were placed two ministers, the Rev. W. 
Beatty Jennings, D.D., and the Rev. Asa J. Ferry, D.D., who had signed 
the Auburn Affirmation, which, as was pointed out in chapter two, 
declared that the belief in the infallibility of holy Scripture, the 
substitutionary atonement, the virgin birth, the bodily resurrection of 
our Lord, and the miracles of Jesus Christ is non-essential to the 
Christian faith, and that the doctrine of the infallibility of the holy 
Scripture is harmful. The Rev. J. Ross Stevenson, D.D., LL.D., the 
president of the seminary, and the Rev. W. L. McEwan, D.D., chairman of 
the board of trustees, put their stamp of approval upon these signers of 
the Auburn Affirmation on the board, and so upon the attitude which the 
document advocated, in the letter which they jointly signed and 
addressed to the "Alumni, Students and Friends of Princeton Theological 
Seminary" in September, 1929, and in which they claimed that the new 
board of trustees was worthy of the church's confidence and qualified to 
direct the educational policies of the seminary, and that the entire 
faculty was loyal to the Bible.[48] Anyone acquainted with the Princeton 
of the Hodges, Warfield, Greene, and Machen could not conceive of its 
approval of men on the board of directors who held such anti-Reformed 
and modernist ideas.

At the present time only two professors of the regime prior to 1929 
remain: the Rev. F. W. Loetscher, Ph.D., D.D., and the Rev. W. P. 
Armstrong, D.D., as all of the other professors who did not resign in 
1929 are retired or dead. In 1936 Dr. J. Ross Stevenson was retired as 
president and the Rev. John A. Mackay, Ph.D., D.D., was elected to fill 
that office.[49] Dr. Mackay has carried the institution much more to the 
left. The professors who have been asked to serve at Princeton at his 
invitation have, for the most part, been men who hold to Barthianism in 
some form. In fact, Dr. Mackay himself embraces this theology.[50]

Wherein does Barthianism, or the theology of crisis, differ from the 
historic position of Princeton? someone might ask. The difference lies 
chiefly in two matters: first, concerning the authority of the Bible, 
and second, the conception of history. The Barthian school of theology 
does not believe in the infallibility of holy Scripture, while the old 
Princeton was noted for its insistence on this doctrine. As Charles 
Hodge once wrote,

    On this subject the common doctrine of the Church is, and ever has 
been, that inspiration was an influence of the Holy Spirit on the minds 
of certain select men, which rendered them the organs of God for the 
infallible communication of his mind and will. They were in such a sense 
the organs of God, that what they said God said.[51]

Emil Brunner, guest professor of systematic theology at Princeton 
1938-1939, on the other hand, believes that the Bible is the Word of 
God, but only in a very restricted sense. He uses the illustration of 
the phonograph record. The voice of Caruso comes forth from the 
megaphone but there also is heard the scratchings of the needle which 
are comparable to the human errors and mistakes in the Bible.[52]

When the final authority of the Bible is rejected, one is compelled to 
fall back on an authority in religion which is the church or some form 
of human experience. The Barthians do not accept the church as the final 
authority, as do the Roman Catholics, but rather in the last analysis 
must resort to an authority which is to be found in fallible human 
experience. And this they do.

It is the Scripture's testimony to itself as being from God, 
"God-breathed" and the Word of God, which must be the ultimate judge of 
the kind of inspiration. If the testimony of the Bible to itself as the 
Word of God is not to be accepted, how can one trust the authority of 
the Bible for faith and conduct? The belief in the full trustworthiness 
of the Bible is the "impregnable rock" of Christianity and is the only 
consistent and logical position which a Christian can maintain. It is 
the doctrine of historic Christianity. Most assuredly, it was the 
doctrine of the old Princeton.

Such a theology as Barthianism is essentially modernist because upon 
Barth's premises every doctrine and practice must inevitably find its 
authority in the experience of man as the determining factor. At heart 
this theology will destroy the true genius of Protestantism, which looks 
to the revelation of God in the Bible as the final arbiter of faith and 
conduct.

The same tendency to emphasize experience rather than the Bible as the 
norm for Christian life is manifest in Dr. Mackay's endorsement of 
Buchmanism, a movement which includes men and women of all shades of 
thought and belief and which judges the validity of a person's religion 
by the quality of his "changed life" experience.[53] In opposition to 
this point of view the Princeton of old fought, and fought vigorously, 
to show the vagaries of human experience in all of its subtleties and to 
demonstrate that human experience, instead of being a guide in religion, 
must itself be tested and judged by the Bible.

The Barthian conception of history also destroys the very foundation of 
Christianity. Historic Christianity declares that the virgin birth and 
the bodily resurrection of Jesus Christ are events in history, but many 
Barthians claim that these facts are only pointers to the real events 
which take place in "supra-history." Such a contention not only makes 
the narratives in Matthew and Luke concerning the virgin birth and the 
account in I Corinthians 15 describing the bodily resurrection 
meaningless, but the historical foundation of Christianity is utterly 
demolished. It is upon such events in the external world as the birth, 
death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ that Christianity is built. If 
these are not to be regarded as actual historical facts in the plain 
sense, then Christianity as revealed in the Bible loses all meaning. 
When Barthianism is examined closely, it is clear that this attempt to 
place these events in the category of the "supra-historical" is only a 
subtle way of trying to avoid the conflict between the miraculous in 
Christianity and modern scientific ideas. Barthianism's unwillingness to 
accept the historical events of redemption as they are revealed in the 
Bible and as real events in time, sets it in opposition to biblical 
Christianity.

In order to demonstrate further what little regard the new president has 
for the old Princeton, that is, the Princeton prior to 1929, and its 
defense and exposition of historic Christianity, notice should be taken 
of the fact that the Rev. L. R. Farmer, D.D., LL.D., a signer of the 
Auburn Affirmation, was visiting professor of homiletics during the 
academic year 1937-38.[54] This is the first time in the history of the 
institution that any one has been on the faculty who has declared in a 
public document, or in any other way, that the five doctrines mentioned 
in the Affirmation are only theories, and that the belief in an 
infallible Bible weakens the testimony of the five doctrines enumerated.

In another way and in a way more discernible to those not theologically 
trained, the new Princeton has made its position abundantly clear. 
Before 1929, the professors at Princeton were very audible in their 
protest against unbelief not only in the world at large, but also in the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA itself. The men at Princeton assumed the 
leadership in attempting to keep the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
loyal to the Westminster Confession of Faith. Without question the 
seminary was the citadel of orthodoxy. Now the lack of protest against 
the evident modernism among the ministers in that church is almost 
eloquent in its silence. When the amendments to the Confession of Faith 
were proposed at the turn of the century, it was the faculty at 
Princeton, led by Warfield, who protested against them because of their 
tendency to weaken the testimony of the church to the truth. It was the 
Princeton faculty who wrote and spoke against the proposed union with 
the eighteen churches in 1918 on the ground of its unevangelical 
doctrinal basis. In fact, whenever a voice was needed to warn the church 
of unbelief, the men at Princeton were ready to raise their voices in 
behalf of the Bible. Now where are the one-time champions of the faith 
at Princeton? They are not there. Princeton has changed—and changed 
radically.

The modernists themselves have noticed this radical change. Once The 
Christian Century, the leading modernist religious weekly in America, 
ridiculed the antiquated and obscurantist theology at Princeton, while 
now it has taken Dr. Mackay to its bosom[55] and finds space available 
for members of the faculty at Princeton, which formerly was not at their 
disposal save for an occasional article in some series of theological 
debate. The Princeton Seminary of Hodge, Warfield, and Machen is no 
more, and the world knows it.

One of two things has happened since 1929: either the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA has become entirely free from modernism and 
anti-scriptural tendencies so that the Princeton professors have no 
occasion for protest, or else Princeton Seminary has fallen in line with 
the temper of the day and has become more liberal in its theological 
program and attitude. The following chapters will attempt to show that 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA, instead of becoming more loyal to 
the Westminster Confession of Faith, has succumbed more and more to the 
inroads of modernism. The only possible conclusion is that Princeton has 
been definitely liberalized, as shown not only by the writings of the 
professors, but also by the lack of defense of historic Christianity 
within the councils of the church.

The editors of The Boston Evening Transcript wrote,

    One cannot say what will happen at Princeton Theological Seminary, 
but one hopes that the house will stand. Clearly the battle at Princeton 
has a significance reaching far beyond its local scene. Its forces, its 
bitterness, give strong indication that the issues there in contest, as 
in other parts of the United States, are the dominant issues of the 
religious thought of our times. Certainly with regard to the Protestant 
denominations, it now seems clear that upon the outcome of the warfare, 
whether for weal or woe, the future character of Protestant Christianity 
depends.[56]

Princeton Seminary did not stand as it stood before. Its influence is 
now exerted in the direction away from historic Christianity, and that 
defection has profoundly affected not only the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA, but also the complexion of Protestantism in America.

Chapter 4. Westminster Theological Seminary

WHEN THE General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA made the 
reorganization of Princeton Seminary final in June, 1929, certain former 
directors and faculty members of the seminary and a group of 
Presbyterian laymen and ministers, mostly from Philadelphia and 
vicinity, met to discuss the launching of another theological 
institution, Presbyterian in doctrine and of high scholarship, which 
would carry on the traditions of Princeton Seminary before its 
reorganization. The initial meeting took place on June 17, 1929, in New 
York City at the University Club by invitation of the Rev. Walter D. 
Buchanan, D.D., pastor of the Broadway Presbyterian Church, New York 
City. Presbyterians from five or six presbyteries who were present at 
this meeting passed the following resolution:

    Resolved, That this group will support the loyal members of the 
former Board of Directors of Princeton Theological Seminary in any step 
they may see fit to take (1) Toward preventing by legal means the misuse 
of the Seminary's funds or (2) Toward the formation of a new seminary if 
they decide that it is necessary.[1]

It was the Rev. Charles Schall, D.D., pastor of the Presbyterian Church, 
Wayne, Pennsylvania, who first conceived of the idea of a new seminary 
after the destruction of Princeton and started influences which made the 
idea a reality. He had luncheon with two elders in Philadelphia, T. E. 
Ross and F. M. Paist, and discovered that they and many other elders in 
Philadelphia were willing and eager to launch a new seminary in the fall 
of 1929 if that were possible. At the Arts Club in Philadelphia eight 
elders and Drs. Wilson, Machen, and Allis met for luncheon and discussed 
curriculum, professors, location, and a budget for the proposed 
seminary. Sufficient funds were pledged at that meeting for the first 
year's expenses to encourage further efforts to make the plans an 
actuality. Following this luncheon seventy-eight men, composed of former 
Princeton directors, faculty, and students, and Presbyterian ministers 
and elders, met at the central YMCA, Philadelphia, July 18, 1929, at 
which time a temporary executive committee was formed and the seminary 
was definitely launched.[2]

The executive committee chosen consisted of ministers: Maitland 
Alexander, Roy T. Brumbaugh, Walter D. Buchanan, Samuel G. Craig, 
Charles Schall, and Frank H. Stevenson, and elders: Roland K. Armes, 
Edgar Frutchey, Frederic M. Paist (chairman), James L. Rankin, T. Edward 
Ross, James F. Schrader, John L. Steele, and Morgan H. Thomas, with Drs. 
Robert Dick Wilson, J. Gresham Machen, and Oswald T. Allis in an 
advisory capacity. Westminster Theological Seminary was selected as the 
name for the new institution.

Among those who later joined the board of trustees, the name of the Rev. 
Clarence E. Macartney, D.D., a former moderator of the General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, is the most prominent, although 
many others who were well-known pastors of large Presbyterian 
congregations and laymen of influential positions in the professional 
and business world also consented to serve. Westminster Seminary began 
its first academic year on September 25, 1929, with an enrollment of 
fifty students.

This meager description of the founding of the institution does not 
portray the faith, courage, work, and real heroism of that small band of 
men who actually launched the seminary in less than four months after 
the reorganization of Princeton. Drs. Wilson, Machen, and Allis spent 
the entire summer in speaking, writing articles, preparing the 
curriculum, securing professors, and carrying on a large correspondence 
in order to secure the opening of the institution in September of that 
year. The Rev. Paul Woolley, registrar, labored tirelessly in preparing 
the student rooms and the classrooms at 1528 Pine Street (which had been 
placed at the disposal of the school, rent free, by Dr. Allis), and in 
answering multitudinous questions about the new seminary. The laymen on 
the executive committee also did yeoman service, particularly in 
securing funds.

No report of the organization of Westminster would be proper without 
special mention of the tremendous work which was accomplished by the 
Rev. Frank H. Stevenson, D.D., who became president of the board of 
trustees, and who was the guiding spirit in the administrative policies 
of the seminary. His large experience as an executive served to prepare 
him in a peculiar way for the task of steering the ship through the 
rough seas of the worst financial depression that this country has ever 
seen, and which overtook America only one month after Westminster was 
founded. Much credit must be given to him for guiding the seminary in a 
remarkable way, so that the infant institution remained free of debt. It 
was he who had published the article, "A Pastor Looks at Princeton," 
which was one of the most incisive and well-written discussions of the 
entire controversy. He had been a member of the board of directors at 
Princeton and before that of Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati, as 
well as the successful pastor of the Church of the Covenant, Cincinnati. 
He came to his position as president of the board of trustees of the new 
seminary bearing the scars of battle and prepared for the task which 
confronted him. His untimely death at the age of fifty-one in 1934 was a 
severe blow to the young and struggling institution.

The faculty at Westminster Seminary was composed of four professors from 
Princeton: Robert Dick Wilson, who was chosen chairman of the faculty, 
J. Gresham Machen, Oswald T. Allis, and Cornelius Van Til; the Rev. R. 
B. Kuiper, who had been a graduate student at Princeton under B. B. 
Warfield, and a pastor in Reformed churches for nearly a quarter of a 
century, and three recent graduates of Princeton: Allan A. MacRae, Ned 
B. Stonehouse, and Paul Woolley, who had pursued graduate studies in 
Europe. A year later Mr. John Murray, who had taught at Princeton 
Seminary, joined the faculty.

Professor Robert Dick Wilson was considered to be an outstanding scholar 
in the Old Testament, especially in Semitic studies, and a great 
defender of the faith. Dr. J. Gresham Machen had come to be regarded as 
one of the leading exponents of historic Christianity. He, more than any 
one else, was the central figure of the controversy at Princeton and the 
theological leader of the conservatives. Dr. O. T. Allis had been the 
editor of the scholarly Princeton Theological Review, and in this 
position had gained an international reputation for his exact and 
thorough grasp of orthodox Christianity. Dr. Cornelius Van Til, who had 
taught only a year at Princeton in the department of apologetics, has 
since attained a place of prestige in that field of theology. Professor 
R. B. Kuiper now holds the chair of practical theology, and from his 
abundant experience in the pastorate and his unique gifts as a preacher, 
is teaching the young men to become faithful ministers of the Word of 
God. The four young men who were added to the faculty were brilliant 
students at Princeton and give promise of a large future in theological 
scholarship. Two others, the Rev. Edward J. Young and the Rev. John H. 
Skilton, were later made members of the faculty in the departments of 
Old and New Testament respectively.

Westminster Seminary is independent of ecclesiastical control, but it is 
not interdenominational or nondenominational in character, for it is 
committed to the Westminster Confession of Faith as the system of 
doctrine taught in the Bible and to the Presbyterian form of church 
government. Yet it welcomes students from many church bodies, and since 
the seminary was founded they have come from thirty-four different 
denominations.

Why was Westminster Theological Seminary founded? The catalogue of the 
institution states,

    Westminster Theological Seminary was founded in 1929 to carry on and 
perpetuate the policies and traditions of Princeton Seminary as that 
institution existed prior to its reorganization by the General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.

    The need for the new seminary is due ultimately to a long process of 
defection from the Christian faith which has been going on in the 
Protestant churches of the world during the past one hundred years; but 
the special occasion was found in certain recent events in the 
Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.[3]

In an address at the opening exercises of Westminster, September 25, 
1929, Dr. Machen said among other things,

    No, my friends, though Princeton Seminary is dead, the noble 
tradition of Princeton Seminary is alive. Westminster Seminary will 
endeavor by God's grace to continue that tradition unimpaired; it will 
endeavor, not on a foundation of equivocation and compromise, but on an 
honest foundation of devotion to God's Word, to maintain the same 
principles that old Princeton maintained. We believe, first, that the 
Christian religion, as it is set forth in the Confession of Faith of the 
Presbyterian Church, is true; we believe, second, that the Christian 
religion welcomes and is capable of scholarly defense; and we believe, 
third, that the Christian religion should be proclaimed without fear or 
favor, and in clear opposition to whatever opposes it, whether within or 
without the church, as the only way of salvation for lost mankind.[4]

In this pronouncement Dr. Machen laid down the platform upon which the 
seminary appeals for support and upon which the professors teach.

Westminster Seminary, in other words, is more than a protest against the 
trend toward modernism at Princeton Seminary; more than an institution 
set for the defense of the gospel; and even more than a seminary to 
carry on the traditions and policies of the old Princeton. It is a 
lighthouse of Christian learning. The seminary and its graduates are 
fired with a zeal to teach and to preach that men must believe in the 
God of the Bible if they are to know God as their heavenly Father, and 
if they are to have a consistent, logical, and reasonable view of the 
world. The seminary assumes the offensive in the warfare against 
paganism in its many forms. It is not content to find a way of escape 
from intellectual difficulties in religion by succumbing to the modern 
day emphasis upon individual experience as the norm for Christian 
thinking and living. On the other hand, by painstaking, accurate, and 
thorough scholarship it ventures to maintain that the Bible is true, 
that the Christian gospel is the power of God unto salvation, and that 
the Christian position is the only intellectually honest one.

The seminary's short history has demonstrated that the founders were 
determined to keep the institution devoted to the Westminster Confession 
as the system of doctrine taught in the Bible and to the Presbyterian 
form of church government. The professors have always taught the 
students to preach the gospel and to be equally vigilant in maintaining 
it in the councils of the church. As a result of this consistent 
teaching, the seminary has been much attacked, and two crises have 
developed within its board of trustees and faculty.

When the seminary came into being, much was said and written about the 
main conflict between paganism and Christianity, and little by 
comparison was stated concerning the Presbyterian character of 
Westminster and the need for upholding the full and consistent view of 
Christianity as set forth in Calvinism. Men like Dr. Machen made it 
abundantly plain that Westminster was not only orthodox, but definitely 
Reformed in its doctrinal basis. On the other hand, the general defense 
against modernism placed the conflict on a broader basis, and the 
distinctively Calvinistic character of Westminster was not strongly 
emphasized. A glance at the past ten years of Westminster Seminary will 
show that the failure to keep foremost the high biblical stand of the 
institution as a seminary of the Reformed persuasion led to serious 
misunderstandings.

When Westminster was organized three different groups of men were 
appointed to the board of trustees. No one knew at the time that this 
situation obtained, but the ensuing events have made it evident.

First, there were thorough-going Presbyterians who were resolved to 
maintain true doctrine regardless of cost. These men were ministers and 
laymen of the Presbyterian Church in the USA who felt the need of making 
a good witness for the gospel, not only from the pulpits of the church 
but also in the meetings of presbyteries, synods, and general 
assemblies. They were aware of the presence of ministers in the church 
who controlled much of its ecclesiastical life and who were opposed to 
the Westminster Confession of Faith. Consequently, the seminary had been 
formed, at least in one respect, with the hope of sending consecrated 
and courageous young men into the ministry of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA to stem the rising tide of unbelief. This group of trustees, as 
well as members of the faculty, was convinced that if that course 
failed, true Presbyterianism must be preserved in some other way.

A second group in the board of trustees and faculty, also ministers and 
laymen of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, was equally determined to 
supply loyal ministers for the church, but, as it developed, they were 
not willing to pay the price of pursuing another course of continuing a 
true witness to the Reformed faith if the first method of reforming the 
church failed.

A third group in the board of trustees was composed of ministers and 
laymen of the same church who were opposed to modernism in the church 
and wanted to train faithful ministers of the Word of God. These members 
were non-denominational in their convictions rather than definitely 
Presbyterian. At the outset all members of the Board appeared to be of 
the same mind with the first group, but the two crises which developed 
required decisions, and the above divisions appeared.

Efforts were made in 1933, particularly by certain members of the 
faculty of whom Dr. Machen was the leader, and members of the board of 
trustees of the seminary, to reform the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA.[5] When these efforts failed, a mission 
society, independent of ecclesiastical control and named the Independent 
Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions, was formed. Three members of 
the faculty and nine members of the board of trustees of the seminary 
became members of that mission society. The General Assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA issued a mandate in 1934 ordering members 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA to resign from the Independent 
Board or suffer discipline. The members of the seminary faculty and 
board of trustees refused to resign from the Independent Board. This 
created dissension within the seminary family because some of the 
seminary board and one member of the faculty, led by Dr. Samuel G. 
Craig, felt that the Independent Board and Westminster Seminary should 
continue as separate institutions, and that sympathy with the seminary 
did not mean agreement with the establishment of the Independent Board. 
On the other hand, men like Dr. Machen were convinced that while the 
seminary and Independent Board were separate and distinct organizations, 
nevertheless the seminary's whole life and purpose were in hearty 
agreement with the attempt to reform the church and with the 
establishment of the Independent Board. In fact, Dr. Machen and the 
others argued that to take any other position would be to defeat the 
very reason for the organization of the seminary. If the seminary did 
not stand like a flint against the encroachments of modernism and 
unbelief in the church and was not willing to encourage its graduates to 
take the consequences of such a position, then the institution had no 
reason to exist.

The Rev. Samuel G. Craig, D.D., was editor of Christianity Today, which 
journal had been launched in May, 1930, when The Presbyterian, of which 
Dr. Craig had been editor, asked him to resign because of his vigorous 
protests against the reorganization of Princeton Seminary. The masthead 
of the first issue of Christianity Today declared it as "A Presbyterian 
Journal Devoted to Stating, Defending and Furthering the Gospel in the 
Modern World," and the editorial in the same issue stated among other 
things as its conviction, "that it is the duty of Christians to bear 
clear-cut witness to the Christian faith against all who oppose it, 
whether within or without the church." Contrary to this avowed purpose, 
so it seemed to Dr. Machen and many others, the paper had later on 
vigorously opposed the work of reformation within the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, as represented by the Independent Board and the 
Presbyterian Constitutional Covenant Union.[6] Consequently, the 
seminary had to make its position clear as to which group, Dr. Craig and 
his followers or the faculty, represented the seminary's attitude in the 
church crisis.

At the regular fall meeting of the board of trustees held on October 22, 
1935, the faculty presented a resolution asking the board to declare its 
position: was the seminary to continue in the vanguard of the gospel and 
the fight against modernism, or was it to lag in the rear of the battle 
and carry on the struggle in word only? The board finally upheld the 
faculty and voted to urge all those on the board opposed to the faculty 
to resign in order to allow the institution to continue.[7]

It is evident from this unique and generous resolution that it was the 
desire of those members of the board of trustees who were opposed to the 
faculty to preserve the witness of the seminary, rather than to have 
their opinion prevail and force most of the faculty to resign. Dr. O. T. 
Allis, a member of the faculty, was out of agreement with the other 
members of the faculty and resigned, stating, "I am taking this step 
voluntarily in the hope that the Seminary may be saved or at least be 
enabled to continue."[8]

Dr. Craig was the only member of the board of trustees who opposed this 
action in a vigorous way, and in order to make his protest formal he 
sent a long letter to each member of the board setting forth his reasons 
for disagreeing with the faculty. He presented five considerations which 
led him to vote against Dr. Macartney's resolution and that of the 
faculty. (1) It misstates the occasion and purpose of the establishment 
of Westminster Seminary. (2) It misstates the cause of the division that 
has been introduced into the affairs of the seminary. (3) It 
misrepresents the present editorial policy of Christianity Today and the 
present attitude of its editor. (4) It demands that the seminary 
identify its interests with those of the Independent Board and the 
Presbyterian Constitutional Covenant Union. (5) It contains a threat to 
wreck the seminary unless the demand just referred to is granted.[9]

At a specially called meeting of the board on January 7, 1936, thirteen 
members of the board and Dr. O. T. Allis of the faculty presented their 
resignations, and a statement was adopted by the board for release to 
the papers, which declared that the seminary would pursue its original 
purpose and policy of teaching and defending the Word of God.[10]

The Alumni Association of the seminary came to the defense of the 
institution and at its annual meeting on May 11, 1936, passed without a 
dissenting vote the resolution: "The Alumni Association hereby records 
its hearty approval of the present administration and policy of 
Westminster Theological Seminary."[11]

The departure of these thirteen members of the board of trustees and one 
member of the faculty was a serious loss to the seminary. It is a matter 
of regret that these men, some of whom were the conservative leaders of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA and men of large abilities, were 
unwilling to go the whole way in the attempt to reform the church. It is 
to be hoped that they will eventually see their mistake and once more 
support the seminary in a wholehearted fashion.

This ended the first great crisis in the life of Westminster and stamped 
it as an institution which would brook no compromise with modernism, and 
which was resolved to instill in the students a militant and aggressive 
attitude against unbelief in the councils of the church as well as from 
the pulpit. The original purpose of the seminary had been upheld and its 
consistent testimony to the truth had been kept clear.

A second crisis within the board of trustees and the faculty occurred in 
1937. This time it concerned the question of the distinctively 
Presbyterian character of the institution. Was it to be only a generally 
evangelical seminary, or was it to continue its original principles and 
stand for Presbyterianism, or Calvinism, as the system of doctrine 
taught in the Bible?

Mr. John Murray, professor of systematic theology at the seminary, began 
a series of articles on the general theme, "The Reformed Faith and 
Modern Substitutes," in the December 16, 1935, issue of the Presbyterian 
Guardian. In this series, which extended over a number of months, he 
dealt with such subjects as "The Limited Atonement," "Arminianism," 
"Total Depravity," and "Modern Dispensationalism." In considering the 
last named topic, he attempted to prove that dispensationalism of the 
Scofield Reference Bible type contradicts the teaching of the 
Westminster Confession of Faith. He exposed the false distinction 
between the kingdom of God and the kingdom of heaven in the New 
Testament made by Dr. Lewis Chafer, which implies that entrance into the 
kingdom of God is by the new birth, while entrance into the kingdom of 
heaven is by works. Mr. Murray made it plain that premillennialism as 
such was not under discussion, but simply some of the errors which had 
become attached to it.[12]

Dr. O. T. Allis, a member of the faculty, also wrote an article on this 
subject in The Evangelical Quarterly for January, 1936, defending the 
same point of view as that expressed by Mr. Murray. Another article 
added to the emphasis on this subject. After the First General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church of America, now the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church, professor R. B. Kuiper wrote a description of the formation of 
the church for The Banner (Christian Reformed), which was reprinted in 
the Presbyterian Guardian, in which he stated,

    The General Assembly had the privilege of examining several 
graduates of Westminster Seminary for licensure and ordination. It would 
have warmed the cockles of the heart of any Christian Reformed minister 
to hear how closely they were questioned about the two errors which are 
so extremely prevalent among American fundamentalists, Arminianism and 
the Dispensationalism of the Scofield Bible. The assembly wanted to make 
sure that these prospective ministers were not tainted with such 
anti-reformed heresies.[13]

These articles brought protests from certain members of the board of 
trustees of the seminary and a number of good people who had supported 
Westminster under the impression that it was a non-denominational 
institution. In fact, it was the knowledge that the thoroughgoing 
Calvinistic principles of the seminary were not sufficiently well-known 
which prompted the articles to be written by Mr. Murray. The criticisms 
which followed revealed only too clearly that the fears of the seminary 
leaders were well-grounded.

Another issue, quite irrelevant to the whole question and which obscured 
the real basic differences of doctrine, was the subject of Christian 
liberty, particularly concerning the drinking of fermented beverages, 
and the discussion of the so-called separated life, which sets up 
certain man-made standards apart from the Bible and judges a Christian's 
spirituality by his conformity to these norms.[14]

Professor Allan A. MacRae, Ph.D., assistant professor in charge of the 
department of Old Testament at the seminary, sympathized strongly with 
these criticisms and sent in his resignation to the board of trustees, 
in which he stated that the teaching at Westminster Seminary was now 
directed against fundamentalism and premillennialism instead of 
modernism, that the faculty vigorously defended the use of fermented 
beverages, that the students were being taught to accept views in 
opposition "to the great stream of Reformed, Evangelical Christianity in 
this country,"[15] and that the seminary had "passed into the hands of a 
small alien group." Ministers Roy Talmage Brumbaugh and Harold S. Laird, 
and elders Roland K. Armes and F. M. Paist resigned from the board of 
trustees for the same reasons.[16]

In protest, the above-named trustees and the Rev. Carl McIntire, with 
Dr. MacRae as chairman of the faculty, formed Faith Theological Seminary 
at Wilmington, Delaware, in September, 1937, which seminary is wedded to 
premillennialism and the so-called separated life. The seminary claims 
to be committed to Presbyterian doctrine, but the presence on the board 
of trustees of one Baptist, the Rev. David Otis Fuller, D.D., of Grand 
Rapids, Michigan, and one independent fundamentalist, the Rev. William 
R. McCarrell, D.D., of Cicero, Illinois, makes it clear that the 
institution is an inter-denominational one.[17]

The unwarranted attack by Dr. MacRae brought a quick response from the 
faculty and the students of Westminster Seminary, both of whom denied 
the allegations of intemperance at the institution and the statement 
that the seminary denied liberty of view with respect to the second 
coming of Christ.[18]

This division in the board of trustees and the faculty resulted in the 
Presbyterian and biblical witness of the seminary being firmly 
maintained. Fortunately, the seminary weathered the storm and continued 
on its course as an institution devoted to the Westminster Confession of 
Faith as the system of doctrine taught in the Bible, and more determined 
than ever to pursue its original purpose of teaching young men to insist 
upon loyalty to the Word of God in the administration of the church, as 
well as in proclaiming it each Sunday from the sacred desk.

The attack on Westminster Seminary from without was more bitter and very 
widespread. The hierarchy of the Presbyterian Church in the USA exerted 
tremendous efforts to still the voice of the institution. On August 1, 
1934, the general council of the Presbyterian Church in the USA sent a 
letter to all ministers and sessions of that church, signed by the 
moderator of the preceding general assembly, and stating among other 
things that "The Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions is 
a continuation of a divisive movement in the Presbyterian Church which 
five years ago resulted in the establishment of an independent seminary 
and which, if not stayed, will result in the formation of other 
independent Presbyterian agencies." The import of this is evident: 
Westminster Seminary is a harmful divisive movement which is threatening 
the future of the Presbyterian church.

This official letter is moderate in comparison with other and more 
drastic measures which were taken to suppress Westminster. For example, 
Mr. Calvin Cummings, a graduate of the seminary, was denied licensure in 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA because he refused to pledge blind 
allegiance to the official Board of Foreign Missions. There is nothing 
in the constitution of the church which requires such a vow for 
licensure, yet the Presbytery of Baltimore demanded that pledge. Advice 
that it should do this had been given by the stated clerk of the general 
assembly. No other interpretation of this action is possible than that a 
pope had suddenly appeared among Presbyterians who was bent on crushing 
the evangelical cause in the Presbyterian Church in the USA.

The Rev. Henry W. Coray, a graduate of Westminster Seminary and the 
pastor of the Presbyterian Church in West Pittston, Pennsylvania, 
applied several years before for appointment as a missionary under the 
official board of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, but he was denied 
this privilege. He then applied to the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions and was appointed to go to China. What 
happened? The Presbytery of Lackawanna refused to dissolve the pastoral 
relationship between Mr. Coray and his church because he was being sent 
out by the Independent Board, and declared that if he persisted his name 
would be erased from the roll of presbytery, which is equivalent in this 
case, as far as the Presbyterian Church in the USA is concerned, to 
excommunication. His name was actually erased from the roll of 
presbytery on November 12, 1934. In other words, a Presbyterian minister 
was not to be allowed to preach Christ unless he would become a slave of 
the hierarchy of the church. There were many other cases of high-handed 
methods. The reaction to this kind of propaganda and tactics resulted in 
sympathy for the seminary and an increased resolution on the part of the 
professors and the board of trustees to go straight on in the endeavor 
to teach the truth, no matter what persecution should arise.

A great and unexpected blow fell upon the seminary on January 1, 1937, 
when its leader, the Rev. J. Gresham Machen, D.D., Litt.D., passed away 
while on a missionary trip to North Dakota to present the cause of the 
Bible against modernism in the Presbyterian Church in the USA. He died 
as he had lived, fighting for the faith without compromise.[19]

Prior to this, two of the founders of the seminary had died: in 1930 the 
Rev. Robert Dick Wilson, Ph.D., D.D., LLD., a member of the faculty, and 
in 1934 the Rev. Frank H. Stevenson, D.D., the first president of the 
board of trustees.

After the death of Dr. Machen, the J. Gresham Machen Memorial Fund was 
announced in March, 1937, in order to raise funds for the purchase of a 
campus and buildings, and to secure the necessary $500,000 endowment, 
which sum is usually required by the state of Pennsylvania before an 
institution can grant theological degrees.[20] Up to this time the 
seminary had been housed in rented quarters at 1526 and 1528 Pine 
Street, Philadelphia. As a result of this campaign a beautiful 
twenty-two acre estate, located on the edge of Philadelphia and 
containing five buildings, was purchased in June, 1937, as the seminary 
campus. The main building was dedicated as the J. Gresham Machen 
Memorial Hall at the opening exercises on September 29, 1937.[21]

In 1938 the board of trustees approached the State Council of Education 
asking the council to recommend that the state courts give Westminster 
Seminary degree-granting power even though the half-million dollar 
endowment was not at hand. The state council made a thorough 
investigation of the seminary's academic standards and found them very 
high and fully warranting the power to grant degrees. The council voted 
unanimously to approve Westminster's application to grant the Th.B. 
degree, and the court approved the recommendation and the necessary 
charter amendments. Ordinarily the endowment is necessary but under 
certain circumstances, when an institution is receiving financial 
support equivalent in value to the endowment from members and 
congregations of religious organizations, this may be substituted for 
the endowment. Westminster Seminary satisfied the State Council of 
Education of Pennsylvania that such financial support was being 
received. At the tenth anniversary celebration and commencement 
exercises on May 9, 1939, nearly 100 of the 162 graduates of the past 
ten years who held the regular certificate of the seminary received 
their Th.B. degree. This brought to a successful conclusion the aims of 
the Machen Memorial Fund, and served as a fitting climax to the tenth 
anniversary celebration and a proper memorial to such a great theologian 
and Christian statesman as Dr. Machen.

This recital of the essential facts of the history of Westminster 
Theological Seminary must have impressed the reader with the unique 
character of the institution and with its exceptional resiliency. Few 
institutions have been subjected to such abuse, criticism, and vigorous 
attacks both from within and without. It places in bold relief the utter 
devotion of the seminary to the Bible regardless of persecution, and 
also the enduring qualities of the truth of Christianity under the most 
adverse circumstances.

Controversy in behalf of the truth against the trend of the times in the 
church as well as in the world has sharpened the knowledge of the gospel 
among the followers of the seminary, and has better prepared all those 
associated with the cause to fight the good fight of faith and to preach 
the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. For the past three years the unity 
of purpose among the board of trustees, the faculty, and the students of 
the institution gives promise of a large place of usefulness in the 
future.

The seminary's reputation as an institution which is committed to the 
Westminster Confession of Faith is now firmly established, and its 
scholarly presentation of the truths of the Bible has attracted students 
not only from many states, but from a number of foreign countries as 
well. Its graduates are located in twenty-three states and ten foreign 
lands where they are ministers, professors, and missionaries.

While Westminster's course has been rough and stormy, yet throughout the 
past ten years it has always held to the conviction that the Bible is 
true, that salvation is only by the grace of God apart from the works of 
man, and that the Christian conception of life is the only logical, 
consistent, and reasonable one. The uncertainty, doubt, and anxiety in 
the world today makes such a seminary a ray of hope, for from its halls 
come ministers of the gospel who preach not their own philosophies, but 
speak the authority of the Word of God, "Thus saith the Lord!"

Chapter 5. Union Movements

MANY ATTEMPTS at organic union between the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA and other church bodies have been made, three of which have already 
been discussed, but so far only three unions, one with the Associate 
Synod in 1822, one with the Cumberland Presbyterian Church in 1906, and 
one with the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist Church in 1920, have been 
consummated. Friendly correspondence has been maintained with several 
churches of the Reformed persuasion, but in most instances little 
progress has been made toward actual union.

In 1903 the General Assembly adopted the following vague resolution 
concerning relationships with other churches:

    The Presbyterian Church holds Christian fellowship with all who 
confess and obey Jesus Christ as their Divine Saviour and Lord, and 
acknowledges the duty of all Churches that recognize Him, as the only 
Head of the Church universal, to work together in harmony and love, for 
the extension of His kingdom and the good of the world; and this 
Assembly earnestly desires to commend and promote this Christian 
cooperation, and also practically to advance the cause of Church union 
by confederation, and, where possible, by consolidation among the 
Churches of the Reformed Faith, which are most nearly akin in doctrine 
and organization.[1]

Three movements in particular require detailed consideration because 
they have occupied the attention of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
for many years, and because they represent serious possibilities for 
organic union. These attempts also show the doctrinal laxity in the 
church and its growing indifference to doctrine.

In 1907 the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
received overtures from 113 presbyteries requesting that action be taken 
with a view to effecting organic union with the United Presbyterian 
Church of North America.[2] From that date on, friendly correspondence 
with the United Presbyterian Church continued, with overtures for union 
emanating from both bodies. But it was not until 1930, when the General 
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA received the following 
message from the committee on correspondence of the United Presbyterian 
General Assembly, "United Presbyterian General Assembly by practically 
unanimous vote adopted report of Committee on Presbyterian Unity 
authorizing committee to begin conferences with committees of other 
Presbyterian and Reformed Churches on plans for Organic Union,"[3] that 
the movement for union became a definite possibility.

The Department of Church Cooperation and Union under the chairmanship of 
the Rev. J. Ross Stevenson, D.D., then president of Princeton 
Theological Seminary and the chief protagonist of church union in the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, was authorized to enter into 
negotiations with other Presbyterian and Reformed churches in order to 
complete plans or a plan for organic union with any one or all of these 
bodies.[4] The United Presbyterian Church was the most receptive, so 
that several meetings between committees of the two churches were held. 
In 1932 a Plan of Union was presented to both general assemblies. The 
name proposed for the united church was "The Presbyterian Church of 
America." A pamphlet entitled, "Documents Relating to the Proposed 
Organic Union of the Presbyterian Church in the USA and the United 
Presbyterian Church of North America," was issued by the Joint Committee 
on Organic Union and widely distributed among the ministers of both 
churches. This pamphlet included the doctrinal basis for the union as 
well as the provisional form of government, book of discipline, and 
directory for worship.

Much criticism was centered about the doctrinal basis of the union, 
especially the confessional statement of 1925 of the United Presbyterian 
Church and the brief statement of the Reformed faith adopted by the 1902 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, both of which 
were included in the doctrinal basis. The strong objections to these 
statements, on the ground that they toned down the Calvinism of the 
Westminster Confession of Faith, compelled the joint committee to 
include these in the Plan of Union only as "historical interpretative 
statements." The Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments were to be 
regarded as the supreme standard, the only infallible rule of faith and 
practice. The subordinate standards were to be the Westminster 
Confession of Faith, together with the amendments adopted in 1903 by the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, and the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, 
all of which were recognized as agreeable to and founded upon the 
Scripture.[5]

Dr. J. Gresham Machen assumed a leading role in opposition to this 
proposed Plan of Union. He voiced no objection to a union between the 
two churches as such because they represented a common Reformed 
tradition, but he was against this proposed union for several 
reasons.[6]

First, he contended that the proposed form of government for union 
practically destroyed the rights of the local congregation. The Plan of 
Union made it possible for a presbytery to take over the affairs of a 
local church without any judicial process and use the resources and 
holdings of the local congregation contrary to its desires.[7]

Secondly, the Plan of Union made giving a tax and not a matter of 
free-will.

    If any person of known pecuniary ability fails in giving of his 
substance, the session should point out his obligation as revealed in 
the Word of God and the blessing attending its faithful discharge. If he 
still withhold from the treasury of the Lord, the session may deal with 
him as an offender.[8]

But a real central objection by Dr. Machen concerned the 1925 
confessional statement of the United Presbyterian Church, even though it 
was to be regarded only as an "historical interpretative statement." He 
argued that although the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and 
Shorter Catechisms, subject to the holy Scriptures, are to be the final 
authority in matters of doctrine,[9] a document like the "1925 
Confessional Statement" actually interprets away the purport of the 
Westminster Confession of Faith and so destroys its original meaning. 
For example, the confessional statement maintains that the holy 
Scriptures are "an infallible rule of faith and practice and the supreme 
source of authority in spiritual truth."[10] This article, he contended, 
makes a false distinction between historical truth and spiritual truth 
and so gives comfort to the central error of the day. On the other hand, 
a Christian believes that the Bible is true throughout; and therefore 
events in the external world, like the bodily resurrection of Jesus 
Christ, must be true.

In addition, the same article states that the writers of the Bible 
"though moved by the Holy Spirit, wrought in accordance with the laws of 
the human mind." This sentence, continued Dr. Machen, denies the 
supernaturalness of the Bible. "What is in accordance with the laws of 
the human mind or with any others of the laws of nature is natural, what 
is not in accordance with the laws of the human mind or any of the 
others of the laws of nature is supernatural."[11]

Another main objection to the Plan of Union concerned the formula of 
creed-subscription. The formula read, "Do you believe and acknowledge 
the system of doctrine professed by this Church as contained in the 
Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, as 
taught in the Word of God, and do you engage to adhere to and maintain 
its truths?"[12] Dr. Machen attacked this formula as undermining the 
faith of the church at the most vital point:

    According to the proposed new formula of creed-subscription the 
Bible may teach any number of systems and the system contained in the 
Westminster Confession of Faith may be held to be only one of them.... 
If the Bible contains various contradictory systems of doctrine, then 
the "infallibility" of the Bible spoken of in the first question of the 
formula of creed-subscription can mean very little; and certainly it is 
little short of blasphemous to call such a self-contradictory book the 
"Word of God."[13]

Apparently the able modernist journal, The Christian Century, agreed 
with Dr. Machen's interpretation. "One is not, then, required to affirm 
that there can be no other system of doctrine whose component parts are 
not also drawn from the teachings of the Bible.... Professor Machen is, 
we think, right in so interpreting the new formula."[14]

Mr. John Murray of Westminster Theological Seminary also attacked the 
confessional statement, not only with respect to the authority of holy 
Scripture, but also its doctrine of creation, salvation, atonement, and 
of God the Father. His main thrust was aimed at the doctrine of the 
atonement which, he claimed, tended to teach universal atonement as 
opposed to the limited or definite atonement of the Westminster 
Confession of Faith, which means that the atonement is effectual only to 
those who are called of God.

Dr. Samuel G. Craig, editor of Christianity Today, and Dr. C. E. 
Macartney attacked the Plan of Union from a different point of view and 
warned the United Presbyterian Church that the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA was a doctrinally divided church. There were modernists, 
middle-of-the-roaders, and evangelicals, and as Dr. Craig pointed out, 
the modernist-indifferentist party was in control.[15] Dr. Macartney 
argued, "If the United Presbyterians wish to unite with our church, they 
should act in full knowledge of the lamentable doctrinal condition which 
now obtains within the Presbyterian Church."[16]

Dr. Gordon A. McLennan, pastor of the Shadyside United Presbyterian 
Church, Pittsburgh, writing in the Christian Union Herald, March 17, 
1934, agreed with Dr. Craig and Dr. Macartney. "If anyone is in any 
doubt as to the division in the Presbyterian Church, surely the 
establishment of an independent Seminary, and now an independent Board 
of Foreign Missions is of a nature to remove such doubt."

From these criticisms it becomes clear that a very strange situation 
obtained. United Presbyterians were regarded as doctrinally sounder in 
membership than the Presbyterian Church in the USA, but at the same time 
as having a confessional statement much less orthodox than the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA.

The vast majority of the ministers of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
favored this union. Dr. Robert E. Speer, senior secretary of the Board 
of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, in a 
semi-official article defending the new formula of creed subscription, 
stated that the words, "the system of doctrine taught in the Holy 
Scripture," is contained in the question asked of licentiates so that 
every candidate for ordination has already declared that he believes in 
only one system of doctrine as taught in the holy Scriptures.[17] Dr. 
Speer answered the criticism of the confessional statement by saying 
that the holy Scriptures are to be the final authority in matters of 
doctrine. He also mentioned that in 1928, in a Plan of Union between the 
Presbyterian Church in the US (southern) and the United Presbyterian 
Church of North America, the southern Presbyterian church accepted that 
confessional statement. This action on the part of the allegedly 
conservative southern church ought to warrant the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA in taking similar action.

The Plan of Union was vigorously defended by the Rev. W. J. Reid, D.D., 
chairman of the Committee on Presbyterian Unity of the United 
Presbyterian Church, and by the Rev. John McNaugher, D.D., president of 
Pittsburgh-Xenia Theological Seminary. Of the confessional statement Dr. 
McNaugher wrote, "However its clear recognition as having interpretative 
character scarcely lessens its influential value as an exponent of 
Reformed Theology."[18]

In appearing before the 1934 General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA as a guest to advocate the Plan of Union, Dr. McNaugher, in 
biting and sarcastic terms, ridiculed those who had found fault with the 
confessional statement. The objection to the phrase "spiritual truth," 
he said, warped it out of its context, "and in hermeneutics that is a 
damnable sin!" He remarked,

    Our critics are afflicted with astigmatism or abysmus, and, in 
addition, they need a heavy injection of First Corinthians thirteen!... 
Read this through [The Confessional Statement] with an open and unbiased 
eye before you retire, and it will compose you into an orthodox 
sleep—not that it is soporific, but it will make you happy, and when you 
roll over to sleep you will say, "Return unto thy rest, O my soul."[19]

When the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA met in 
1934 to vote on the Plan of Union, the only real opposition to it from 
the floor was voiced by the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, managing 
editor of Christianity Today, who objected to the union on the grounds 
of the confessional statement, the new formula of creed-subscription, 
and the unfairness to congregations who voted not to go into the union, 
since they could not retain their church property.[20] But an overture 
in favor of union and asking the presbyteries to express their approval 
was passed by a vast majority.[21]

On the other hand the United Presbyterian Church, by a vote of 123 to 
113, turned down the Plan of Union so that any further attempts to unite 
with the United Presbyterian Church of North America would have to begin 
de novo.[22] But the defeat was due not so much to the doctrinal issues 
involved (although they were the real issues), as to the plea on the 
part of United Presbyterians that they would be overwhelmed, since their 
membership is only one-tenth that of the Presbyterian Church in the USA.

A second major attempt at union, still in progress, is that between the 
Protestant Episcopal Church in the USA and the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA. In 1888 the Protestant Episcopal Church approached the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA on the question of union, but the 
correspondence was terminated in 1896 because the Protestant Episcopal 
Church would not accept the doctrine of recognition and reciprocity "as 
a principle controlling negotiations."[23] But in 1937, the Rev. James 
De Wolfe Perry, presiding bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church, 
addressed a communication to the secretary of the general council of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, informing him that the Protestant 
Episcopal Church urged the Presbyterian Church to consider the 
possibilities of organic union between the two bodies.[24]

Upon receipt of this letter, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA adopted a resolution authorizing the moderator and 
stated clerk of the General Assembly, together with the chairman of the 
Department of Church Cooperation and Union, to inform the presiding 
bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church that the Presbyterian Church 
"declares its earnest and prayerful purpose to cooperate with the 
Protestant Episcopal Church in the U.S.A. in the study and formation of 
such plans as may make possible the union contemplated."[25]

This concordat cannot be finally and definitely adopted until the 
general convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church meets in 1940. At 
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, June, 1939, 
no formal approval of the concordat was given, but the committee of the 
church was asked to continue negotiations.[26]

The proposed union has met strenuous objections among Presbyterians. Dr. 
C. E. Macartney set forth seven reasons why the union was not likely to 
succeed. First, it was undesired by the rank and file of both churches. 
Second, Presbyterians and Episcopalians would not seek ministers from 
each other. Third, the statement about the Bible is doctrinally 
latitudinarian. It recognizes the Scriptures as the supreme standard for 
faith and morals but also states, "in the assurance that with the 
Catholic fellowship there is room for diversity of interpretation." 
Fourth, with respect to ordination, the Presbyterians must make 
concessions by having bishops lay hands on Presbyterian ministers. 
Fifth, the Episcopal attitude toward social customs and amusements is 
different. Sixth, this union will drive a wedge between the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and other Presbyterian bodies who are considering 
union. Seventh, these marked differences will really help to separate 
the two churches.[27]

Likewise, Episcopalians warned against undue haste in forming 
conclusions that the union will take place. Bishop Wilson, a member of 
the Protestant Episcopal Commission, wrote that the proposed concordat 
had not yet been approved by the Episcopal church. He also warned that 
the ordination element was very troublesome.

    For us to commission Presbyterian ministers without regard to 
ordination would involve us in endless difficulties.... Such a 
"commissioning" without ordination would do three things. (1) It would 
violate the whole spirit and intentions of the preface to the ordinal in 
our Prayer Book on which our own historic ministry is firmly founded. 
(2) It would run counter to the accepted standards of all other branches 
of the Anglican communion and might quite conceivably split us off from 
them. There is little to be said for that kind of unity achieved at the 
cost of still more disunion. (3) It directly contradicts our 
representation given to the Orthodox at the last Lambeth Conference on 
the subject of Holy Orders.[28]

Bishop William T. Manning, perhaps the most prominent bishop in the 
entire Protestant Episcopal Church, has very frankly cautioned against 
the proposed union as inimical to the good feeling between the two 
churches and as hindering the effective witness of the churches to the 
truth.[29]

In the meantime, four recommendations were made as "things that might be 
undertaken in common," namely, an exchange of preachers occasionally, an 
invitation to the members of each church to the Lord's table, an 
exchange of greetings from delegates of the churches, and an exchange of 
professors and students in the seminaries of both churches. None of 
these recommendations has been followed in either church to any 
appreciable extent.

The whole project is meeting with little enthusiasm and interest among 
Presbyterians and Episcopalians and the reasons seem to be quite 
obvious. The form of government of the Episcopal church with its 
conception of the ministry and its ritualism is considerably different 
from that of traditional Presbyterianism. The Episcopal church 
discipline is founded on the principle of rule by bishops with great 
concentration of power in their control, while Presbyterianism is a 
representative form of government, that is, a rule by teaching and 
ruling presbyters or elders. The parity of the clergy in Presbyterianism 
would make it difficult for ministers to accept the higher authority of 
the bishops in the Episcopal sense. Underlying this radically different 
view of the ministry is the scriptural interpretation of it. Most 
Presbyterians would surrender their form of government either completely 
or partially with great reluctance. Dr. Mark A. Matthews of the 
Presbyterian church expressed this view when he wrote, "The Presbyterian 
Church will never surrender its ordination by its presbyteries ... The 
Presbyterian Church will never surrender its form of government ..."[30]

The ritualism of the Episcopal church is another formidable barrier. 
Presbyterianism has followed a very simple form of worship with the 
sermon as the central part of the service, while the Episcopal church 
has a highly developed form of symbolism in worship, even in the low 
church congregations, with the sermon occupying a less prominent place 
than the ritualistic element in the service. The doctrinal statements of 
each church are fundamentally Calvinistic and so would not present such 
great difficulties.

But there is another phase to the whole enterprise which must give pause 
to many in the two churches, and that is the moral element. How can a 
Presbyterian in good conscience who believes that the Presbyterian form 
of government is that which is taught in the Bible give way, even by 
indirection, to episcopacy?[31] The whole tradition of the Presbyterian 
church is so fundamentally opposed to episcopacy that it is likely to be 
the deciding factor in the attempt to unite. There are indications that 
this factor will prevent the union at least for many years to come.

The attempt at organic union with the Presbyterian Church in the US 
(southern) is the most likely to succeed, because the two churches have 
the same confession of faith and much the same form of government. Two 
forces militate against such a union: the fear of the southern church 
that it will be submerged in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, which 
has four times as many members, and the suspicion and conviction of some 
that the so-called northern church is not true doctrinally to its 
constitution.

After the Civil War a committee was appointed by the General Assembly of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA to confer with the Presbyterian 
Church in the US to seek closer and more fraternal relations. In 
response the Presbyterian Church in the US from time to time appointed a 
similar committee on union but the movement advanced very little beyond 
this stage until 1917. At that time overtures were received from 195 
presbyteries of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, urging the General 
Assembly to unite with the Presbyterian Church in the US. The General 
Assembly took action urging that organic union between the two churches 
be considered.[32]

The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the US replied:

    While this Assembly does not regard organic union as practicable at 
this time, yet it hereby appoints the Committee of Conference on Union 
asked for by the Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., and 
recommends to the proposed Conference the consideration of the 
federation of all the Presbyterian Churches of our country upon some 
practical and effective basis.[33]

A plan of reunion was presented to the Presbyterian Church in the US, 
and in reply the committee of the Presbyterian Church in the US drafted 
a Plan of Federal Union of all Presbyterian and Reformed Churches in the 
United States. This plan of federal union was presented not only to the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, but also to the Reformed Church in the 
US, the United Presbyterian Church of North America, the Reformed Church 
in America, the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Synod, the Christian 
Reformed Church in North America, the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist or 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, the Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian 
Church of North America, the General Synod of the Reformed Presbyterian 
Church, the Cumberland Presbyterian Church, and the Cumberland 
Presbyterian Church, Colored.[34] In general the plan of federation was 
a loose one which called for a federal general assembly having very 
restricted powers.[35]

After much discussion it became evident that the Presbyterian Church in 
the US did not desire organic union, and that the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA saw no gain in entering into a union on the basis of the plan of 
federal union, because no closer association would be secured by it than 
already existed.

Committees from both churches have continued with conferences on the 
general subject of union but with little result. The Rev. Charles W. 
Welch, D.D., of the Presbytery of Louisville was elected moderator of 
the 1938 General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, in the 
hope that a Southerner would appeal to the Presbyterian Church in the 
US. In fact, the individual who nominated him for this office made that 
the burden of his speech.

On the other hand, the Presbyterian Church in the US dismissed its 
Committee on Union at its General Assembly in 1938. In 1939, by a small 
margin, it voted to ask the presbyteries to express their attitude 
toward such a union.[36]

In other words, the enthusiasm and interest in the union are nearly all 
on the part of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. It seems almost 
certain that organic union between the two churches is very much in the 
future. If the Presbyterian Church in the USA continues along its 
present trend toward modernism, the union may never take place, unless 
there is a disruption in the Presbyterian Church in the US caused by 
modernism, in which case the liberal element of the church will be very 
much in favor of union.

The whole union enterprise in the Presbyterian Church in the USA in the 
past two decades has been motivated by the conviction that outward unity 
of organization is the great need and goal of Protestantism today. This 
spirit was expressed by John D. Rockefeller, Jr.:

    Only a united Christian world can stem the rising tide of 
materialism, of selfishness, of shaken traditions, of crumbling moral 
standards, and point the way out. How such a union might be brought 
about was once suggested by Dr. Stanley Jones, to whose stimulating 
address we have just listened. He proposed one Church, to be called the 
Church of Christ, or it might be called the Church of the Living God, 
with all sectarian churches as branches. Thus individual and 
non-essential differences would be preserved, while in the fundamentals 
of religion in God's love and Christ's loving spirit-all would be 
united.[37]

In fact, the whole Protestant world is under the spell of this 
conviction. A united Christian church may be a commendable goal, but the 
necessary doctrinal vagueness which must result from such a union would 
vitiate the whole enterprise. Any large union which may result in the 
future is most likely to be along doctrinal lines rather than 
denominational ones.

The time has come in each denomination for a separation between those 
who believe the Bible and those who do not; such a division would result 
in real Christian unity. But such vague and meager doctrinal bases which 
have been proposed so far as the foundation for a united Christendom 
would create a church which the historic Christian church would hardly 
be able to recognize, and which would certainly be ineffective for great 
spiritual work among individuals and the nations. What is needed, and 
needed badly, is a rebirth of genuine enthusiasm for, and belief in, the 
miraculous gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, which proclaims that all men 
are lost in sin and separated from God and in need of redemption and 
reuniting with God the Father. This should be the great message of the 
church; it should be the consuming desire of every minister in the 
Christian church. If that comes to pass, all ideas of a false and feeble 
outward church union will be forgotten, and the church will have 
returned to its true mission.

The spirit of unionism in the Presbyterian Church in the USA is strong, 
and will continue to grow as the doctrinal witness and consciousness of 
the church becomes weaker. It is safe to predict that, if modernism 
continues its present hold on the life of that church, union enterprises 
on a vague, meaningless doctrinal basis will be entered into and very 
likely consummated.

Chapter 6. The Independent Board

THE CONTENTION and the belief that the boards and agencies of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA were, and are, under the control and 
domination of those who do not hold to historic Christianity was a vital 
concern to the Board of Foreign Missions. For many years the 
conservatives of the church were critical and distrustful of the actions 
and missionary appointments of that board. While the other agencies were 
likewise under scrutiny, and in many cases considered even more liberal 
in their operation, it was the Board of Foreign Missions which received 
most of the attention. This may be explained on the ground that foreign 
missions have always been regarded as most intimately concerned with the 
real mission of the church in preaching the gospel of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. An examination of the other boards in a later chapter will 
reveal that what is stated here about the foreign board is equally true 
of the others.

In the fall of 1923, the Rev. Robert Dick Wilson, D.D., LL.D., professor 
of Hebrew and Old Testament literature at Princeton Seminary, wrote an 
article in which he criticized the board on two counts. He averred that 
the board had allowed itself to become entangled with bodies of 
missionaries differing in doctrine and polity from the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, and that missionaries had been hindered from joining 
such a doctrinally sound organization in China as the Bible Union. He 
wrote,

    While believing that it is our duty to give adequate support to the 
missionaries already on the field who are loyal to the doctrine of the 
church, I cannot refrain from stating my conviction that the Board, and 
especially some of our secretaries, have erred grievously in some of 
their policies with regard to the work entrusted to them by the 
church.[1]

In addition to the two causes which Dr. Wilson gave for lack of 
confidence in the board, others felt that the public repudiation by 
three members of the board of the doctrinal deliverances of the 1923 
General Assembly, when they signed the Auburn Affirmation, made that 
board unworthy of the church's support.[2]

At the General Assembly in May, 1924, the agitation against the Board of 
Foreign Missions found expression in the report of the Standing 
Committee on Foreign Missions. The following resolution of the committee 
was adopted:

    That while maintaining loyally the policy established by past 
General Assemblies in repeated enactments with regard to cooperation 
with other Evangelical bodies in our Foreign Missionary Work the Board 
be directed to exercise due care with regard to the Evangelical 
character of all such union and cooperative enterprises, and if there 
should arise in the work of these enterprises a situation in which 
teachings unsound or injurious to the Evangelical Faith are given, the 
Board, as it has declared to be its policy, should either secure the 
correction of such a situation or failing such withdraw from further 
participation.[3]

As far as is known, the board did not withdraw from any union 
enterprises, however questionable they were.

The discontent with the policy of the board increased in extent and 
intensity, and was brought to a climax in 1932 by the publication of a 
book entitled Re-Thinking Missions, which was issued as a report of the 
"Commission of Appraisal of the Laymen's Inquiry after One Hundred 
Years," the chairman of which was Dr. William E. Hocking, professor at 
Harvard University and a leader with strong liberal leanings. The 
minister representative of the Presbyterian Church in the USA was the 
Rev. William P. Merrill, D.D., a signer of the Auburn Affirmation. The 
work of the commission was largely financed by John D. Rockefeller, Jr., 
who had voiced his opposition to historic Christianity.[4]

Representatives of seven denominations—Congregational, Methodist, 
Episcopal, Northern Baptist, Protestant Episcopal, Presbyterian Church 
in the USA, Reformed Church in America, and the United Presbyterian 
Church—met unofficially in New York City in 1930 to consider the foreign 
missions enterprise. This group constituted the thirty-five directors of 
the Foreign Missionary Inquiry, of which seven formed an executive 
committee. The inquiry resulting was independent of the denominational 
mission boards, but it received their cooperation in securing the facts. 
The inquiry was restricted to Burma, China, India, and Japan, and the 
work was divided into two parts; first, an accumulation of data, and 
secondly, "an appraisal of these facts in the light of the widest 
possible consideration of the meaning of the mission enterprises and of 
the world condition in which it is now, and is to be, carried out."[5]

The Institute of Social and Religious Research was engaged to gather the 
data and research workers were sent to the designated fields for this 
purpose. In September, 1931, this part of the report was completed and 
the facts were placed in the hands of the Commission of Appraisal of 
fifteen members. These commissioners made a visit to the several mission 
fields with the following purpose in mind:

    To aid laymen to determine their attitude toward Foreign Missions, 
by reconsidering the functions of such Missions in the world today. With 
this general aim,

    a. To make an objective appraisal of their activities in the fields 
visited;

    b. To observe the effect of Missions on the life of the peoples of 
the Orient;

    c. In the light of the existing conditions and profiting, though not 
bound, by missionary experience to work out a practical program for 
today, offering recommendations as to the extent to which missionary 
activities of every sort should be continued or changed.[6]

In September, 1932, seven volumes were issued by the commission 
containing the data gathered concerning the various aspects of the 
foreign missions enterprise and also the book, Re-Thinking Missions, 
which summarized the facts according to the foregoing expressed purpose. 
The last named book is of the most importance and contains three parts: 
I. General Principles, chapters 1-4; II. Aspects of Mission Work, 
chapters 5-12; III. Administration, chapters 12-14.

The parts of the book which have to do with personnel and methods are 
not so important to this study, but the recommendations of this 
commission with reference to the approach of Christianity to the other 
religions, and the message which missionaries should preach, are of the 
utmost concern in this study. The commission makes it plain that 
Christianity should unite with the other religions, Islam, Hinduism, or 
Buddhism, in a common front against materialism, naturalism, and 
immorality.

    It is no longer, which prophet? or which book.? It is whether any 
prophet, book, revelation, rite, Church is to be trusted. All the old 
oracles are seeing a new sign: the scorn on the faces of students who 
know the experiments in anti-religion in Russia and non-religion in 
Turkey, and the actual religionlessness of much western life.... The 
case that must now be stated is the case for any religion at all.[7]

    ... Thus it is that Christianity finds itself in point of fact 
aligned in this world-wide issue with the non-Christian faiths of 
Asia.... There are thus several factors conspiring to one end: namely, 
the necessity that the modern mission make a positive effort, first of 
all to know and understand the religions around it, then to recognize 
and associate itself with whatever kindred elements there are in 
them.[8]

There is no need to multiply these quotations because the whole attitude 
of the book is predicated upon the assumption that the germ of truth 
exists in all religions and that it is the duty of the missionary to 
recognize that germ of truth as the least common denominator and build 
thereupon.

In regard to the message of the missionary it is stated,

    The original objective of the mission might be stated as the 
conquest of the world by Christianity: it was a world benevolence 
conceived in terms of a world campaign. There was one way of salvation 
and one only, one name, one atonement. this plan with its particular 
historical center in the career of Jesus must become the point of regard 
for every human soul. The universal quality of Christianity lay not 
alone in its valid principles of truth and morals, but in an essential 
paradox, the universal claim of one historical fact: the work of 
Christ.... Hence, in respect to its central fact Christianity was 
necessarily dogmatic—it could only say Ecce Homo, Behold the Man; and it 
was committed to a certain intolerance, beneficent in purpose—in the 
interest of the soul it could allow no substitute for Christ.[9]

Concerning this point of view, the following hope was expressed, "In 
that case, the hope would be that Christianity, instead of tying itself 
to the sinking bulks, would hold itself clear and give a distinctive 
version of what religion, in its purity, may mean.[10]

It is very plain from these quotations that the modernist message of 
missions is entirely different from that of historic Christianity. 
According to historic Christianity a missionary is not to make common 
cause with pagan religions, but to show these religionists the error of 
their ways and to point them to the one way of salvation through Jesus 
Christ. This was the method and the message of the apostles and has been 
for the Christian church these many centuries. In other words, the 
recommendations of the commission would mean a radical departure for the 
mission enterprise.

Since the commission and its report had received such wide newspaper 
comment, the publication of Re-Thinking Missions focused the attention 
of the Christian world upon foreign missions and demonstrated anew that 
drastic changes in missionary work and in the missionary message were 
taking place within the Protestant church. Ministers and organizations 
in practically every Protestant church made some mention of the report. 
In fact, it was the issuance of this book, as well as the presence of 
Pearl S. Buck on the foreign missionary roster of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, which crystallized the thoughts of Dr. Machen on 
foreign missions as they were related to the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA.

This Pearl S. Buck was no obscure missionary in a forgotten part of the 
world, but one of the most prominent and successful novelists of the day 
who lived in China and was associated with Nanking University. What 
makes the situation more reprehensible from the standpoint of the Board 
of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the USA is the fact 
that Dr. Robert E. Speer, senior secretary of the board, was president 
of the board of founders of Nanking University. In fact, Dr. Speer's 
attitude was a source of amazement to Christian leaders.[11]

The manifest indifference of the board toward Pearl Buck's unbelief and 
the compromising attitude of the board toward Re-Thinking Missions 
produced the conviction that the time to take drastic action had come. 
Dr. Machen felt compelled to make public his opinion to the New 
Brunswick Presbytery of which he was a member. This he did in the form 
of an overture.

    I am presenting this Overture not because I desire to do so but 
because I am compelled to do so. I should be far happier if I did not 
know certain things about the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.; but I do know those things, and the 
knowledge of them places upon me a duty which I cannot evade. My 
membership in a Presbytery seems to me to be a sacred trust, and it is 
in discharge of the obligations of that trust that I am presenting the 
proposed Overture and some of the reasons which have compelled me to 
advocate it.[12]

The overture was presented to the presbytery at its meeting on January 
24, 1933, and made the order of the day for April 11, 1933. Dr. Robert 
E. Speer was invited to be present as the representative spokesman for 
the Board of Foreign Missions. The overture called for care on the part 
of the board to keep modernists from the board and the roll of 
missionaries, and to avoid doctrinally compromising union 
enterprises.[13]

Dr. Machen's argument in favor of the overture was printed in a 110-page 
pamphlet entitled, Modernism and the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., and sent, before the meeting, to 
every minister and elder in the presbytery as well as to every member 
and secretary of the Board of Foreign Missions.

The drama and meaning of that day will remain long in the memory of 
those who were present to hear the debate. Before that large audience in 
the Fourth Presbyterian Church in Trenton, New Jersey, appeared two men, 
one the outstanding conservative theologian of America and the other the 
missionary leader of American Presbyterianism.

It was more than a conflict between two brilliant men set for an 
academic debate and verbal pyrotechnics for the entertainment and 
intellectual stimulation of the audience. It was even more than the 
clash of two opponents each ready to prove that his presentation of the 
case was right. In reality, it was a dramatic meeting in which two 
conceptions of Christianity were presented by two of the ablest men in 
the Christian world, one the historic orthodox point of view and the 
other the doctrinally indifferent attitude. One stood for a militant 
defense of the gospel and the other advocated a pacifistic view toward 
those ministers and missionaries of the church who were modernistic in 
their theology. The final outcome of the struggle in the church warrants 
the claim that this debate was one of real historic significance, and 
one that has had an influence on individuals and churches wherever the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA is represented both in America and 
abroad.

At the very outset Dr. Machen made it plain that his sole standard of 
judgment was the Word of God, and that every missionary, every 
institution, and every piece of literature supported and endorsed by the 
board must be tested and judged by adherence to the Bible. There are 
many standards of judgment, he said, but the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA has stated in its Confession of Faith, "The Supreme Judge, by whom 
all controversies of religion are to be determined, ... and in whose 
sentence we are to rest, can be no other but the Holy Spirit speaking in 
the Scripture."[14]

With these preliminary remarks he plunged into the main stream of his 
argument and mentioned briefly the evidences of modernism in the Board 
of Foreign Missions contained in his pamphlet. Only one hour was allowed 
for the presentation of these facts, but the pamphlet had been sent to 
the presbyters well in advance of the meeting, so that the supporting 
evidence for his address was known to everyone present.

The moral earnestness, the dignity, and the tender appeal with which Dr. 
Machen closed his argument brought a hushed silence over the audience. 
He pled with them to return to the Word of God, to forsake the wisdom of 
man, to turn against the trend of the age, and to be faithful to the 
Christ of the Bible.

The main thesis of Dr. Machen's charges against the Board of Foreign 
Missions as stated in his pamphlet was that the board had become so 
entangled with modernism that the need for reform was imperative. He 
proceeded to prove this contention by making six charges against the 
board, all substantiated by evidence.

His first complaint had to do with the attitude of the Board of Foreign 
Missions toward the book Re-Thinking Missions. The board issued an 
official "Action of the Board of Foreign Missions," passed on November 
21, 1932, and published in pamphlet form as well as in the Presbyterian 
Magazine, January, 1933. In this statement the board made no clear-cut 
pronouncement against the appraisal commission's report, which had made 
"an attack against the very heart of the Christian religion."[15] Mr. 
James M. Speers and Mrs. John H. Finley were members of the Board of 
Foreign Missions, and at the same time members of the Laymen's Foreign 
Missions Inquiry. Dr. Machen asked the question,

    Did it [the Board] agree with its Vice-President, Mr. Speers, and 
another of its members, Mrs. Finley, in their action in issuing the 
Appraisal Commission's Report, or did it repudiate this action of these 
two of its members, and pronounce the Report of the Appraisal Commission 
as being, what it clearly is, hostile to the roots of the Christian 
religion?

Dr. Machen answered his own question: "It made no answer to these 
inquiries. It dodged the issue."[16] The statement of the board relative 
to the aim of missions reads,

    The supreme and controlling aim of Foreign Missions is to make the 
Lord Jesus Christ known to all men as their Divine Saviour and to 
persuade them to become His disciples; to gather these disciples into 
Christian Churches which shall be self-propagating, self-supporting, 
self-governing; to cooperate, so long as necessary, with these Churches 
in the evangelizing of their countrymen and in bringing to bear on all 
human life the spirit and principles of Christ.[17]

In reply to this Dr. Machen said,

    Where is there any reference here to the things really distinctive 
of Christian missions, where is there, at least, any reference to such 
things in terms which are not often distorted by modern unbelief to mean 
something entirely different from what they used to mean?[18]

The second charge of modernism against the board concerned its 
vacillating attitude toward Pearl S. Buck, the author of The Good Earth. 
Dr. Machen quoted largely from two articles by Mrs. Buck, "The Laymen's 
Mission Report," and "Is There a Case for Foreign Missions?" Dr. 
Machen's quotations from her articles very plainly show outspoken 
opposition to historic Christianity:

    The first three chapters [Re-Thinking Missions] are the finest 
exposition of religion I have ever read.[19]

    To some of us He is still the divine son of God, born of the virgin 
Mary, conceived by the Holy Spirit. But to many of us He has ceased to 
be that... I do not believe in original sin.... I agree with the Chinese 
who feel their people should be protected from such superstition 
(Biblical teaching about salvation from sin).[20]

Such statements are so obviously opposed to historic Christianity that 
Dr. Machen hardly felt called upon to answer them.

When Dr. Machen first made these damaging charges against the board for 
allowing Mrs. Buck to remain as a missionary, the board had done nothing 
about it. At a later date, Mrs. Buck resigned as a missionary and the 
board accepted her resignation "with regret." The minute of the board 
reads,

    A letter was presented from Mrs. J. Lossing Buck, of the Kiangan 
Mission, requesting to be released from responsible relationship to the 
Board. The Board had hoped that this step might be avoided, but in view 
of all the considerations involved and with deep regret it voted to 
acquiesce in her request. The Board expressed to Mrs. Buck its sincere 
appreciation of the service which she has rendered during the past 
sixteen years and its earnest prayer that her unusual abilities may 
continue to be richly used in behalf of the people of China.

On May 31, 1934, Dr. Robert E. Speer in writing to the Rev. Carl 
McIntire stated,

    The Board did accept Mrs. Buck's resignation with regret... Its 
regret in Mrs. Buck's case was because she was unable any longer to hold 
and proclaim the Christian faith as she had held it on her first 
appointment by the Southern Presbyterian Church as a missionary to China 
and her appointment as a missionary of our Church when she married Mr. 
Buck.[21]

Dr. Speer's answer seems rather strange, particularly when it is 
recalled that he had been president of the board of founders of Nanking 
University with which Mrs. Buck had been associated for many years, and 
must have known her attitude. Furthermore, on the face of the matter 
surely no one would possibly interpret the action as Dr. Speer 
interprets it.

Dr. Machen's third accusation concerned the board and its attitude 
toward the Auburn Affirmation. He made it clear that one of the most 
important officers of the board, the candidate secretary, Rev. Lindsay 
S. B. Hadley, was a signer of the Auburn Affirmation. Dr. Machen wrote,

    To the Candidate Secretary is entrusted the delicate task of 
interviewing candidates for the foreign field and of encouraging or 
discouraging them in their high ambition. Is there any agent of the 
Church who ought to be more completely clear as to what the Church's 
message is than the occupant of this position?[22]

In 1926, Dr. Machen had written to the board asking for an explanation 
of the presence of five signers of the Auburn Affirmation on the board. 
In reply Dr. Speer wrote, "We know of not one who does not accept the 
Constitution and Standards of the Church and who is not truly and 
loyally evangelical."[23] At the time that this letter was written there 
were five out of fifteen members of the board who were signers of the 
Auburn Affirmation. To such a state of affairs Dr. Machen made the 
reply, "It must be said very plainly that Bible-believing Christians can 
have no confidence in a Board whose standards of what is truly and 
loyally evangelical are such as that."[24]

The fourth count against the board concerned the modernist propaganda by 
the candidate department. This department recommended such books as The 
Meaning of Faith, by Harry Emerson Fosdick, The Marks of a World 
Christian, by D. J. Fleming, and The Devotional Diary, by J. H. Oldham. 
Dr. Machen examined these books and, judging by the standards of the 
Bible, he found them to be contrary to historic Christianity. As a 
matter of fact, the Rev. Harry Emerson Fosdick, D.D., is regarded as one 
of the most outstanding modernist ministers in the bounds of the 
nominally Christian church. The other two authors are not as well-known, 
but their books which were there recommended are as offensive to the 
gospel of the Bible as the book of Dr. Fosdick.

Dr. Machen's fifth charge against the board was its commendation of such 
men as Sherwood Eddy and Kagawa. Dr. Machen made it clear that the 
teachings of Sherwood Eddy and Kagawa strike at the very heart of the 
Christian message as understood by the church for these many centuries.

The last indictment of the board was concerned with the fact that the 
board cooperates with modernist union enterprises in China. For evidence 
in this respect Dr. Machen depended upon communications from Dr. Albert 
B. Dodd of the North China Theological Seminary, a missionary of the 
church, and Chancellor Arie Kok of the Netherlands legation in Peiping. 
The citations of modernist propaganda and cooperation with modernist 
union enterprises in China of the board are overwhelming.

It is difficult to understand how one could read this pamphlet or have 
heard Dr. Machen and not come to the conclusion that the Board of 
Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the USA had been 
unfaithful to its trust.

Dr. Robert E. Speer spoke after Dr. Machen, but in no way was his 
address an answer to the charges in the pamphlet which had been sent to 
him well in advance of the meeting. In the main he said that the board 
was a servant of the church and, as such, it was up to the general 
assembly to take whatever actions were necessary to remedy a bad 
situation if that obtained. Dr. Speer defended the actions of the board 
and its missionaries and declared that these men were as faithful to the 
Bible as the men at home. This latter statement no one would deny, since 
the ministers of the church at home were probably less true to the 
Bible. Instead of replying to the charges in the pamphlet, Dr. Speer did 
attempt to answer the four parts of the overture which Dr. Machen had 
introduced. Concerning section one, he stated that it singled out the 
Board of Foreign Missions and so was discriminatory. Section two he 
declared was out of order because the board had no authority to sit in 
judgment upon a minister who was in good and regular standing. Dr. Speer 
could not deny that the candidate secretary was a signer of the Auburn 
Affirmation. Relative to section three, he stated that the question 
blanks which were sent by the board to prospective candidates in no way 
indicated that a tolerance for opposing views was essential to a 
missionary's attitude. The last paragraph of the overture refers to the 
dangers which lurk in union enterprises and the necessity for constant 
vigilance. This Dr. Speer admitted, but he also made it clear that there 
is danger in separation.

The Presbytery of New Brunswick voted overwhelmingly against Dr. 
Machen's overture, but this did not stop the questions and doubts which 
the pamphlet had created in the minds of Presbyterians everywhere. On 
May 1, 1933, the Presbytery of Philadelphia passed the identical 
overture so that the whole matter thus forced itself upon the attention 
of the General Assembly.[25]

When the General Assembly met in Columbus, Ohio, on May 25, 1933, the 
issue which overshadowed all other items on the docket was the overture 
from the Presbytery of Philadelphia, which was concurred in by the 
Presbytery of Aberdeen, and other overtures of a similar nature from 
Hudson, Chester, and Northumberland Presbyteries concerning the Board of 
Foreign Missions and its alleged unfaithfulness to the doctrinal 
standards of the church.[26] Since the boards of the church are the 
creation of the general assembly, this was the proper procedure for 
attempting to remedy a bad situation in any board.

The utter weakness of the Board of Foreign Missions' answer to the 
allegations in the overture was seen by the tactics of those who chose 
to "whitewash" the activities of the board, and so demonstrate their 
loyalty to it. Every conceivable parliamentary trick was used to stifle 
debate and to stir the emotions of the commissioners to loyalty to the 
boards of the church. In the midst of the majority report of the 
Assembly's Committee on Foreign Missions, for example, the memorial roll 
of missionaries was read, a prayer was made, and then the whole assembly 
sang, "For All the Saints Who from Their Labors Rest," thus prejudicing 
the assembly in favor of the report. This show of bad taste in the midst 
of a controversial issue was evidently done to put the majority report 
in a good light. Another demonstration of prejudice and bad taste was 
the introduction which Dr. McDowell, the moderator, gave to Dr. Speer 
when he said, "Dr. Speer... of whom it could be said, as it was said of 
his Master, 'In him was life and the life was the light of men.' "[27]

The majority report of the assembly's Committee on Foreign Missions 
occupied practically all of the time allotted to the subject in 
extolling the virtues and accomplishments of the board.[28] Those who 
represented the minority on this committee, Peter Stam, Jr., an elder 
from Narberth, Pennsylvania, and the Rev. Robert S. Marsden, of 
Middletown, Pennsylvania, wished to speak in behalf of the overture, but 
were allotted a sum total of fifteen minutes. The usual courtesy of 
printing the minority report was denied. The minority made the following 
recommendations:

    Therefore, in answer to the overtures from the Presbyteries of 
Philadelphia and Aberdeen, and in reply to the other overtures, papers 
and memorials, the Committee recommends that the following resolution be 
adopted by this Assembly:

    "The 145th General Assembly has learned with sorrow of the acts and 
policies of its Board of Foreign Missions which have seriously impaired 
confidence in the minds of thousands of loyal and earnest Presbyterians. 
This Assembly proclaims anew its loyalty and love for the pure and 
everlasting gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, declaring to men everywhere 
that there is only one way of salvation—through the substitutionary, 
atoning sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, where He shed His precious 
blood for the redemption of lost and sinful men. The Assembly pledges 
that the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. will, through its Board of 
Foreign Missions, preach this one, only gospel to the uttermost parts of 
the earth, to the exclusion of all other gospels or false paths to God."

    In order to take the first practical step to make this pledge 
effective and thus to reestablish confidence the Committee nominates the 
following persons to serve for three years as members of the Board of 
the Class of 1933-1936:...

    (Signed)
    Peter Stam, Jr.
    Robert S. Marsden

Dr. Machen appeared before the Assembly's Standing Committee on Foreign 
Missions to defend his charges against the board, but the members of the 
committee were so obviously prejudiced that he made little impression 
upon them.

The majority report was overwhelmingly adopted, and the attempt to 
reform the Board of Foreign Missions in the most effective way according 
to Presbyterian procedure had failed completely. There was nothing left 
to do but to announce the formation of an independent organization 
operating outside the bounds of the church, and separate from the 
church, which would carry on truly biblical and truly Presbyterian 
foreign missions. The conservatives who had attempted to bring about a 
reform in the Board of Foreign Missions were determined to have a 
foreign mission agency which would be true to the Bible. While still at 
Columbus, Ohio, Dr. Machen and the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, both of 
whom had been leaders in the reform movement, issued the following 
statement:

    In view of the action of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. resisting the movement for reform of the Board of 
Foreign Missions, a new Board will be organized by Bible-believing 
Christians to promote truly Biblical and truly Presbyterian mission 
work.[29]

On June 27, 1933, the Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign 
Missions was formally organized and on October 17, 1933, the 
constitution was adopted and the following officers elected: the Rev. J. 
Gresham Machen, president, the Rev. Merrill T. MacPherson, 
vice-president, the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, secretary, and Murray 
Forst Thompson, treasurer. The board also issued an invitation to the 
Rev. Charles J. Woodbridge, a missionary of the church in the French 
Cameroun, West Africa, to serve as general secretary.[30]

The Rev. Charles J. Woodbridge returned to this country and began 
serving as general secretary in February, 1934. He accepted the 
responsibility because he was convinced that the old board was no longer 
faithful to its trust, and that an independent board which would be 
truly biblical and truly Presbyterian would have to be established.

With the coming of Mr. Woodbridge the Independent Board began to extend 
its influence and activities. Mr. Woodbridge, whose father had been for 
over forty years an honored missionary of the Presbyterian Church in the 
US in China, was no ordinary general secretary, but a man of exceptional 
personality and evangelistic appeal. As a result of his work, funds were 
contributed to the board with such liberality that within two months 
after his arrival, the Rev. and Mrs. Henry W. Coray were appointed in 
April, 1934, as the first missionaries of the board to be stationed in 
China.[31]

Dissatisfaction with the policy of the Board of Foreign Missions, 
however, was not confined to Philadelphia nor to Dr. Machen. The 
Presbytery of Chester sent a statement to the board on January 23, 1934, 
part of which is as follows:

    1. ...Rightly or wrongly, the feeling prevails in many quarters that 
our Board has spoken feebly when the occasion demanded a thunder tone.

    2. The Board's Candidate Department, so influential in determining 
the character of the reinforcements sent to the field, should be above 
suspicion in the matter of its loyalty to the doctrinal standards of our 
church....

    3. We believe that there is an urgent need of improvement in mission 
study books recommended to our people....

    4. The conviction prevails among many that the nature of some of the 
educational work in which our Board has a share is of questionable 
value.[32]

The board's reply to Chester Presbytery gave no new light on the 
accusations which had been leveled at it by Dr. Machen and others.

In April, 1935, the Rev. Carl McIntire, pastor of the Presbyterian 
Church in Collingswood, New Jersey, published a 96-page pamphlet 
entitled Dr. Robert E. Speer, the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. and Modernism, in which he gave 
additional proof of modernism in the Board of Foreign Missions along the 
same lines as Dr. Machen, that is, concerning the literature, 
missionaries, members of the board, and union enterprises of the board. 
Dr. Speer's reply to these charges was included in Mr. McIntire's 
booklet, but in most of the instances he denied the charges of modernism 
and "whitewashed" the board entirely.

Another indictment of the Board of Foreign Missions was made by the Rev. 
Donald G. Barnhouse, D.D., pastor of the Tenth Presbyterian Church in 
Philadelphia, who had made a sixteen months' tour of some of the mission 
fields of the church. In his report of this tour Dr. Barnhouse charged 
that modernism was to be found among some of the missionaries and in 
some of the missionary enterprises.[33] But his conclusions differed 
greatly from Dr. Machen's in that he advocated that the church give to 
the board, especially to its sound missionaries, and urged further that 
the church try to elect more members to the board who would be loyal to 
the standards of the church. Although Dr. Barnhouse's conclusions were 
weak and futile, nevertheless his testimony to modernism in the Board of 
Foreign Missions added to the weight of the evidence against the board.

In addition to these rather formal protests against modernism in the 
Board of Foreign Missions, many articles continued to be written and 
overtures sent to the General Assembly as late as 1935, two years after 
the Independent Board had been organized.

A strong indictment was delivered in an address by Dr. Charles G. 
Trumbull, editor of The Sunday School Times, at a mass meeting called by 
Presbyterian laymen in Philadelphia, February 28, 1935. Under the title, 
"Foreign Missionary Betrayals of the Faith," Dr. Trumbull asked the 
question, "What are the policies and practices of our Board of Foreign 
Missions that are undermining the work of the sound evangelical 
missionaries in the foreign field? They are the policies and practises 
of Modernism." He then listed some of those policies and practices as 
evidenced by members of the board itself, by missionaries, by union 
enterprises, by the literature issued by the board, and concluded his 
address by saying, "How can unfaithful Board members and unfaithful 
Board secretaries be expected to deal properly with unfaithful 
missionaries?"[34]

Protests and communications relative to modernism were also sent to the 
Board of Foreign Missions so that the discontent with the board mounted 
higher and higher. In the meantime, the power and influence of the 
Independent Board grew as each month saw more converts to its cause. 
This alarming situation frightened the leaders of the ecclesiastical 
organization of the church to such an extent that unprecedented and 
drastic action was decided upon. The General Assembly meeting in 
Cleveland, Ohio, May, 1934, was to witness the awful tragedy of the 
issuance of a deliverance which was to cause those who were most loyal 
to the Bible to resign, and so to deprive the church of a group who had 
been zealous in maintaining the truths of the gospel. The rulers of the 
church knew no bounds in their determination to rid the church of the 
so-called disturbers of the peace.

Chapter 7. The Deliverance of the 1934 General Assembly

IT BECAME increasingly evident that some official action against the 
organizers of the Independent Board would be taken at the 1934 General 
Assembly. Dr. John McDowell, moderator of the 1933 General Assembly, 
issued a statement in the fall of 1933 which hinted strongly that the 
formation of the Independent Board was, in his opinion, in violation of 
the provisions of the constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA.[1]

On May 3, 1934, Dr. Machen, the Rev. Paul Woolley, the Rev. H. 
McAllister Griffiths, and Mr. Murray Forst Thompson were called into a 
conference with representatives of the general council and told that it 
was the unanimous opinion of the general council that the Independent 
Board was contrary to the fundamental principles of the constitution of 
the church, and that the members of the Independent Board were violating 
their ordination and membership vows.[2] These men were also informed 
that a document was in the press setting forth the council's reasons for 
this opinion and that this document was to be sent to all the 
commissioners of the coming assembly.

Shortly before the convening of the 146th General Assembly at Cleveland, 
Ohio, on May 24, 1934, the general council of the General Assembly sent 
out the above-mentioned document, a 43-page pamphlet, Studies of the 
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. These so-called 
Studies purported to lay the groundwork for the deliverance which was 
adopted by that assembly, and enunciated the principle that every member 
of the church is required by the constitution to support the missionary 
program of the church in the same way that each member must take part in 
the Lord's Supper.[3]

The first question which arises is, Did the general council have the 
authority to issue such a document without direct orders from the 
General Assembly, or was the general council presumptuous in this 
matter? The council defends its action by quoting chapter XXVI, section 
II, of the Form of Government which lists as one of the duties of the 
council, "to consider between annual meetings of the General Assembly 
cases of serious embarrassment or emergency concerning the benevolent 
and missionary work of the church, and to provide direct means of 
relief."

No one need be left in doubt as to the powers of the general council 
with reference to initiating action against members of the Independent 
Board. Chapter XXVI, section XII, of the Form of Government reads:

    General Councils shall handle and consider only such administrative 
business as may be referred to them by the electing judicatories as 
indicated in the succeeding sections, and shall have no power of 
initiation except as hereinafter provided. No judicial business shall be 
referred to a General Council.

The Rev. William B. Pugh, D.D., the alleged author of the Studies and 
now the stated clerk of the General Assembly, claimed that this section 
refers only to general councils of presbyteries and synods and not to 
the general council of the General Assembly as interpreted by the 
General Assembly of 1930.[4]

In answer to Dr. Pugh, it can be said that the interpretation of the 
General Assembly is not a part of the constitution of the church, but 
simply an action of one assembly which has no binding effect upon the 
succeeding assemblies. Even if this interpretation had binding effect 
upon the succeeding assemblies, the second part of that interpretation 
proves beyond doubt that the general council erred in initiating action 
against the Independent Board. It reads, "That business of a doctrinal 
or judicial character ... shall not be originated by or referred to the 
General Council of the General Assembly." No one can deny that the 
business regarding the Independent Board was of a judicial or doctrinal 
character. As the Northumberland Presbytery stated, this action was 
practically "conviction before trial."[5]

Dr. Machen characterized the claims of the general council as follows:

    The whole notion that the General Council is a sort of ad interim 
Star Chamber court and supreme administrative agency combined is 
entirely abhorrent to the Constitution of the Church and entirely 
contrary to the sections of the Constitution in which the powers of the 
General Council are defined.[6]

It is also apparent that the organization of the Independent Board was 
not the cause for "serious embarrassment or emergency" in the missionary 
work of the church, but rather the result of a deplorable situation. The 
Board of Foreign Missions had refused to take a positive stand against 
the Laymen's Report and Pearl Buck's unbelief. It is very doubtful that 
the reductions in missionary giving would have been less even if the 
Independent Board had never been organized. Bible-believers had lost 
confidence in the board and its program and could not be induced to 
contribute unless a radical reform took place.

The Studies further argue that the General Assembly "has all the power 
the Church would have if it were possible to convene the Church together 
in one place."[7] The only agency in the church which would have power 
even approaching this in degree is the General Assembly plus two-thirds 
of the presbyteries, which combination can amend the Confession of 
Faith.[8] If the General Assembly alone assumed such power it would 
simply nullify the constitution and place mere acts of the General 
Assembly, which in themselves are only pious advice, on a par with 
constitutional provisions. The constitution has very wisely provided for 
protection of the individual, the session, and the presbytery against 
any tyranny of the higher courts. As a matter of fact, the Presbytery of 
Northumberland exercised this right and repudiated the action of the 
General Assembly with reference to the Independent Board when it adopted 
the report of its Ad Interim Committee on Bills and Overtures which 
stated that the action was unconstitutional.[9]

The entire pamphlet sent out by the general council and its argument 
that a serious emergency existed in the missionary work of the church is 
based upon the conviction that the Independent Board is within the 
church and so subject to the jurisdiction of the church courts. Such an 
argument is fallacious.

The Independent Board never made the claim that it was a missionary 
organization of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. The word 
"Independent" in its name implies that the board is not a part of the 
constituted mission agencies of the church. The first issue of the 
Independent Board's official magazine states, "Why is it called the 
'Independent Board'? Because, according to its Charter, it is 
independent of ecclesiastical control. Its Charter expressly states that 
it is ecclesiastically independent."[10] In a statement adopted by the 
Executive Committee of the Independent Board on May 10, 1934, the 
independency of the board is clearly enunciated.[11]

As soon as the general secretary of the Independent Board took office in 
February, 1934, he sent out a pamphlet stating the program of the board. 
In this pamphlet no claim whatsoever is made that the board is within 
the church. Quite the contrary is stated. "It [the Independent Board] is 
independent in that it is not responsible, as an organization, to the 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., or to any 
other ecclesiastical body."[12] This is true of all the Independent 
Board literature, so that the statement of the general council that 
"certain ministers and laymen of the Presbyterian Church in organizing 
within the denomination an 'Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign 
Missions'" is without basis in fact. Furthermore, there were members of 
the Independent Board who were not ministers or members of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA. One was a minister of the Presbyterian 
Church in the United States, and one was a member of another Protestant 
communion. How could an organization with such a mixed membership claim 
to be within the Presbyterian Church in the USA or be judged to be 
within the church?

The question then resolves itself to this: "Does the law of the church 
prohibit the formation of the Independent Board?"[13] Chapter XXIII of 
the Form of Government states that there may be organizations "for the 
conduct of a special work for missionary and other benevolent purposes, 
or for the purpose of instruction in religion and development in 
Christian nurture." Such agencies must be responsible to a session, 
presbytery, synod, or general assembly, depending upon the scope of 
their activities. But this chapter contemplates organizations within the 
church which have a relationship to its judicatories and in no way 
includes boards which operate outside of the jurisdiction of the church, 
even though members of such boards may also be ministers or members of 
the church. Individuals within the Presbyterian Church in the USA have a 
perfect right to associate themselves together along with others to form 
a charitable organization. In fact, many such agencies with the word 
Presbyterian in their title exist. As the editor of Christianity Today 
wrote,

    It is contrary to fact, we believe, to state that the Independent 
Board is an organization "within the Church" in the sense alleged by the 
General Council. If so, it would seem that the Presbyterian and Reformed 
Publishing Company, under whose auspices Christianity Today is 
published, is also an organization "within the Church" and subject to 
General Assembly control. It, too, is incorporated under the laws of the 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with a Constitution and Bylaws. All its 
officers and members are either ministers or elders of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. Moreover, inasmuch as its editors are subject to 
its Board of Directors, it "assumes the direction of persons who are 
subject to the authority of church judicatories" and to that extent 
exercises what the General Council calls "ecclesiastical functions." It 
would seem also that without authority of the General Assembly it 
exercises what the general council calls "administrative functions" as 
it appeals to Presbyterians to "provide the ways and means"—to make 
financial contributions in other words—by which the paper may continue 
to be published. What is true of the Presbyterian and Reformed 
Publishing Company is also true in all essential respects of the 
companies that publish The Presbyterian, The Presbyterian Advance and 
The Presbyterian Banner, not to mention a host of other educational and 
benevolent corporations. We submit that the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions is no more an organization "within the 
Church" than are our religious newspapers or any educational or 
benevolent organization that employs Presbyterian ministers or that 
appeals to Presbyterians for financial support.[14]

It was further argued by those opposed to the Independent Board that the 
ministers and elders who had formed the Independent Board violated their 
ordination vows which promised, among other things, to study the peace, 
unity, and purity of the church.[15] It will be noticed that the vow 
pledges the minister "to be zealous and faithful in maintaining the 
truths of the gospel, and the purity and peace of the Church; whatever 
persecution or opposition may arise unto them on that account." It is 
plain from this pledge that peace is not to be gained at any price, but 
rather that the purity of the church and the truths of the gospel are to 
be maintained so that true peace will prevail. The minister is to accept 
"whatever persecution or opposition may arise ... on that account," so 
that controversy is not to be avoided but rather borne for the sake of 
the gospel. Members of the Independent Board could rightfully claim that 
they were most faithful to their vows for they attempted with all their 
powers to warn the church of unbelief in its midst.

The argument of the council is based upon the false idea that the 
liberty of an individual ceases when he joins the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA. As Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Murray Forst Thompson so ably put it:

    The whole burden of the General Council's argument is that when one 
joins the Presbyterian Church he has exercised his one and only act of 
freedom, and henceforth must either be obedient to all that he is 
ordered to do, or withdraw from the Church. And this in a Church whose 
Standards declare, "All synods and councils since the Apostles' times, 
whether general or particular, may err, and [many] have erred; therefore 
they are not to be made the rule of faith and practice..." (Confession 
of Faith, chapter XXXI, section III). The General Council thus flouts 
the law of the Church, and requires of its members an obedience to 
"synods and councils" which the law itself does not require! Indeed the 
Confession of Faith in the preceding section distinctively repudiates 
this erroneous idea of the authority of Church courts, and says that 
their decrees are to be received only "if consonant to the Word of 
God."[16]

In other words, when the general council sent out the Studies, it was 
not only exceeding its power but interfering in an organization over 
which it had no jurisdiction and to which it had no relationship. It 
appeared then, and it appears even more clearly now, that the 
ecclesiastical organization of the church was determined to stifle the 
testimony of the Independent Board to the gospel and to keep the 
corporate testimony of the church in conformity with the liberal 
tendencies of the day.

The section of the Studies which deals with missionary giving strikes at 
the very heart of Protestantism and the Bible and so demands a full 
exposition and refutation. Dr. Machen's document is so able and states 
so clearly the great Christian principles which are involved in the 
controversy, that we can do no better than to consider its 
arguments.[17] The statements in this brief are practically a Christian 
manifesto of what the Bible teaches on missionary giving, and on the 
subject of obedience to the authority of the Word of God rather than to 
human authority.

Dr. Machen gives four reasons for refusing to obey the order of the 
General Assembly to sever his connections with the Independent Board. 
First, "Obedience to the order in the way demanded by the General 
Assembly would involve support of a propaganda that is contrary to the 
gospel of Christ."[18] In chapter six it was pointed out plainly that 
the Board of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in the USA had 
been guilty of supporting and encouraging propaganda that is contrary to 
the Bible. Dr. Machen also rightly claimed that his charges against the 
policy of the board had never been refuted. After six years that claim 
is still valid. What is more, he argues, Pearl Buck's resignation was 
not asked for but was accepted "with regret" and "earnest prayer that 
her unusual abilities may continue to be richly used in behalf of the 
people of China."

The Rev. Lindsay S. B. Hadley, a signer of the Auburn Affirmation, 
resigned as candidate secretary of the board, but the members of the 
board, so Dr. Machen continues, still regard him as capable and 
admirable for such a position so that the board continues to support a 
signer of the Auburn Affirmation in a responsible position. In other 
words, since the board condoned such modernism and allowed exponents of 
it to remain under its jurisdiction, Mr. Machen could not support the 
board and be true to the Bible.

In the second place, Dr. Machen states that he cannot obey the order of 
the General Assembly because by so doing he would substitute human 
authority for the authority of the Word of God. This claim is 
substantiated by the fact that the General Assembly has said that an 
individual who...

    will not give to promote the officially authorized missionary 
program of the Presbyterian Church is in exactly the same position with 
reference to the Constitution of the Church as a church member or an 
individual that would refuse to take part in the celebration of the 
Lord's Supper or any other of the prescribed ordinances of the 
denomination as set forth in chapter VII of the Form of Government.[19]

This means that a member or minister of the church must support whatever 
missionary program may be established by successive general assemblies 
regardless of the program's faithfulness to the Bible. To prove that 
this is the true inference to be drawn from the above statement, Dr. 
Machen cites five examples.

First, the Presbytery of New Brunswick adopted a provision on September 
26, 1933, stating that "all candidates seeking licensure or ordination 
shall be examined as to their willingness to support the regularly 
authorized Boards and agencies of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., 
particularly the Board of Foreign Missions." As a second example, he 
says that some members of the Presbytery of Chester voted against the 
action of the presbytery in licensing certain candidates because these 
young men would not give a blanket promise to support the boards and 
agencies of the church. Thirdly, Dr. Machen maintains that the 
complainants of the Presbytery of Philadelphia were opposed to the 
reception of Dr. Machen from the Presbytery of New Brunswick, because 
they were not allowed to question him concerning his allegiance to the 
boards of the church. As a fourth example, he states that the Presbytery 
of Baltimore refused to license Mr. Calvin K. Cummings on the same 
ground. As a fifth case, Dr. Machen argues that the stated clerk of the 
General Assembly wrote to the stated clerk of the Presbytery of 
Baltimore,

    If and when any students from Westminster Seminary come before your 
Presbytery, they should be informed that the Presbytery will neither 
license nor ordain them until they have given a written pledge that they 
will support the official agencies of the church as a part of their 
pledge of loyalty to the government and discipline of the church.[20]

These examples are convincing evidence that Dr. Machen's interpretation 
of the assembly's action is correct.

In the third place, Dr. Machen could not obey the order of the General 
Assembly because it advocates the principle that support of the church 
is "not a matter of free will giving but the payment of a tax enforced 
by penalties." The Studies seem to allow free will giving from the 
following quotation:

    On the contrary, it [the General Assembly] has always maintained 
that the right to control the property of the members of the Church, to 
assess the amount of their contributions, or to prescribe how they shall 
dispose of their money, is utterly foreign to the spirit of 
Presbyterianism. Every contribution on the part of an individual member 
must be purely voluntary.[21]

But the following quotation from the same report contradicts the first 
statement.

    In maintaining, however, this personal freedom of individual 
members, in their contributions to the Church, the General Assembly has 
never recognized any inconsistency in asserting with equal force, that 
there is a definite and sacred obligation on the part of every member of 
the Presbyterian Church to contribute to those objects designated by the 
authorized judicatory of the denomination.[22]

Dr. Machen paraphrases these conflicting assertions of the Studies as 
follows:

    Support of the Boards is voluntary; don't you dare say that it is 
not voluntary; but all the same, if you do not come right across with it 
we shall see that it will be the worse for you ... You may enter the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. or not as you please, ... but if you 
do enter you must leave your Christian liberty behind. If you once enter 
you are slaves. Henceforth support of whatever missionary program 
successive General Assemblies may set up is obligatory upon you whether 
you think the program right or wrong. If you think that the missionary 
program of any General Assembly is so wrong that you cannot 
conscientiously support it, then the only thing for you to do is to 
leave the Church."[23]

In the fourth place, Dr. Machen claims that all of the three mentioned 
implications of obedience to the order of the General Assembly are 
contrary to the Bible. The Bible requires that a Christian must preach 
the gospel of Christ and forbids him to preach any other gospel. "Though 
we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that 
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed" (Gal 1:8). This 
statement, as Dr. Machen so clearly writes, is a summary of what runs 
throughout the entire Bible. Christianity is utterly exclusive.

The Bible forbids a man to substitute human authority for the Word of 
God. "Ye were bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men" (I Cor 
7:23). As Dr. Machen claims,

    In demanding that I shall shift my message to suit the shifting 
votes of an Assembly that is elected every year, the General Assembly is 
attacking Christian liberty; but what should never be forgotten is that 
to attack Christian liberty is to attack the lordship of Jesus 
Christ.[24]

The Bible also upholds the principle of free will offerings as opposed 
to a tax enforced by penalties. "Every man according as he prospereth in 
his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God 
loveth a cheerful giver" (II Cor 9:7).

Dr. Machen concludes his masterful brief on the subject by asserting, 
"Since the Action of the General Assembly was unconstitutional it should 
be ignored both by the individuals concerned and by the 
Presbyteries."[25] This advice the members of the Independent Board 
followed.

The Studies of the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
had been sent to the commissioners in advance of the 1934 General 
Assembly, but no one knew just what action the General Assembly would 
recommend. On Friday (May 25th) at one o'clock, only a few minutes 
before adjournment for luncheon, and on the very afternoon set aside for 
consideration of this matter, the resolution of the general council was 
distributed to the commissioners. Most of the Commissioners hardly had 
time to read the proposed action, let alone prepare an answer to it. 
Such a procedure failed to observe the ordinary rights of parliamentary 
justice and demonstrated the fear and unreasonableness which must have 
possessed the council.

The action which was read by the stated clerk of the assembly commanded 
the Independent Board to cease soliciting funds within the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, and demanded that ministers of the church resign from 
the board or suffer discipline.[26]

As soon as the document was read, Dr. Mark A. Matthews, a member of the 
general council, arose and proceeded to deliver a long lecture on the 
theory of representative government and its divisions into executive, 
legislative, and judicial power. Most of his remarks were irrelevant to 
the issue, but his general discourse on Presbyterian law in a vague way 
tended to impress the commissioners that the Independent Board was 
illegal and that the members of it should be asked to resign from the 
board or suffer church discipline.

The Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, managing editor of Christianity Today 
and a member of the Independent Board, obtained the floor and in a short 
but effective speech declared that the proposed action was 
unconstitutional and that the Independent Board was not within the 
jurisdiction of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. He used some of the 
arguments which have already been discussed. More speeches were made for 
and against the resolution, but after several hours of debate it was 
passed by a vote of approximately four to one.[27]

The issue raised by the deliverance of the 1934 General Assembly was not 
merely technical or legal, but of fundamental importance. Let no man 
maintain that the difference was only administrative or governmental or 
a question of interpreting the constitution of the church correctly. It 
placed in juxtaposition two authorities, the Bible on the one hand, and 
the decrees of a human council on the other. Allegiance to the Lord 
Jesus Christ is demanded in the Word of God, and when that conflicts 
with the commands of men, a Christian must follow Christ regardless of 
cost. Six years have elapsed since the deliverance was adopted, 
sufficient time to consider the controversy calmly and in the light of 
facts, but only one conclusion is possible: the General Assembly erred 
and acted in a manner contrary to the Word of God and contrary to its 
own constitution. And what is more tragic, it resulted in the 
resignation of ministers and laymen from the church, some of whom were 
among the most consistent and the most vigorous opponents of unbelief. 
It left the modernists and the doctrinal indifferentists in complete 
control of the church.

Chapter 8. The Machen Trial

IMMEDIATELY AFTER the Deliverance of 1934 was issued, there were many in 
the church who did not and could not believe that the presbyteries would 
obey its orders and prosecute members of the Independent Board if they 
refused to resign from the board. The consensus among conservatives in 
the church seemed to be that no presbytery would discipline 
Presbyterians for joining any society whose object was to preach the 
gospel. This opinion went further in the belief that such action would 
only arouse members of the church to greater hostility toward the Board 
of Foreign Missions and the ecclesiastical organization.

In this opinion the conservatives were very wrong, for the 
relentlessness with which the hierarchy of the church began to function 
in enforcing the so-called mandate was not to be mistaken. While some 
presbyteries did nothing at first, the church was soon to witness real 
efficiency in court procedure.

On August 1, 1934, the administrative committee of the general council 
issued a letter defending the deliverance of the assembly, adding the 
information, "that excepting in relatively small areas of our Church, 
the significance of the action of the 1934 General Assembly with 
reference to the 'Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions' 
has been clearly understood and warmly approved."[1]

The Rev. A. L. Latham, D.D., minister of the Third Presbyterian Church, 
Chester, Pennsylvania, wrote an open letter in reply to the 
administrative committee. He said in part,

    I have no connection with the Independent Board, and never have had 
any. Nevertheless, I believe there is abundant ground for the formation 
of the same. The pity is this, that the Church Council and the General 
Assembly have done nothing to remove these grounds ... The Assembly has 
not sought to remove the disturbing cause; but rather, to coerce.[2]

The Rev. Clarence E. Macartney, D.D., issued a challenge to the action 
of the General Assembly relative to the Independent Board under the 
title, "Presbyterians Awake!"[3] He challenged the action on six 
grounds: First, that the General Assembly had no right to initiate such 
action; second, that it violated the right of private judgment; third, 
that it pronounced judgment without a hearing and trial; fourth, that it 
amended the constitution of the church by adding, to the subscription 
vows of candidates for licensure and ordination, a vow to support the 
boards and agencies; fifth, that it compelled every member of the church 
to contribute to the boards; sixth, that it was a usurpation of power 
and inaugurated an era of inquisition and persecution.

The Rev. William B. Pugh, D.D., the reputed author of the Studies of the 
Constitution, answered Dr. Macartney in an article entitled 
"Presbyterians Are Awake!,"[4] condemning Dr. Macartney's charges as 
"emphasized by the incorrect statements, the unsupported assumptions, 
the unwarranted inferences, the serious discrepancies, and the false 
interpretations which are inserted in the article in support of the 
various arguments or pleas for rebellion." Such abusive and intemperate 
language is rather indicative of the lack of judgment and objective 
attitude on the part of the one who wrote the Studies. After this 
tirade, Dr. Pugh attempted to answer each one of Dr. Macartney's points. 
Arguments similar to Dr. Pugh's have already been considered at length 
in the preceding chapter so no further discussion will be presented 
here.

A criticism of the action of the General Assembly also came from the 
Rev. Henry S. Coffin, D.D., president of Union Theological Seminary, New 
York City, a well-known modernist institution. He regarded the founders 
of the Independent Board as bitter, intolerant, unfair, disloyal, and 
bigoted, and the officers of the General Assembly and the Board of 
Foreign Missions as tried and true servants of the church. Nevertheless, 
he did write that the assembly "acted unwisely" and that he read the 
document with "mixed feelings."[5]

These protests by a liberal as well as by conservatives made little 
difference to the church machine. Shortly before the deliverance was 
adopted, a foretaste of what was going to happen occurred in the 
Presbytery of Philadelphia when Dr. Machen transferred his membership 
from New Brunswick Presbytery to Philadelphia Presbytery in January, 
1934.

Dr. Machen had been teaching at Westminster Theological Seminary for 
several years, so he considered it proper that he transfer his 
membership to the Presbytery of Philadelphia within whose bounds he then 
resided and labored. On January 23, 1934, he requested that he be 
granted a letter of dismissal from the Presbytery of New Brunswick to 
the Philadelphia Presbytery. The letter was granted and he was commended 
to the Presbytery of Philadelphia as a minister in good and regular 
standing. On March 5, 1934, the presbytery's Standing Committee on 
Candidates, Credentials, and Unemployed Ministers recommended that he be 
received upon the basis of his certificate of dismissal from New 
Brunswick. Certain members of the presbytery wished to ask Dr. Machen 
questions about his attitude toward the official agencies of the church. 
The moderator ruled that Dr. Machen was not required to answer these 
questions. By a vote of seventy-eight to forty-eight he was received 
into the presbytery and no appeal was taken to the moderator's ruling. 
Following this action, forty-four members of the presbytery filed a 
complaint with the Synod of Pennsylvania against the presbytery's action 
in receiving Dr. Machen. The synod voted to hold the complaint until the 
synod meeting in 1935.

In the meantime the General Assembly issued its decree against the 
members of the Independent Board, and the stated clerk of the General 
Assembly transmitted the action of the assembly to the clerk of New 
Brunswick Presbytery, instead of to the clerk of the Presbytery of 
Philadelphia, and added,

    The Stated Clerk of the General Assembly has on June 13, 1934 
notified as therein provided the following named person who to the best 
of his information and belief is within the jurisdiction of your 
Presbytery, Rev. J. Gresham Machen, D.D., 206 South 13th Street, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

But the Presbytery of New Brunswick had anticipated the stated clerk of 
the General Assembly in its zeal to obey the assembly's orders and on 
June 26, 1934, had passed the following motion,

    By motion, the Stated Clerk was authorized to ascertain from the 
Rev. J. Gresham Machen his answer in respect to the matter sent out by 
the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly, entitled, 'The Independent 
Board for Presbyterian Foreign Missions.'[6]

A little later the Synod of Pennsylvania upheld the complaint and 
declared that Dr. Machen was a member of New Brunswick Presbytery.[7]

An excellent brief on the subject of jurisdiction was written by Dr. 
Machen's counsel, the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths. Its arguments will 
be considered later on in this chapter. On the surface of the situation, 
however, it is evident that the stated clerk of the General Assembly was 
presumptuous and, as Dr. Maitland Alexander, a former moderator of the 
General Assembly, remarked, "If we are to have a Pope give us one with 
the wisdom and conservatism of the Vatican."[8]

As a result of being reinstated in the Presbytery of New Brunswick, more 
or less by fiat, Dr. Machen was held to be subject to its jurisdiction, 
and the judicial process against him for membership on the Independent 
Board was begun by the Presbytery of New Brunswick. Action was started 
by other presbyteries against several members of the Independent Board, 
but since Dr. Machen was the president of the Independent Board, and 
since his trial formed the basis for all of the others, both in form and 
charges, his trial will serve as a basis for detailed study. On the 
other hand, mention might be made of other trials.

The other outstanding trials of Independent Board members were those of 
the Rev. Carl McIntire in West Jersey Presbytery; the Rev. J. Oliver 
Buswell, Jr., D.D., in the Presbytery of Chicago; five members of 
Philadelphia Presbytery: the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, the Rev. 
Merrill T. MacPherson, the Rev. Edwin H. Rian, the Rev. Charles J. 
Woodbridge, and the Rev. Paul Woolley; the Rev. Harold S. Laird, D.D., 
in New Castle Presbytery; and the Rev. Roy T. Brumbaugh, D.D., in 
Olympia Presbytery. Miss Mary W. Stewart and Mr. Murray Forst Thompson, 
members of the Holland Memorial Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia, 
were tried by the session of that congregation.

Ministers Griffiths, McIntire, MacPherson, Rian, Woodbridge, and Woolley 
were ordered suspended from the ministry.[9] Dr. Buswell was given the 
sentence of admonition.[10] Dr. Laird was rebuked by the presbytery. Mr. 
Thompson and Miss Stewart were admonished. And Dr. Brumbaugh withdrew 
from the church before judgment could be pronounced. It is interesting 
to note that the Presbytery of Chester refused to take disciplinary 
action against the Rev. Wilbur M. Smith, D.D., pastor of the First 
Church, Coatesville, Pennsylvania, for his membership on the Independent 
Board when it adopted a minority report of its Judicial Committee.[11] 
Here was at least one presbytery which had the courage to stand by its 
constitutional rights.

Now for a detailed consideration of Dr. Machen's trial. In answer to the 
presbytery's request for information relative to his membership in the 
Independent Board, Dr. Machen replied on July 25, 1934,

    Without prejudicing the question whether I am or am not still under 
the jurisdiction of New Brunswick or whether, if I am still under the 
jurisdiction of that Presbytery, the Presbytery is warranted in 
addressing to me officially the inquiry contained in your letter, I 
desire to say, very respectfully, for the information of the Presbytery, 
that I have not severed my connection with the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions; and that I regard the action of the 
General Assembly enjoining me to do so as being contrary to the 
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.[12]

When Dr. Machen's determination not to resign from the Independent Board 
was learned by the Presbytery of New Brunswick, the following action was 
taken by the presbytery on September, 1934:

    That a special Committee be appointed to confer further with Dr. 
Machen with respect to his relationship with the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions and to make recommendations to presbytery 
for the disposition of the matter involving the mandate of the General 
Assembly to the presbytery and the relation of Dr. Machen to the 
Independent Board.[13]

A committee of five ministers and two elders was appointed, of which the 
Rev. D. Wilson Hollinger of Trenton, New Jersey, was the chairman. Dr. 
Machen never met with this committee because it refused to allow him the 
privilege of the presence of a stenographer. He wished this privilege 
for himself as well as for the committee if it desired, since every 
member of the committee was opposed to him. In fairness and for the sake 
of accuracy he believed that a written record was essential. After much 
correspondence, the committee finally allowed Dr. Machen to present his 
point of view concerning membership in the Independent Board in written 
form. This statement has already been discussed in detail in the 
preceding chapter.

At a meeting of New Brunswick Presbytery on December 20, 1934, the 
following action was taken on recommendation of the special committee to 
confer with Dr. Machen.

    (1) That Presbytery prefer charges against the Rev. J. Gresham 
Machen, D.D., for offenses which are as follows: With the violation of 
his ordination vows; with his disapproval of the government and 
discipline of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.; with renouncing and 
disobeying the rules and lawful authority of the Church; with advocating 
rebellious defiance against the lawful authority of the Church; with 
refusal to sever his connection with the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions as directed by the General Assembly; with 
not being zealous and faithful in maintaining the peace of the Church; 
with contempt of and rebellion against his superiors in the Church in 
their lawful counsels, commands and corrections; with breach of his 
lawful promises; and with refusing subjection to his brethren in the 
Lord. (2) That a Prosecuting Committee be appointed by Presbytery, which 
committee shall conduct the prosecution in all its stages in whatever 
judicatory. (3) That the Presbytery transmit the case against Dr. Machen 
for hearing and decision to a special judicial Commission to be duly 
elected by the Presbytery.[14]

Dr. Machen was cited to appear before the Special Judicial Commission on 
February 14, 1935, from which sessions the public was to be barred. The 
first session of the trial was held in the First Presbyterian Church, 
Trenton, New Jersey, in the presence of a large audience composed mostly 
of Dr. Machen's followers and a number of newspaper reporters. The 
protests of the defendant against a secret trial had compelled the 
commission to open the meetings of the trial to the public.

Every member of the commission was challenged by the defendant's counsel 
as to his right to sit on the commission. Dr. Culp was challenged 
because he had signed the Auburn Affirmation. Mr. Magill was challenged 
because he had been a member of the special committee to deal with Dr. 
Machen, and which committee had recommended that Dr. Machen be tried. 
Dr. Kuizenga was challenged because he occupied the chair of apologetics 
at Princeton Seminary, to which chair Dr. Machen had been appointed by 
the board of directors, and because there existed a doctrinal 
controversy between Princeton and Westminster Theological Seminary where 
Dr. Machen served as professor. Mr. Morris was challenged because his 
statements had already prejudiced the case, and because one of his 
elders was a member of the prosecuting committee. Mr. Morris had stated 
that if Dr. Machen could not keep step with the overwhelming majority of 
the General Assembly he should get out of the church. Mr. Hankinson was 
challenged because his pastor, the Rev. A. Kenneth Magner, was a member 
of the prosecuting committee. Mr. Cooley was challenged because his 
pastor was a signer of the Auburn Affirmation. Dr. Kummel was challenged 
on the same ground, and further because he had been illegally elected to 
the commission.[15]

The charges and specifications against Dr. Machen, which were only an 
elaboration of those recommended by the special committee to confer with 
Dr. Machen, were also presented at the first session.[16] At the second 
meeting all the challenges against members of the commission were 
disallowed except those against Mr. Magill, so that six, instead of 
seven, continued to sit on the commission.

The attitude of the commission toward the central issue of the trial, 
that of doctrine, became evident when the defense objected to the 
presence of Dr. Kuizenga of Princeton Seminary on the commission. One of 
the prosecutors immediately arose and said, "We would like to object, 
Mr. Moderator, to the introduction of this, to anything that goes back 
to the Princeton Seminary, or the doctrinal phase of this case."[17]

The question of jurisdiction was the next matter argued. The defense 
maintained that New Brunswick Presbytery had no jurisdiction in the case 
for three reasons: first, Dr. Machen had been dismissed by the 
Presbytery of New Brunswick as a member in good and regular standing and 
received by the Presbytery of Philadelphia, March 5, 1934, on 
recommendation of the standing committee on Candidates, Credentials, and 
Unemployed Ministers by a vote of seventy-eight to forty-eight. That was 
an established fact which no one could refute. Second, the complaint 
which had been filed with the Synod of Pennsylvania by the forty-four 
members of Philadelphia Presbytery could not possibly stay the action of 
the presbytery in receiving Dr. Machen. The Book of Discipline, chapter 
XII, section 8, recognizes a complaint against a "particular 
delinquency, action or decision" of an inferior judicatory, but a "stay" 
or an arresting of the case until the decision is rendered by the next 
superior judicatory can only take place in the matter of a "decision." A 
"decision" involves contemplated action in the future, while in the case 
of Dr. Machen's reception an "action" had been taken which made it a 
fait accompli. Third, the required one-third had never properly signed 
the complaint. The Rev. W. K. Eubank, D.D., who had seconded the motion 
to receive Dr. Machen unanimously, had signed the complaint. There were 
132 present at the meeting, so that with Dr. Eubank's name subtracted 
there lacked one for the required one-third to "stay" the action. What 
is more, the Rev. J. R Jackson had withdrawn his name from the 
complaint, so that actually the complaint did not contain the required 
one-third.

With respect to this question it is worth noting that on April 1, 1935, 
by a vote of sixty-six to thirty-two, the Presbytery of Philadelphia 
adopted a memorial to the Synod of New Jersey stating that Dr. Machen 
was still under the jurisdiction of Philadelphia Presbytery.[18]

As a response to the arguments on jurisdiction, the prosecution set 
forth two grounds for believing that New Brunswick Presbytery did have 
jurisdiction over Dr. Machen. First, Dr. Machen had never presented a 
certificate of membership from Philadelphia Presbytery. Second, the 
stated clerk of the Philadelphia Presbytery had never returned the stub 
of Dr. Machen's certificate to the clerk of New Brunswick Presbytery. 
The defense immediately replied that the lack of receipt of the 
certificate stub by the clerk of New Brunswick Presbytery could not 
possibly change one's membership, and that the Book of Discipline 
recognized no degrees of reception as a member. No attempt was made by 
the prosecution to answer the three arguments of the defense. As was 
anticipated, the commission ruled in favor of the prosecution.

Further objections by the defense relative to prejudgment of the case by 
New Brunswick Presbytery and to the fact that proper charges and 
specifications had never been presented by New Brunswick Presbytery to 
the commission were overruled, thus ending the second session of the 
trial.

On March 7, 1935, at the third session the dramatic and tragic point of 
the trial was reached. In order to appreciate this climax it is 
necessary to note the contrast between the defendant, Dr. Machen, and 
the personnel of the commission.

Without dispute it can be stated that before the commission of New 
Brunswick Presbytery stood one of the greatest theologians of his 
generation. His large and accurate fund of theological knowledge, his 
loyalty to the historic Christian position as held by the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, his keen incisive mind, and his outstanding 
contributions to the defense of Christianity through his books and his 
teaching in the classroom for over twenty-five years, placed him above 
the members of the commission. Dr. Machen by common consent was regarded 
as a great defender of the faith. No one could accuse him of turning 
either to the left or to the right of sound doctrine. Yet, there he 
stood that day on trial for his ecclesiastical life because he had been 
willing to defend the truths of the gospel and accept whatever 
persecution would come to him on that account.

On the other hand, the members of the commission were not only inferior 
to him in theological knowledge, in brilliancy of mind, and in 
contribution to the defense of the faith, but at least one of these, the 
moderator of the commission, the Rev. Cordie J. Culp, Ph.D., had signed 
the Auburn Affirmation which attacked directly the full truthfulness of 
holy Scripture and declared that belief in the virgin birth of Christ, 
his bodily resurrection, his substitutionary atonement, and his miracles 
is nonessential to the Christian faith. Yet it was this very man as 
moderator of the commission who now asked Dr. Machen to stand, and in 
solemn stillness asked him the question, "It is now necessary for the 
court to inquire as to the plea. How does the defendant plead as to 
charge No. 1?" To each of the six charges Dr. Machen replied, "Not 
guilty!"

But the farcical and disgusting aspect of the entire proceedings 
followed immediately. The Book of Discipline states,

    Questions as to order or evidence, arising in the course of a trial, 
shall, after the parties have had an opportunity to be heard, be decided 
by the moderator, subject to an appeal to the judiciary or judicial 
commission, to be determined without debate.[19]

Disregarding this rule and making the trial even more ridiculous, the 
commission issued the following ruling:

    1. This court rules that it cannot accept and hear any further 
arguments or inferences based on the Auburn Affirmation, or on its 
signing by certain members of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.

    2. This court rules that it cannot accept and hear any further 
arguments or inferences against the Board of Foreign Missions of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. It is not within the province of this 
Commission to hear either defence or attack of the Board of Foreign 
Missions of our Church, since both the General Assembly and the 
Presbytery of New Brunswick, from which this Commission derives its 
powers, have given the Board of Foreign Missions their vote of approval.

    3. This court rules that it cannot accept and hear any further 
arguments or inferences based on the Princeton-Westminster Seminary 
controversy. We cannot entertain any arguments directed against any 
individuals, Boards, Agencies, Institutions, or Judicatories, against 
which no charges have been presented in the Presbytery of New Brunswick, 
and which are not on trial before this judicial Commission.

    4. This court rules that it cannot accept or regard any arguments 
questioning the legality or validity of the Mandate of the General 
Assembly in reference to the "Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign 
Missions." It is one of the well established and fundamental principles 
of the Presbyterian system that a subordinate judicatory cannot sit in 
judgment upon the acts or deliverances of a superior judicatory, whether 
or not we think those acts or deliverances have been wise equitable, and 
for the edification of the Church. So long as such acts and deliverances 
stand this Commission has no power but to obey.[20]

The defense asked for a short recess and then entered a protest.[21]

Another historic church trial comes to mind. Martin Luther, the German 
monk, was asked by the Diet of Worms to retract what he had written 
against the doctrines of the Roman church. He was asked two questions, 
"Do you acknowledge these books to have been written by you?" After the 
books were listed Luther replied, "As to the first, I acknowledge as 
mine the books which have just been named; I cannot deny them." A second 
question was put to him, "Are you prepared to retract these books, and 
their contents; or do you persist in the opinions you have advanced in 
them?" In reply to the second query, Luther asked for time to defend 
himself. "For this reason I entreat your imperial majesty, with all 
humility, to allow me time, that I may answer without offending against 
the Word of God."[22] Luther's request was granted and the next day was 
set as the time for a defense. On the next day he gave his defense and 
ended with the historic words, "And I neither can nor will revoke 
anything, seeing that is not safe or right to act against conscience. 
God help me. Amen."[23]

In other words, even in those dark days when justice was supposed to be 
dead and when alleged heretics were burned at the stake, Martin Luther 
had an opportunity to defend his accusations against the church and to 
show that his doctrines were in accord with the truth of the Word of 
God. But Dr. Machen, in the twentieth century of enlightenment, was 
denied the very basis of justice and fairness and practically condemned 
without a hearing.

As a result of this unexpected and unfair move by the commission, the 
rest of the proceedings became more or less meaningless. The opening 
speech by the prosecution was given by the Rev. D. Wilson Hollinger, in 
which he reiterated that the case was not doctrinal but administrative 
and that the Presbytery of New Brunswick and the church were perfectly 
orthodox.[24] After this the prosecution offered various documents, 
mostly pamphlets issued by the Independent Board, as evidence to prove 
their case against Dr. Machen. The whole procedure was little short of 
ridiculous, especially since the defendant was not allowed to prove that 
his charges against the Board of Foreign Missions were true.

As a formality, the defense moved for a verdict for the defense which 
was overruled by the commission. The defense then expressed the 
willingness to prove that Dr. Machen's charges against the Board of 
Foreign Missions were true.[25] When the court refused to hear this 
evidence, the counsel for the defense stated:

    Mr. Moderator, the rulings of this court relating to argument and 
evidence have deprived this defendant of the right to introduce facts 
and arguments essential to his defense against these charges and to be 
heard concerning the same. Since this defendant is thus precluded from 
offering the defense to which he is entitled by the constitution of the 
Church, the exercise of which right has been denied by this commission, 
he does not find himself able to present a so-called "case" which would 
not include these essential facts and arguments, for such a "case" would 
not be the case which, by the law of the Church, he is entitled to 
present.

    Therefore, Mr. Moderator, under these circumstances the defense has 
nothing further to say.[26]

At the final session of the trial held on March 29, 1935, the commission 
declared Dr. Machen guilty, suspended him from the ministry of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, but recommended that the sentence take 
effect only after appeal to the higher courts had been heard.[27] Dr. 
Machen stated afterwards,

    The Special Judicial Commission of the Presbytery of New Brunswick 
has simply condemned me without giving me a hearing. I am condemned for 
failing to obey a lawful order but when my counsel, the Rev. H. 
McAllister Griffiths, offered to prove that the order that I had 
disobeyed was not lawful but unlawful the court refused to him a word of 
argument. I am condemned for making false assertions about the Modernism 
of the official Board of Foreign Missions, but when my counsel offered 
to prove that those assertions were not false but true, the court would 
not hear a word of the evidence that we were perfectly ready to produce. 
It is not too much to say that a trial conducted in that fashion is 
nothing but a farce. The customary attempt is being made to obscure the 
issue, by representing it as merely administrative and not doctrinal, 
but I think real Christian people and even the general public are being 
less and less deceived by such evasion.[28]

The Rev. Daniel Russell, D.D., moderator of the Presbytery of New York, 
said in an interview published in The New York Times of March 31, 1935,

    Most Presbyterians hold no brief for the Independent Board for 
Presbyterian Foreign Missions. Many regret what has seemed at times an 
intolerant attitude on the part of Dr. Machen toward his brethren.

    Nevertheless, there must be a widespread feeling of sorrow together 
with something of sympathy for the accused in that, after thirty years 
of distinguished service to religion, this famed scholar, whether 
through his own fault or otherwise, has been condemned by his Presbytery 
... and that his denomination, if the condemnation is sustained, can 
find no place in which his brilliant gifts may be utilized....

Was Dr. Machen's trial a fair one? Ecclesiastical lawyers maintain that 
no question of doctrine is involved. In the more adequate view there are 
doctrinal differences which run into the heart of the entire problem. 
These the accused was not permitted to discuss in his defense.

The Rev. A. Z. Conrad, D.D., pastor of the Park Street Congregational 
Church, Boston, Massachusetts, described the trial as follows:

    Not for a generation has anything so high-handed, so unjust, so 
utterly un-Christian been witnessed as the trial of Dr. Gresham Machen 
in the New Brunswick Presbytery... It will be a sorry day for 
Presbyterians if such a travesty as the pretended trial of Dr. Machen is 
permitted to stand as the judgment of the majority.[29]

Dr. Clarence E. Macartney commented,

    Sad, lamentable, tragic, unthinkable that the Church Dr. Machen has 
served for thirty years, and more than twenty of them at our oldest and 
most famous seminary, and to which he has brought renown by his great 
talent, should now repay him by casting him out of its fellowship.[30]

Thus ended the trial of the Rev. J. Gresham Machen, D.D., Litt.D., 
before the Special Judicial Commission of the Presbytery of New 
Brunswick. Dr. Machen appealed the decision to the Permanent Judicial 
Commission of the General Assembly, but he lost the appeal and was 
suspended from the ministry of the church.[31] The years that have 
intervened only make the decision all the more unfair and sad. This 
travesty of justice remains as a blot on the history of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, and as an illustration that history repeats itself. 
The church is once more in a state of apostasy and spiritual decay, for 
how else could it "excommunicate" one of its greatest and most valiant 
soldiers of the truth?

In 1893 the church suspended Dr. Charles A. Briggs of New York from the 
ministry because he did not believe in the infallibility of the Bible, 
and in 1936 the same church suspended Dr. Machen from the ministry 
because he was determined to follow the teachings of the infallible Word 
of God. Do not these two actions indicate the tremendous transformation 
in the Presbyterian church from orthodoxy to modernism?

Chapter 9. The 1935 General Assembly

THE 1935 General Assembly met in Cincinnati, Ohio, in an atmosphere 
tense with feeling for and against the deliverance concerning the 
Independent Board and its members. The conviction of Dr. Machen by New 
Brunswick Presbytery had created more antagonism against the hierarchy 
of the church, as well as a feeling of futility in the hearts of the 
conservatives, while the vast majority of the church was more determined 
than ever to rid the church of the "trouble makers." It was manifest 
that the church would witness a pitched battle between the two forces.

Shortly before the convening of the General Assembly, a very significant 
"Testimony" against the 1934 deliverance, under the auspices of a 
nationwide committee of ruling elders, was addressed to the entire 
eldership of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. It is important to note 
that these elders of the committee, none of whom was connected with the 
Independent Board, stated deliberately,

    We believe that doctrinal differences lie at the heart of and 
furnish the motivating cause for the present discord in our Church, and 
that issues having the aspect of administrative and governmental matters 
are only collateral manifestations and outgrowths of fundamental and 
irreconcilable differences in belief.[1]

The Rev. Burleigh Cruickshank, D.D., not associated with the Independent 
Board, also wrote, "The real issue is between two theological points of 
view which have become, during the last years, mutually exclusive."[2]

The Rev. William C. Robinson, D.D., a professor in Columbia Theological 
Seminary, Decatur, Georgia, and a minister of the Presbyterian Church in 
the US (southern Presbyterian), made the accusation, "Theoretically, 
your church stands upon the Word of God as the rule of faith and 
practice. I regret to state, however, that practically she seems to be 
making the voice of the Church her rule of faith and manners."[3] Such 
testimony is in direct contradiction to the opinion of the Special 
Judicial Commission of New Brunswick Presbytery, which claimed that the 
issue was administrative and not doctrinal.

Thirteen presbyteries had sent overtures or resolutions relative to the 
Independent Board. Six urged the General Assembly to take care that the 
foreign missionary program of the church be in full accord with the 
Bible, and that only those who are fully aware of the danger in which 
the church stands and who are faithful to the Word of God be elected to 
membership on the Board of Foreign Missions. Five overtures and four 
resolutions asked the General Assembly to rescind the action against the 
members of the Independent Board or drop the process against them.[4]

But the opposition to and agreement with the action against the 
Independent Board which had been generated since the 1934 General 
Assembly found even more vehement and drastic expression in the General 
Assembly. The Assembly was hardly officially constituted when the Rev. 
George E. Barnes, D.D., a signer of the Auburn Affirmation and a 
minister in Philadelphia, arose and read a petition signed by other 
ministers, protesting the enrollment of the Rev. H. McAllister 
Griffiths, the Rev. Merrill T. MacPherson of Philadelphia Presbytery, 
and the Rev. Carl McIntire of West Jersey Presbytery on the ground of 
their refusal to resign from the Independent Board. The petition was 
given to the Standing Committee on Polity, and the three ministers were 
granted full membership in the Assembly pending the report of the 
committee.[5]

On Monday, May 27, the General Assembly adopted the committee's report, 
recommending "That the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths and the Rev. Merrill 
T. MacPherson, of the Presbytery of Philadelphia, and the Rev. Carl 
McIntire of the Presbytery of West Jersey, be not enrolled in this 
General Assembly."[6] The three unseated commissioners were allowed to 
speak a few words of protest and later in the Assembly a formal protest 
against this action was filed by certain members of the Assembly.[7]

This action not only demonstrated the temper of the General Assembly and 
its control by those who were set against the Independent Board, but it 
also showed little regard for the constitutional rights of the three 
commissioners. These men were members in good and regular standing in 
their presbyteries and had been duly elected as commissioners to the 
General Assembly. They were not under the condemnation of their 
presbyteries, nor had they been cited to appear before their 
presbyteries because they had failed to obey the "mandate" of the 
General Assembly relative to the Independent Board. The General Assembly 
of 1934 had instructed the presbyteries "to institute, or cause to be 
instituted, promptly such disciplinary action as is set forth in the 
Book of Discipline,"[8] if the members of the Independent Board within 
their jurisdiction did not resign from the Independent Board. Until a 
minister or member of the Independent Board had been brought to trial 
and some disciplinary action pronounced upon him by his presbytery, he 
remained a member of the presbytery in good and regular standing. In 
other words, the General Assembly had no constitutional right to deprive 
him of membership in the Assembly. When the Assembly ousted these three 
ministers by a majority vote it exhibited the worst kind of tyranny.

This action also made it plain that the General Assembly failed to 
distinguish between administrative and judicial actions. When the 
General Assembly delivered its "mandate" against the Independent Board, 
it was acting in its administrative capacity. The special commission of 
1925 made an observation which has always been accepted and agreed to by 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA:

    The General Assembly sits sometimes in an executive and 
administrative capacity, again it may act as a legislative body; and yet 
again as a judicial tribunal, but always with restricted powers.... The 
failure to distinguish among these functions performed by the Assembly, 
as they have been distinguished in our American civil government, is the 
cause of the confusion which has crept into our minds regarding this 
matter.[9]

The late Francis L. Patton called administrative acts of the General 
Assembly "pious advice." The very essence of Presbyterianism is that the 
liberties of the individual minister or member are protected because 
those rights can only be abrogated by judicial process, which begins 
ordinarily in a presbytery and proceeds through the synod and general 
assembly. The general assembly is just as bound by the constitution in 
its acts as the humblest member of the church. In other words, the 
members of the Independent Board had not disobeyed an order of the 
supreme court of the church simply because no case in connection with 
membership on the Independent Board had as yet come before the General 
Assembly sitting in its judicial capacity as a court of Jesus Christ. In 
the meantime, the so-called mandate of the 1934 General Assembly only 
had the force of an administrative action which presbyteries or 
individuals are not compelled to follow.

The irony of the whole situation was seen in the fact that the one who 
had raised the protest against the three members of the Assembly was a 
signer of the Auburn Affirmation. As such, he had himself defied the 
action of the 1923 General Assembly which declared that certain 
doctrines are essential to the Word of God. His right to disregard an 
administrative act of the General Assembly had been conceded—although 
while doing so he revealed heretical tendencies, since the five 
doctrines mentioned in the Affirmation are at the very heart and core of 
Christianity. And yet Dr. Barnes, who had denied the very essence of 
historic Christianity as taught by the Presbyterian Church in the USA, 
now stood up and urged that the Assembly deprive men of their 
constitutional rights because they had disregarded a declaration of the 
Assembly pertaining to the administration of the church. The shift of 
the church from the conservative to the liberal doctrinal position and 
also a drift toward tyranny can be seen quite clearly from this 
procedure. Such action would have been incredible twenty-five years 
earlier.

The cleavage in the 1935 General Assembly was also plain in the election 
of the moderator. Dr. Stewart M. Robinson, editor of The Presbyterian, 
was nominated by the Rev. Burleigh Cruickshank, D.D. of Philadelphia, on 
the platform of loyalty to the Bible and the need for reform within the 
church. The Rev. Joseph A. Vance, D.D., of Detroit, was placed before 
the General Assembly as president of the Board of National Missions, and 
staunch defender of the status quo in the church. He was a typical 
"machine" man. Several others were nominated but these men typified the 
two doctrinal factions within the church, although Dr. Robinson had 
never been associated with the Independent Board movement nor had he 
been actively aligned with the group in the church which had made a 
consistent fight for the faith. Dr. Vance was elected by an overwhelming 
majority, making it evident again that the church was controlled by 
those who were liberals and who were content with the drift of the 
church toward unbelief.

A surprise came when the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General 
Assembly presented its decision in the Blackstone-Kauffroth case. These 
two young men, James H. Blackstone and John A. Kauffroth, had presented 
themselves for licensure to the Presbytery of Chester on June 12, 
1934.[10] In addition to the regular constitutional questions, several 
relative to the foreign missions situation, occasioned by the "mandate" 
against the Independent Board, were asked the candidates. Then each one 
read a prepared statement, saying that at present the Board of Foreign 
Missions, in his opinion, was not entirely loyal to the constitution of 
the church; however, they said that they held themselves open to receive 
new facts.[11]

After these statements the presbytery, by a vote of forty-five to 
twenty-two, proceeded to license the two candidates in the regular 
constitutional manner. Against this action seventeen members of the 
presbytery complained to the Synod of Pennsylvania.[12] The Judicial 
Commission of the Synod of Pennsylvania sustained the complainants. In 
turn, the action of the synod was complained against which brought the 
case before the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General Assembly. 
The Permanent Judicial Commission reversed the decision of the synod, 
and found that the presbytery had acted properly in licensing the two 
candidates.[13]

This decision implied what members of the Independent Board and 
conservatives had been saying, namely, that the mandate of 1934 adds to 
the constitution of the church when it requires blind allegiance to the 
boards of the church and makes it the duty of each member to support the 
authorized missionary program of the church, whether or not he regards 
it as in accord with the Bible. In other words, the decision of the 
Permanent Judicial Commission, which became the decision of the General 
Assembly in the Blackstone-Kauffroth case, repudiated the central 
principle upon which the action of the 1934 General Assembly was based, 
that of blind allegiance to the boards.

Immediately, modernists in the Assembly interpreted the decision as 
favoring them, because each presbytery was left free to do as it 
pleased. A careful reading of the decision, however, reveals that 
presbyteries must proceed strictly according to the constitution. While 
this decision practically reversed the action of the 1934 Assembly, it 
became clear almost immediately that those in control of the machinery 
of the church would not be bound by it.

What took place in New Brunswick Presbytery on April 6, 1936, 
established this statement. Nine candidates for licensure appeared 
before the presbytery and each one was asked questions to this effect: 
"Are you willing to support the authorized boards and agencies of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and particularly the Board of Foreign 
Missions?" The presbytery asked this question on the basis of its rule 
passed on September 26, 1933,

    All candidates seeking licensure or ordination shall be examined as 
to their willingness to support the regularly authorized Boards and 
Agencies of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., particularly the 
Board of Foreign Missions. A record of this examination shall be made in 
the Minutes of Presbytery.

Six candidates answered the above question in the affirmative, while the 
other three expressed their unwillingness to make a blanket pledge for 
the future, but they finally satisfied the presbytery that they could 
support the boards as then constituted, and would withdraw from the 
church if there came a time when they could not give unquestioned 
loyalty to the boards.[14]

Another instance of the same nature, proving that the rulers of the 
church refused to be bound by a General Assembly decision even though it 
was in a judicial case, and therefore final, occurred in Kalamazoo 
Presbytery with respect to the reception of the Rev. G. H. Snell from 
the Presbytery of Cincinnati. Mr. Snell had been called as pastor of the 
Presbyterian Church at Allegan, Michigan, but the presbytery refused to 
receive him because he would not give a blanket pledge of loyalty to the 
boards. However, it allowed him to remain as stated supply of the 
church.[15] Such were the reactions of the ecclesiastical rulers to the 
decision of the Permanent judicial Commission in the 
Blackstone-Kauffroth case.

The overtures and resolutions urging the General Assembly to rescind the 
action against the Independent Board were voted down with dispatch, and 
to show the temper of the 1935 Assembly more pointedly, it concurred in 
the resolution of the Presbytery of Niobrara, reaffirming the action of 
the 1934 General Assembly relating to the Independent Board.[16]

The Presbyteries of Chester and Philadelphia had always been regarded as 
outstanding conservative strongholds which the modernist element had 
found it difficult, if not impossible, to control. It was the Presbytery 
of Philadelphia under the leadership of the Rev. Clarence E. Macartney, 
D.D., which had initiated the action against Dr. Harry E. Fosdick. In 
fact, Philadelphia Presbytery had led the fight to keep the church true 
to the Bible and the Westminster Confession of Faith. This fact had 
troubled the leaders of the church very much, but the action which was 
adopted at the 1935 General Assembly eventually solved that problem and 
placed the modernists and the ecclesiastical "machine" group in complete 
domination of these presbyteries. Two memorials, identical in form, one 
from a group of eighteen ministers and twenty-nine elders in Chester 
Presbytery, and the other signed by fifteen ministers and ninety-eight 
elders in Philadelphia Presbytery, petitioned the General Assembly to 
investigate conditions in those presbyteries.[17]

It is significant that of the five ministers designated by the 
self-appointed group in Philadelphia Presbytery to argue their case 
before the standing committee of the General Assembly, four were signers 
of the Auburn Affirmation. The Committee on Bills and Overtures 
recommended that a commission be appointed for the investigation and 
report to the next assembly.[18]

The ecclesiastical organization was determined to crush the evangelical 
majorities in these presbyteries and compel them to do their bidding. In 
the next chapter the complete success of this determination will be 
considered.

In conclusion, it is well to recognize one rather amusing incident in 
the 1935 Assembly which illustrates further the true condition of the 
church, as well as the complete doctrinal indifference and insincerity 
of some members. After the three members of the General Assembly were 
unseated, considerable comment resulted in the newspapers, over the 
radio, and among laymen visiting in Cincinnati. To answer this 
unfavorable publicity, the Rev. W. C. Covert, D.D., moderator of the 
1934 General Assembly, asked for the floor and, after making threatening 
remarks to the offenders, called upon the Assembly to recite the 
Apostles' Creed in order to demonstrate the doctrinal soundness of the 
church. After the Assembly had recited the creed, one member arose and 
asked naively if the Assembly would not go on record as showing that it 
really believed the creed. The moderator answered that of course the 
Assembly believed the creed. But it was apparent to everyone that such a 
request showed definitely that the integrity of the church's own 
pronouncements of doctrinal soundness was questioned. And well might 
that suspicion be, when it is realized that signers of the Auburn 
Affirmation, who had denied certain dogmas of the creed as essential to 
Christianity, repeated the creed with the rest.[19]

The 1935 Assembly gave modernism another victory. The church in its 
corporate witness was nearer the goal of complete capitulation to 
unbelief. Anyone who could not see that the struggle in the church was 
between two different conceptions of religion must have been blind.

Chapter 10. Philadelphia and Chester Presbyteries

THE PRESBYTERIES of Philadelphia and Chester were particularly obnoxious 
to those in control of the Presbyterian Church in the USA because in 
these two bodies the modernists, the doctrinal indifferentists, and the 
supporters of the ecclesiastical organization were in a decided 
minority. For many years these two presbyteries could be counted upon to 
oppose any move in the church at large which would tend to weaken its 
testimony to the full truthfulness of the Bible and to compromise the 
church's attitude toward unbelief.

The minority report which the General Assembly of 1923 adopted, and 
which declared that five central verities of Christianity are essential 
doctrines of the Word of God, was made by the Rev. A. Gordon McLennan, 
D.D., then pastor of the Bethany Presbyterian Church, Philadelphia. It 
was in Philadelphia that Westminster Theological Seminary had been 
launched to carry on the scholarly and Presbyterian traditions of 
Princeton Theological Seminary before its reorganization in 1929 so as 
to be complacent toward modernism. It was by Philadelphia Presbytery 
that the overture asking for drastic reform within the Board of Foreign 
Missions had been adopted in 1933. In a very consistent fashion the 
conservatives in this presbytery had elected their men as moderators and 
as members of the various important committees. All of these actions 
were accomplished according to the rules of the presbytery and the 
constitution of the church, simply because the Bible-believers vastly 
outnumbered the modernists. This fact irked the Auburn Affirmationist 
members of the presbytery, of whom there were eleven, and when they 
discovered that their case was hopeless in the presbytery, they decided 
to appeal to the general assembly which was overwhelmingly sympathetic 
with their point of view.

The Presbytery of Chester had taken less spectacular actions and had not 
been the storm center of the church in the controversy between 
Bible-believers and modernists; nevertheless, the men in the presbytery 
had stood firmly for historic Christianity. It had dared to challenge 
the orthodoxy of the Board of Foreign Missions by its criticism of it. 
It had licensed Blackstone and Kauffroth after the 1934 "mandate," even 
though both of the young men refused to pledge blind allegiance to the 
boards and agencies of the church, which licensures were upheld by the 
1935 General Assembly. It also had refused to bring the Rev. Wilbur M. 
Smith, D.D., a member of the Independent Board, to trial for his failure 
to obey the "mandate." In these and other ways the majority in the 
presbytery revealed their steadfast determination to be faithful to the 
Bible and the Westminster Confession of Faith despite the general 
assembly and the ecclesiastical overlords.

The minority in the Presbytery of Chester was made up mostly of 
followers of the Rev. W. B. Pugh, D.D., an assistant in the office of 
the stated clerk of the general assembly and the heir-apparent to that 
position. In fact, he was elected to that office by the 1938 General 
Assembly. During the struggle within the church between the two forces, 
Dr. Pugh did everything in his power to thwart the actions of the 
conservatives. But in spite of his ingenuity and persistence, he, like 
the minority in Philadelphia Presbytery, was unable to sway the 
presbytery to his viewpoint. Consequently, he and his satellites also 
petitioned the general assembly for aid.

The memorial to the general assembly from the minority in the Presbytery 
of Philadelphia, signed by fifteen ministers and ninety-eight elders, 
listed their grievances under two headings, (1) direct violations of the 
constitution, and (2) violations of the general rules for judicatories. 
Under the first caption the licensure of several candidates for the 
ministry was criticized on the ground the presbytery refused to compel 
the candidates to be subjected to questions concerning their loyalty to 
the boards and agencies of the church. The presbytery did this on the 
ground that such questions were extra-constitutional. As has been 
already stated, the Permanent Judicial Commission of the general 
assembly, approved by the general assembly, upheld the Presbytery of 
Chester on this point.

They also objected to the presbytery's delay in bringing to trial the 
members of the Independent Board. The other so-called violations under 
the second heading were largely due to the fact that the majority voted 
for its men as committee members and officers, leaving the minority 
without the representation which it desired, a situation which happens 
in a deliberative body where the majority rules. The other objections 
were mostly trivial, such as an inaccurate roll call, unseemly 
interruptions, and visitors mingling with members of presbytery. 
Grievances if a similar nature were also filed by the minority in 
Chester Presbytery.[1]

A commission of nine was appointed by the general assembly with 
instructions to dissolve the differences in the presbyteries.[2] In 
October and November, 1935, this committee held executive meetings in 
Philadelphia with groups and individuals representing various shades of 
opinion in both Philadelphia and Chester Presbyteries. The public and 
the press were barred from these investigations. Because each one was 
pledged to secrecy, most of the conservative leaders of Philadelphia 
refused to appear, so that a printed statement was issued on their 
behalf by the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths, in which the conflict 
between modernism and Christianity in the world and in the Presbytery of 
Philadelphia was enunciated, and a strong plea for the elimination of 
modernism was entered.[3]

After hearing members of both presbyteries and after deciding on a plan 
of action, the commission submitted a program of twelve points to each 
presbytery, which was adopted with only the militant members of each 
presbytery dissenting. It urged the members of the presbyteries to love 
one another, to respect minorities, to create a general council, to 
establish a Vacancy and Supply Committee, to adopt a rule of retirement 
of ministers at age seventy, and to establish a metropolitan presbytery 
composed of several surrounding presbyteries.[4]

In this twelve-point program no mention whatsoever is made of the 
profound doctrinal differences which existed in the two presbyteries and 
which were the real cause of the trouble. This is studiously avoided and 
instead the groundwork is laid for streamlining the organization of the 
presbyteries so that it would be in harmony with the trend of the whole 
church. Strong committees on vacancy and supply were recommended, which 
committees could control the supplying of vacant pulpits with men who 
would fit in with the doctrine of those on the committees. The Auburn 
Affirmationist members of Philadelphia Presbytery got exactly what they 
wanted, because when the Independent Board members left the presbytery, 
the modernists and those conservatives whom they had cowed into 
submission actually held the majority. In fact, shortly before the 
Independent Board members resigned from the presbytery, that situation 
obtained.

Two particular recommendations of the committee calling for 
constitutional changes were aimed at those associated with Westminster 
Theological Seminary and the Independent Board, and the graduates of 
Westminster Seminary, because they had been called "centers of 
dissension" and "disturbers of the peace." The committee urged that only 
pastors and elders be allowed to vote and that candidates for the 
ministry from seminaries not under the control of the general assembly 
be referred to the synod's Committee on Licensure and Ordination.[5]

An overture which would accomplish this and tend to eliminate graduates 
of Westminster Theological Seminary and other institutions not under the 
jurisdiction of the general assembly from the ministry of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA was presented to the 1937 General 
Assembly, but the Standing Committee on Polity's recommendation of no 
action was adopted.[6]

The commission of nine also recommended that a large metropolitan 
presbytery be formed in Philadelphia, which would eventually include 
Philadelphia Presbytery and portions of Philadelphia North and Chester 
Presbyteries. In 1937, the commission recommended that this matter be 
referred to the Synod of Pennsylvania for further study. Up to this 
writing no changes have been made in the boundaries of those 
presbyteries.

The commission reported to the 1937 General Assembly that the 
Presbyteries of Philadelphia and Chester were reorganizing along the 
lines suggested. Having concluded their work, the commission said that 
it, "Having now helped these Presbyteries to set their feet upon the 
paths of peace, and confident that the good work which has begun in them 
will be perfected by the Holy Spirit, respectfully asks to be 
discharged."[7]

The prediction of the conservative leaders that the complexion of these 
presbyteries would be changed by the recommendations of the commission, 
from one of militant defense of the faith and loyalty to the Confession 
of Faith to one of docility toward the leaders of the church and 
compromise with modernism, was evident immediately. The Rev. George E. 
Barnes, a signer of the Auburn Affirmation, was elected moderator of 
Philadelphia Presbytery for two successive terms, a procedure almost 
without precedent, and this honor was bestowed upon one who had flouted 
the doctrines of the church. When the founders of the Orthodox 
Presbyterian Church left the Presbyterian Church in the USA, the Auburn 
Affirmationists and their friends were in the saddle in the Presbytery 
of Philadelphia.

The Presbytery of Chester was also reorganized and from then on 
controlled by the Rev. W. B. Pugh, D.D., and his followers according to 
the dictates of the leaders of the church. The voice of protest against 
modernism and modernists in the church, which had been so loud and clear 
in these two presbyteries, became strangely silent. Philadelphia and 
Chester Presbyteries, which had been the real bulwarks of the faith, 
which had carried the brunt of the battle to keep the church true to its 
Confession of Faith and the Bible, and which had attempted to warn the 
church of the encroachments of modernism, were now mere instruments in 
the hands of the rulers of the church. The demise of a noble testimony 
had taken place, and the church was deprived of the witness of two 
presbyteries where some real constructive action in favor of the Bible 
might have been taken.

Chapter 11. "We Must Obey God"

IN ORDER to appreciate the full significance of what took place at the 
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, which was held 
at Syracuse, New York, in May, 1936, a brief resume of the issues 
involved is necessary.

The central point raised in the matter of the Independent Board and the 
deliverance of the 1934 General Assembly concerned the ultimate source 
of authority in religion. Should a Christian obey the voice of the 
church speaking through its councils and general assemblies, or the 
voice of God speaking in the Bible? When all bitterness, strife, 
name-calling, and hatred are brushed aside, there remains this paramount 
question and no amount of verbiage can make it otherwise. This issue was 
brought to a focus in two aspects: first, with respect to the authority 
of the courts of the church and second, with respect to the support of 
the established and official program of the boards and agencies of the 
church.

Those in control of the Presbyterian Church in the USA argued that the 
church is under a constitution, and under this constitution the general 
assembly is the highest court, and when it delivers a mandate, an order, 
or a decision, it must be obeyed by the members of the church. 
Presbyterianism recognizes the right of protest and free discussion, 
these men said, but if these protests are not allowed by the church, a 
member must obey or leave the church.[1] The general assembly "has all 
the power the church would have if it were possible to convene the 
church together in one place."[2] The general assembly, in other words, 
is the official interpreter of the constitution and the Bible, and all 
members of the church must abide by its decisions regardless of what 
those decisions may be.

On the other hand, those opposed stated that the Bible itself is the 
final arbiter for doctrine and life and that the constitution of the 
church makes that abundantly clear.[3] The general assembly and its 
decrees are to be received only if consonant with the Word of God. The 
general assembly and all the courts of the church are as subject to this 
important and essential principle of the constitution of the church as 
the humblest member. The Confession of Faith states emphatically that 
"they [synods and councils] are not to be made the rule of faith or 
practice, but to be used as a help in both."[4] The holy Scriptures are 
"the only rule of faith and manners." "The Supreme judge, by whom all 
controversies of religion are to be determined, and all decrees of 
councils, opinions of ancient writers, doctrines of men and private 
spirits, are to be examined, and in whose sentence we are to rest, can 
be no other but the Holy Spirit speaking in the Scripture."[5]

In this difference between the two parties lies the fundamental 
difference between Protestantism and Roman Catholicism. Roman 
Catholicism believes in an infallible Bible, but it adds to this an 
infallible church as the final interpreter and arbiter in doctrine and 
in life. The Roman Catholic must obey the voice of the church speaking 
through its Pope and councils. On the other hand, the Protestant holds 
that the Bible alone is the supreme judge in faith and practice, and 
that all decrees and commands of the church are to be tested by their 
adherence to the Bible. The Protestant must obey the voice of God in the 
Bible rather than the voice of the church speaking through its councils.

When the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General Assembly sat at 
Syracuse to decide the cases involving members of the Independent Board, 
this was the question. But the personnel of the Judicial Commission made 
it inevitable that its decision would favor the position that a member 
must obey the voice of the church. Three of the seven ministerial 
members of the commission, Herbert K. England, Robert Hastings Nichols, 
and Archibald Cardle, were signers of the Auburn Affirmation, which 
document attacked directly the inerrancy of the holy Scriptures. The 
question of the final authority of the Bible is at the very heart of 
Protestantism. When men no longer believe in this dogma, it is only 
logical that they should place the seat of authority in religion in some 
word or experience of man, which is exactly what the commission did.

The second aspect of the question concerned support of the official 
missionary agency of the church. The deliverance of the General Assembly 
of 1934 had stated,

    A Church member or an individual church that will not give to 
promote the officially authorized missionary program of the Presbyterian 
Church is in exactly the same position with reference to the 
Constitution of the Church as a church member or an individual church 
that would refuse to take part in the celebration of the Lord's 
Supper.[6]

Such a statement makes it plain that the general council, which issued 
the Studies of the Constitution, and the General Assembly which adopted 
this document, elevated the decrees of a human council to equal position 
with the command of the Lord Jesus Christ. When it is realized that 
evidence had been presented, and not refuted to this day, showing that 
at least some of the program of the Board of Foreign Missions was 
unfaithful to the teachings of the Bible as defined by the Westminster 
Confession of Faith, the full import of this position is plain.

Dr. Machen and the other members of the Independent Board who had 
appealed their cases to the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General 
Assembly had said in effect that neither the New Testament nor the 
constitution of the church made support of the church and its agencies a 
compulsory matter. On the other hand, the New Testament stresses 
free-will contributions. To say that a member must support the agencies 
of the church regardless of their loyalty to the Bible is like putting 
the minutes of the general assembly on top of the pulpit Bible.

In these two aspects of the same question is found the recurring theme 
and question which divided the founders of the Independent Board and the 
rulers of the church, and which is really the fundamental difference 
between Bible-believers and modernists. When once the sufficiency and 
infallibility of the Bible and its final authority in faith and practice 
are denied, the authority that is substituted must be something human 
and fallible even though it is a church council. In accordance with this 
principle, the members of the Independent Board were expelled from the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, and another denomination now known as 
the Orthodox Presbyterian Church was organized.

The same question arose in the 1936 General Assembly with reference to 
other cases than those concerning members of the Independent Board. The 
Rev. Arthur F. Perkins, Merrill, Wisconsin, had helped to organize an 
interdenominational summer camp for young people known as the Crescent 
Lake Bible Fellowship. Members of the Presbytery of Winnebago objected 
to this camp because two similar camps under the jurisdiction of the 
presbytery were already in existence, so that competition and rivalry 
resulted. The Presbytery of Winnebago further alleged that Mr. Perkins 
refused to support the Board of Foreign Missions of the church. Because 
of these so-called evidences of insubordination and disobedience, Mr. 
Perkins was tried by a special judicial commission of the presbytery and 
suspended from the ministry for two years. He appealed the decision to 
the synod, which changed the suspension to one year, and then he 
appealed further to the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General 
Assembly, which confirmed the suspension until such time as Mr. Perkins 
would give evidence of repentance and reformation.[7]

Mr. Perkins, according to his testimony, had established a summer camp 
for young people because the speakers and programs of the two camps of 
the presbytery were not wholly true to the Bible. Any number of such 
independent camps conducted by ministers of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA are carried on each year, but because Mr. Perkins had dared to 
challenge the Board of Foreign Missions, and because he had dared to 
criticize certain aspects of the denomination's work, he was not allowed 
to organize an independent camp but was suspended from the ministry. 
This is simply another testimony to the fact that every minister and 
every member must support the full program of the church, or leave. In 
other words, the courts of the church are the final arbiter of faith and 
practice.

Still another case, that of the Rev. John J. DeWaard, Cedar Grove, 
Wisconsin, came before the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General 
Assembly in 1936. Mr. DeWaard had criticized not only the Board of 
Foreign Missions but also the Board of Christian Education of the church 
for unfaithfulness to the Bible. The Presbytery of Milwaukee had ordered 
Mr. DeWaard to do three things: (1) cease his attacks upon the boards of 
the church, (2) bring all his charges against the church, its boards, 
and its judicatories to presbytery, and (3) encourage the session in the 
distribution of undesignated benevolence funds according to quotas 
assigned.[8]

Mr. DeWaard expressed his willingness to obey the second command, but 
refused to cease his attacks on the boards or to encourage his session 
to support the boards of the church. The presbytery then voted to 
dissolve the pastoral relationship and to continue Mr. DeWaard as stated 
supply for a period of six months. The Permanent Judicial Commission of 
the General Assembly sustained this decision.[9]

The hierarchy of the church was determined to stamp out all forms of 
alleged insubordination and refusal to follow their dicta and program. 
It is significant in this respect to note that the one presbytery, 
namely Chester, which refused to try the Rev. Wilbur M. Smith, D.D., 
because he would not obey the mandate of the 1934 General Assembly, was 
also ordered by the 1936 General Assembly to try Dr. Smith.[10]

It is impossible to discuss the 1936 General Assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA without considering the tremendous drama 
that was enacted there. Here was not one minister but eight, all of whom 
were well-known for their loyalty to the Bible as the Word of God and 
their unequivocal devotion to the Westminster Confession of Faith, 
suspended from the ministry of that church because they had the courage 
and the grace to obey the God of the Bible rather than the voice of the 
church. The ecclesiastical leaders of that church will never admit that 
it was a case of the Bible versus the church, but men not associated 
with the Presbyterian Church in the USA, and some, not even Christians, 
saw the real issue and did not hesitate to make it plain.

The Presbyterian Church in the USA is what is known as a creedal church 
because each minister and each office-bearer must pledge loyalty to the 
Westminster Confession of Faith as the system of doctrine taught in the 
holy Scriptures. The church had been known as an intellectual defender 
of the historic Westminster Confession of Faith, even though that 
defense had depended largely in the last decade upon a minority. But by 
the 1936 decisions the Lord Jesus Christ was dethroned as Head and King 
of his church, and the authority of human councils was placed above the 
Word of God. A missionary program which was contrary to the teachings of 
the Bible was forced upon the church and its members, and the penalty 
for lack of support and for effective criticism was suspension from the 
ministry. The Confession of Faith of the church was not altered, but it 
was so interpreted by the highest court of the church sitting as a court 
of Jesus Christ that for all practical purposes the Confession of Faith 
was changed. From that time forth each informed member of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA was fully aware of the meaning of the 
Confession of Faith and the constitution for him. He must obey men.

The decision of the Presbyterian Church in the USA in the case of Dr. 
Machen and the others is almost identical with that in the case of 
Martin Luther. Luther declared that his teachings were in accord with 
the Bible and he tried to prove it. The Roman Catholic Church, on the 
other hand, said that it must decide what teaching is true to the Bible. 
When Luther refused to recant he was excommunicated. The one great 
difference between the two trials and decisions is that for the Roman 
Catholic, the church is the supreme judge in all matters of doctrine; it 
is the official and final arbiter for Roman Catholics in spiritual 
matters. But in the case of Dr. Machen, the constitution of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA states emphatically that "the Supreme 
judge, by whom all controversies of religion are to be determined...can 
be no other but the Holy Spirit speaking in the Scriptures."[11] In 
other words, the Roman church was wrong in Luther's case in its lack of 
faithfulness to the Bible but right in loyalty to its constitution, 
while the Presbyterian Church in the USA was not only untrue to the 
Bible in its decisions but was also unfaithful to its own constitution.

At least one of the eight suspended from the ministry of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA was a world-famous theologian who was 
honored by the world for his sound learning and cogent reasoning in 
defense of the Bible. Dr. Machen was by far the most distinguished 
minister of the Presbyterian Church in the USA in his generation. The 
Rev. Caspar Wistar Hodge, Ph.D., professor of systematic theology at 
Princeton Theological Seminary and a member of the famous Hodge family, 
wrote, "I regarded him as the greatest theologian in the 
English-speaking world."[12]

This blow to Dr. Machen by the church which he had served with 
distinction for over thirty years, together with the disloyalty of 
certain Independent Board members to Presbyterianism, filled his cup of 
sorrow. Six months later, on January 1, 1937, on a trip to Bismarck, 
North Dakota, to speak against unbelief in the church and the world, he 
contracted pneumonia and died. When he had passed to his reward a flood 
of tributes came from men and women of all shades of opinion, confirming 
not only his greatness but also the truth of his contentions in the 
conflict with the Presbyterian Church in the USA.

H. L. Mencken, who by no means can be designated a believer in historic 
Christianity, wrote,

    He saw clearly that the only effects that could follow diluting and 
polluting Christianity in the modernist manner would be its complete 
abandonment and ruin. Either it was true or it was not true. If, as he 
believed, it was true, then there could be no compromise with persons 
who sought to whittle away its essential postulates, however respectable 
their motives.

    Thus he fell out with the reformers who have been trying, in late 
years, to convert the Presbyterian Church into a kind of literary and 
social club, devoted vaguely to good works...

    His one and only purpose was to hold it resolutely to what he 
conceived to be the true faith. When that enterprise met with opposition 
he fought vigorously, and though he lost in the end and was forced out 
of Princeton it must be manifest that he marched off to Philadelphia 
with all the honors of war.[13]

Albert C. Dieffenbach, religious editor of The Boston Evening 
Transcript, and a Unitarian minister, said,

    Out of the historic issue of fundamentalism, which began about 1920 
in the Northern Baptist churches but has continued unabated among a 
minority in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, that is, the Northern 
Presbyterian church, he [Dr. Machen] emerges in death as the theologian 
and crusader, as learned and valiant a spiritual warrior as the 
Protestant church has produced in modern times...

Now all that Machen ever did was hold fast to the faith and insist that 
those of his denomination who had taken their vows should do likewise. 
He was unwilling to yield an inch to the trend of modern thought.[14]

Pearl S. Buck, noted author and former missionary of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, whom Dr. Machen had opposed because of her unbelief, 
eulogized Dr. Machen's efforts to combat the rulers of the church even 
though she disagreed violently with his theological position.

    We have lost a man whom our times can ill spare, a man who had 
convictions which were real to him and who fought for those convictions 
and held to them through every change in time and human thought. There 
was power in him which was positive in its very negations. He was worth 
a hundred of his fellows who, as princes of the church, occupy easy 
places and play their church politics and trim their sails to every 
wind, who in their smug observance of the convictions of life and 
religion offend all honest and searching spirits. No forthright mind can 
live among them, neither the honest skeptic nor the honest dogmatist. I 
wish Dr. Machen had lived to go on fighting them.[15]

Many other glowing tributes were paid Dr. Machen by leaders in other 
denominations and by outstanding Presbyterians, but these persons are 
quoted to demonstrate that the convictions and contentions of the 
minority in the Presbyterian Church in the USA that the issue was 
doctrinal, and that the authority of the Bible was at stake, were upheld 
even by men and women who declared themselves avowedly against historic 
Christianity. Individuals like Mencken, Dieffenbach, and Pearl Buck 
surely had no personal interest in the matter nor any axe to grind. They 
were spectators and, if anything, more in agreement theologically with 
modernists. No, the princes of the church may fool some of the people, 
and even a majority of the Presbyterians, by crying that the issue was 
"administrative," but they cannot stampede outsiders and they cannot 
keep down the truth forever.

Dr. Machen is gone, the supporters of the Independent Board have left 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA, and, sad to state, the consistent 
and clear testimony against unbelief that once made that church a 
bulwark of the faith is silent. Occasionally an individual voice is 
raised through a sermon or an article in a theological journal, but the 
corporate witness of the church through its boards and agencies is no 
longer on the side of historic Christianity. The church is large in 
membership, it is rich in endowments and buildings, it is praised and 
recognized by the world, but its great Calvinistic heritage, its 
adherence to the Bible as the Word of God, has been cast aside and 
"Ichabod" is written over its door. As each year passes the church 
becomes less doctrinally conscious and more in tune with the modernism 
of the day!

Chapter 12. The Orthodox Presbyterian Church

THE SPIRIT and the decisions of the 1935 General Assembly made it clear 
that the conservatives of the church would have to organize and unite on 
a definite program of reform and preparation for what seemed like the 
inevitable—a split in the church. Accordingly, a letter was written by 
two elders and a layman and addressed to 100 or more conservative 
leaders in the East, inviting them to be present at a meeting in 
Philadelphia on June 27, 1935, for the purpose of considering a plan of 
united action.

Approximately 100 attended the meeting at which time the Presbyterian 
Constitutional Covenant Union was organized, officers elected, an 
executive committee formed, and a constitution adopted. A campaign was 
launched to obtain signers of the covenant, to form chapters, and to 
promote the program of the Covenant Union. The covenant read as follows:

    We, the members of this Covenant Union, are resolved, in accordance 
with God's Word, and in humble reliance upon His grace, to maintain the 
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., (1) making every 
effort to bring about a reform of the existing church organization, and 
to restore the church's clear and glorious Christian testimony, which 
modernism and indifferentism have now so grievously silenced, but (2) if 
such efforts fail and in particular if the tyrannical policy of the 
present majority triumphs, holding ourselves ready to perpetuate the 
true Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., regardless of cost.

It became obvious that the officers and executive committee of the 
Covenant Union were determined not only to expose modernism in the 
boards of the church and to attempt a reform, but also to prepare for 
the probable division in the church if the members of the Independent 
Board were ousted. This was certain from the second part of the pledge.

Immediately, the Covenant Union was attacked not only by the church 
machine but also by the Rev. Samuel G. Craig, D.D., a former member of 
the board of trustees of Westminster Theological Seminary and a former 
member of the Independent Board, because the Covenant Union by its 
pledge committed men to withdraw from the church if members of the 
Independent Board were expelled from the church.

    While in our opinion one of the planks of that platform should 
commit its supporters to the defense of the members of the Independent 
Board against the unchristian and unconstitutional mandate of the 1934 
Assembly, we are persuaded that it must be broad enough to provide seats 
for many who think that the formation of the Independent Board was 
unwise or premature, and even for some who think its formation of 
questionable constitutionality. It is high time, it seems to us, for a 
conference of representative conservatives or evangelicals or 
fundamentalists—call them what you will—to discover whether it is not 
possible to agree on such a platform and in such leadership.[1]

Such outspoken criticism and opposition on the part of one who was 
editor of Christianity Today, the paper which had been launched in 1930 
to carry on the fight against modernism in the church, and to which the 
conservatives in the church looked for leadership, called for an 
important decision. If the Covenant Union could not express its views 
and promote its program through the pages of Christianity Today, then 
another journal had to be started which would further the aims of the 
Covenant Union and those who were carrying the main burden of the 
conflict.

Prior to this Dr. Machen, as well as other members of the Independent 
Board, had carried on an extensive correspondence with Dr. Craig because 
of his indirect attacks on the Independent Board. Dr. Machen contended 
that in 1933, Christianity Today and the editorials in the paper had 
defended the Independent Board.[2] An editorial in the paper, June, 
1933, stated, "As matters now stand, they [Bible-believers] must either 
make their contributions to Foreign Missions through non-Presbyterian 
channels or they must establish a new agency." In the September, 1935, 
issue of Christianity Today, Dr. Craig assumed an entirely different 
attitude. He then defended a third alternative, namely, the designation 
of gifts to sound missionaries under the Board of Foreign Missions of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA.

In answer to this allegation, Dr. Craig argued that the first editorial 
was written by Mr. Griffiths, then managing editor of Christianity 
Today, and so the opinion expressed was not his own, yet now Dr. Craig 
claimed, "Whatever of praise or blame is due its editorial policy should 
be placed wholly to the account of its editor."[3]

Dr. Machen made further criticisms of Dr. Craig's policy, among them the 
lack of attention given to trials of members of the Independent Board, 
particularly in the September, 1935 issue, when all of the Independent 
Board trials which were the center of controversy in the church were 
dismissed with a third of a column in the paper.

This "drift" in the policy of the journal which left the conservatives 
in the church without an adequate organ of expression, and this open 
attack on the newly organized Covenant Union, brought the resignation of 
the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths as managing editor of Christianity 
Today, and the establishment of the Presbyterian Guardian as a paper 
directly under the sponsorship of the Covenant Union and edited by Mr. 
Griffiths, with Thomas R. Birch as assistant editor. Mr. Griffiths was 
also made general secretary of the Covenant Union and offices were 
opened in Philadelphia.

This division in the ranks of the conservatives was a great blow to 
their cause and a source of satisfaction to the leaders of the church. 
It was founded upon a fundamental difference of approach to the whole 
problem of reform and the battle for the faith, which will be considered 
in detail in another chapter under the title, "Reform from Within."

In the very first issue of the Presbyterian Guardian, Dr. Machen set the 
standard for the movement when he wrote,

    We cannot trust the world; we cannot trust that elusive something 
known as "civilization!" We cannot, alas, trust the visible church. But 
when God speaks we can trust Him. He has spoken in the Bible. We can 
find our way through all the mists if we will make that blessed Book our 
guide.

Another article in the same issue stated, "By the grace of God we will 
contend against all forms of unbelief. We shall not cease to maintain 
and defend the inspired Word of God and the Constitution of the 
Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. 'regardless of cost.'"

The Covenant Union began immediately an intensive campaign to interest 
individuals in the support of its program and to form chapters 
throughout the nation. Public rallies were held in support of the new 
organization and in opposition to the tyranny of the church in its 
apparent determination to force the members of the Independent Board 
from the church. Not only did the Covenant Union add members to its 
cause, but in line with the pledge to bring about a reform in the 
existing church organization, a full exposé of modernism in the other 
boards and organizations was begun. Even in the Board of Foreign 
Missions more evidence was produced of its unfaithfulness to the Bible 
and the doctrinal standards of the church.

Nine articles by different men were written concerning unbelief in the 
Board of Christian Education. What was exposed in that agency 
corresponded largely with the facts discovered in the Foreign Mission 
Board. Signers of the Auburn Affirmation were found in places of 
authority in the educational program of the church,

    (1) Two, as members of the Board; (2) One, as an officer of the 
Staff of the Board, in charge of the Department of Colleges, Theological 
Seminaries and Training Schools; (3) Five as Field Representatives who 
are responsible at headquarters to the Secretary of the Board, who work 
under the supervision of synodical or presbyterial committees on 
Christian Education in order to make the Board's program effective; and 
(4) Ten among the university pastors...[4]

The literature issued by the board was found to be not only silent 
concerning the great and central doctrines of Christianity, but in some 
instances opposed to them. The books recommended included three written 
by outstanding modernists of the day, among them, The Meaning of Prayer, 
by H. E. Fosdick, and The Life of Prayer in a World of Science, by 
William Adams Brown. The various departments under the sponsorship of 
the board were found to be anything but faithful to the central message 
of Christianity. For example, the direction of the board's program in 
higher education was under the leadership of Dr. W. L Young, a signer of 
the Auburn Affirmation.[5]

In order to implement these charges against the Board of Christian 
Education in the way provided by the constitution of the church, an 
overture was introduced in the Presbytery of Philadelphia asking that 
the board exercise care in electing members, secretaries, in issuing 
literature, and in cooperating with union movements, in order to keep 
modernism from the board's program.[6] Dr. George E. Barnes, newly 
elected Auburn Affirmation moderator of the presbytery, ruled this 
overture out of order.

Strangely enough, this overture was worded in the accustomed way. In 
fact, it followed the wording of the overture concerning the Board of 
Foreign Missions which had been passed by the Presbytery of Philadelphia 
in 1933. The difference was that in 1933 the conservatives controlled 
the presbytery, but in 1936 the Auburn Affirmationists were in the 
saddle.

An overture from the Presbytery of Philadelphia North was presented to 
the 1936 General Assembly, asking that the Board of Christian Education 
see to it that its literature be in accord with the standards of the 
church.[7] This overture was referred to the Board of Christian 
Education and more or less forgotten.

A similar overture was presented by the Presbytery of Milwaukee and 
referred to the Board of Christian Education by the 1936 General 
Assembly for due consideration.[8] An exposé was also begun with respect 
to the Board of National Missions and the same results 
obtained—modernism held the upper hand.[9]

Of the seventeen minister members of the Board of Christian Education, 
seven were signers of the Auburn Affirmation and of these seven at least 
one, the Rev. Henry Sloane Coffin, D.D., president of Union Theological 
Seminary, New York City, is one of the leading modernists in America. 
Not only did he sign the Auburn Affirmation, but his books reveal 
clearly what his opinions are concerning the great doctrines of the 
church. In his book Some Christian Convictions, he writes as follows 
about the canon of holy Scripture:

    He [a Protestant] is not bound by the opinion of others, however 
many and venerable; and unless a book commends itself to his own 
spiritual judgment, he is under no obligation to receive it as the Word 
of God to him. As a matter of fact every Christian does make such a 
Bible of his own; the particular passages which "grip" him and reproduce 
their experience in him, they, and they alone, are his Bible.[10]

Nothing could more flatly contradict the Westminster Confession of Faith 
on the canon of holy Scripture and the authority of all Scripture. 
Chapter I, section II, after naming the sixty-six books of the Bible, 
states, "All which are given by inspiration of God, to be the rule of 
faith and life."

The Rev. W. H. Boddy, D.D., pastor of the large and influential 
Westminster Presbyterian Church, Minneapolis, Minnesota, not only signed 
the Auburn Affirmation, but also was a member of the National Committee 
of the Modern Missions Movement, whose avowed purpose was

    ... to foster the further consideration of the possible world 
service of Christianity as indicated by the Laymen's Foreign Missions 
Inquiry; to serve as a medium of information; and to cooperate with any 
Board, Church or other agency which is making effective the principles 
and recommendations of the Report [Re-Thinking Missions] and of the 
Regional Reports by the Commission of Appraisal.[11]

The anti-Christian religion of Re-Thinking Missions has already been 
considered.

Not only were some members of the board aligned against biblical 
Christianity, but also the general secretary, the Rev. E. Graham Wilson, 
D.D., was a signer of the Auburn Affirmation. The literature issued by 
the board was also examined and found to be wanting in its adherence to 
the Confession of Faith.[12] And so another board of the church was 
proven to be untrue to the Confession of Faith.

While the Covenant Union was continuing its attempt to reform the 
existing church organization by bringing the true situation to the 
attention of the members of the church, the prosecution of the 
Independent Board members went on unabated, and the goal toward which 
the rulers of the church were working came closer with each month. 
Philadelphia and Chester Presbyteries were reorganized so as to be 
controlled by those in sympathy with the princes of the church. The Rev. 
Roy T. Brumbaugh, D.D., pastor of the First Church, Tacoma, Washington, 
and a member of the Independent Board, was forced to leave his church 
building and with over five hundred members formed the First Independent 
Church of Tacoma. Kalamazoo Presbytery refused to receive the Rev. G. H. 
Snell from the Presbytery of Cincinnati because of his unwillingness to 
pledge support of the Board of Foreign Missions without qualification. 
The Permanent Judicial Commission of the General Assembly upheld the 
action of Lackawanna Presbytery in erasing the name of the Rev. Henry W. 
Coray from its roll because he had become a missionary of the 
Independent Board, and in interpreting his action as making him 
"independent" even though he did not declare himself "independent." The 
Judicial Commission of the Synod of Wisconsin upheld the Presbytery of 
Milwaukee in dissolving the pastoral relationship of the Rev. J. J. 
DeWaard because he refused to cease his criticism of the boards of the 
church, and it sustained Winnebago Presbytery in suspending the Rev. 
Arthur F. Perkins from the ministry because he had established an 
independent Bible camp and had criticized the boards. All of these 
actions made the terminus ad quem of the whole conflict certain. The 
members of the Independent Board would be suspended from the ministry 
and a new church organization would be launched as a result. The 
"machine" of the church was rolling along, crushing all opposition in 
its path and making the victory at the end a hollow one.

The inevitable took place, for in Syracuse, New York, in June, 1936, 
certain members of the Independent Board were suspended from the 
ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. This action had been 
foreseen by the Covenant Union so that its first annual convention had 
been called for June 11-14, 1936, in Philadelphia. To this gathering 
came delegates from thirteen states who realized what the meeting meant 
and were prepared for action. The Covenant Union was dissolved and on 
the afternoon of June 11, 1936, thirty-four ministers, seventeen ruling 
elders, and seventy-nine laymen signed an act of association and 
doctrinal statement.[13]

The ministers and elders then constituted themselves the general 
assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America. The Rev. J. Gresham 
Machen, D.D., who had led the conflict against unbelief, was elected 
moderator without a dissenting vote, and the long-awaited, 
long-prophesied parting of the ways between Bible-believers and the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA became a reality.

The first general assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America was 
concerned largely with the election of committees which would prepare 
the necessary organization of the church in readiness for the next 
assembly, which was called for November 12-15, 1936. On the other hand, 
several important and far-reaching decisions were made which stamped the 
Presbyterian Church of America as thoroughly Calvinistic in its doctrine 
and fair in its recognition of the rights of congregations to retain 
their local properties.

A Committee on the Constitution was elected with the power to recommend 
the adoption of the Westminster Confession of Faith, the Larger and 
Shorter Catechisms, and the elimination from these standards of the 1903 
amendments and the Declaratory Statement.[14] The changes in the 
Confession of Faith of the Presbyterian Church in the USA which were 
made in 1903 and which were discussed in chapter one, impaired the 
church's testimony to the Bible and the Reformed faith.

A resolution with reference to church property grew out of the unfair 
practice of the Presbyterian Church in the USA in claiming all church 
property for the denomination, even though the church building had been 
erected and paid for by the local congregation. Each local church under 
this provision is allowed to retain its property, which shall only 
revert to the Presbyterian Church of America if the congregation becomes 
extinct.[15] Committees on home missions and Christian education were 
also elected.

Another action was taken making the decisions of the General Assembly of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA regarding the members of the 
Independent Board invalid. In part, it read,

    All censures inflicted by courts of the Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A., upon any of the defendants in judicial Cases 1-5 mentioned above 
who are now connected with this church, are by the action of this 
Assembly, as the supreme judicatory of this church, terminated, lifted, 
and declared at an end.[16]

One outstanding characteristic marked the first general assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church of America. It was a truly deliberative body where 
every commissioner had an equal opportunity to express his opinion and 
where lively debate preceded each action. There was no attempt to shut 
off discussion, to call for the previous question, and to use all sorts 
of parliamentary tricks to force motions to a vote. When a matter had 
been thoroughly considered, each man voted according to his convictions, 
unafraid of any recriminatory measures later by a coterie of 
office-holders and office-seekers.

Immediately following the first general assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church of America, congregations and ministers began to leave the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, the Knox Presbyterian Church, 
Philadelphia, being the first to unite with the new body. Within two 
months after the new body had been formed, seventy-five ministers were 
under its jurisdiction, nine presbyteries had been erected (California, 
the Dakotas, Iowa, the Northwest, New Jersey, New York and New England, 
Ohio, Philadelphia, and Wisconsin), and there were congregations or 
groups of the Presbyterian Church of America meeting for worship in 
California, Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, 
Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North 
Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Washington, Wisconsin, 
and the District of Columbia.[17]

Even before the Presbyterian Church of America was formed, it was 
certain that the Presbyterian Church in the USA intended to continue its 
persecution of the Independent Board members even though they were in 
another church body. The Christ Reformed Episcopal Church, 43rd and 
Chestnut Streets, Philadelphia, had extended the courtesy of the use of 
its building to the Covenant Union for its evening meetings during the 
convention of June 11-14. To prevent this and to persuade the Reformed 
Episcopal Church to cancel the contract with the Covenant Union, the 
Rev. Lewis S. Mudge, D.D., stated clerk of the General Assembly, and the 
Rev. George Emerson Barnes, D.D., moderator of Philadelphia Presbytery 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, appeared before the vestry and 
actually convinced it that to allow the former ministers of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA to use the Reformed Episcopal Church 
building would be to violate comity relations between the Reformed 
Episcopal Church and the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[18] However, 
the Reformed Episcopal Church of the Atonement in Germantown offered its 
auditorium to the Presbyterian Church of America, and a telegram of 
greeting was read to the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of 
America from the Rev. Robert Westly Peach, presiding bishop of the 
Reformed Episcopal Church.

In an almost ludicrous session of the Philadelphia Presbytery of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, the five minister members of the 
Independent Board, who had been ordered suspended from the ministry of 
that church by the General Assembly, were formally ordered suspended, 
even though these men had already renounced the jurisdiction of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and so were no longer members of it. The 
same procedure was reenacted by the Presbytery of New Brunswick in the 
case of Dr. Machen. And to make the whole proceeding even more 
ridiculous, five ministers, the Rev. A. A. MacRae, the Rev. Ned B. 
Stonehouse, the Rev. Robert Moody Holmes, the Rev. Albert B. Dodd, D.D., 
and the Rev. David Freeman, all of whom had renounced the jurisdiction 
of the Presbyterian Church in the USA and had joined the Presbyterian 
Church of America, were ordered to face trial before the Presbytery of 
Philadelphia.[19]

The full force of vindictiveness against the Presbyterian Church of 
America on the part of the Presbyterian Church in the USA was yet to 
come. On August 13, 1936, just two months after the formation of the 
Presbyterian Church of America, a bill of complaint in equity was filed 
in the Court of Common Pleas No. 5 in Philadelphia by Henry B. Master, 
moderator of the General Assembly, Lewis S. Mudge, stated clerk of the 
General Assembly, et al., claiming to represent the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA versus J. Gresham Machen, Paul Woolley, et al., and all 
officers and members of the Presbyterian Church of America, asking the 
court to enjoin the defendant church from using the name on the ground 
of its similarity to that of the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[20]

On April 28, 1937, the hearing began in the Court of Common Pleas No. 5 
before the Honorable Frank Smith. The plaintiff's arguments fell under 
three heads. First, the Presbyterian Church in the USA was by general 
consent the largest and most representative Presbyterian Church in the 
United States. It had invested millions and millions of dollars in 
buildings and organizations, and these had to be protected. Secondly, in 
a proposed union between the Presbyterian Church in the USA and the 
United Presbyterian Church of North America, the name "The Presbyterian 
Church of America" had been mentioned as the one for the united church. 
Thirdly, the Presbyterian Church in the USA had carried on happy comity 
relations with many churches, and it would be unfortunate if the 
Presbyterian Church of America should enter these areas with a 
competitive spirit and by a misleading name confuse its identity in the 
minds of the public.

To prove that the Presbyterian Church of America had been confused with 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA in the mind of the general public, 
one letter and one telegram were produced which had been mailed by a 
newspaper office to the Presbyterian Church of America and incorrectly 
addressed to the office of the stated clerk of the General Assembly of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[21]

In answer to these arguments, the defendants stated: First, while the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA is the largest Presbyterian body in the 
United States, it is not the Presbyterian Church and has no more right 
to the name "Presbyterian" than any of the other ten or more churches in 
America using that descriptive title. "Presbyterian" designates a 
certain form of doctrine and church government developed by John Calvin 
and others, so that any body conforming to this well-accepted historical 
type of church is qualified to use the word "Presbyterian" in its title. 
Furthermore, there is no such thing as property rights in the future 
contributions of members of any church. It is a totalitarian conception 
of the church that members of evangelical churches must support the 
official agencies of the church to the utmost of their ability.

In the second place, the proposed union between the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA and the United Presbyterian Church of North America, which 
was to use the name was voted down by the United Presbyterian Church 
years ago and any attempt to revive this movement would have to be 
started de novo. Certainly, it was misleading to create the impression 
that a proposed union which was defeated warranted the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA in preempting the name Presbyterian Church of America. 
In fact, such an implication was absurd.

In the third place, the argument against proselytizing struck at the 
very heart of religious freedom in the United States. Even Dr. Mudge had 
to admit on the witness stand that he would urge the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA to proselytize among Unitarians.[22] Every church has a right 
under the constitution of the United States to proselytize. At this 
point it is well to note that the judge in the case refused to allow the 
introduction of evidence by expert theologians to prove that a 
fundamental difference in doctrinal belief caused the members of the 
defendant church to withdraw from the plaintiff body. Therefore, argued 
the defendants, since the great doctrinal conflict which separated the 
two churches could not be introduced, only one valid issue remained, 
namely, the question of confusion of the names in the minds of the 
general public. This hearing took place nearly a year after the 
defendant church had been organized, and yet the plaintiffs could only 
produce two pieces of evidence of mistaken identity. This was no 
positive proof that any state of confusion existed. On the other hand, 
the defendants cited many secular and religious papers to demonstrate 
that no obscurity or confusion whatsoever obtained in the minds of the 
writers.[23]

The court handed down a decision on June 27, 1938, in favor of the 
plaintiff church.[24] The defendants gave notice of appeal to the State 
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, but the appeal was not taken. On February 
9, 1939, at a specially called Fifth General Assembly, the Presbyterian 
Church of America adopted the name "The Orthodox Presbyterian Church," 
and the suit was terminated.[25]

The Second General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America in 
November, 1936, only five months after the formation of the church, was 
held in order to adopt a Confession of Faith and so provide an adequate 
doctrinal basis for the new body. It claimed to be the "spiritual 
succession" of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, so that the 
Westminster Confession of Faith would logically be its doctrinal 
confession. However, in 1903 certain changes and additions had been made 
to the Westminster Confession of Faith by the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA, which changes toned down the biblical and Calvinistic witness of 
the Confession, and these had to be eliminated if the Presbyterian 
Church of America were to continue in the true tradition of the Reformed 
faith.[26] Therefore the Committee on the Constitution was given power 
"to recommend the elimination, from that form of these Standards [The 
Westminster Confession of Faith], of the changes made in the year of our 
Lord 1903." The committee did recommend the adoption of the Westminster 
Confession of Faith with the elimination of most of the 1903 amendments, 
but with the retention of two small changes in chapter XXII concerning 
oaths, and chapter XXV, section Vl, which designates the pope as the 
antichrist.[27] By an overwhelming majority the recommendation of the 
committee was adopted.[28]

Another subject already discussed in chapter four developed into the 
central issue of that assembly, namely, the question of modern 
dispensationalism and premillennialism. As has been stated, professor R. 
B. Kuiper of Westminster Theological Seminary had written an article, 
"Why Separation Was Necessary," which first appeared in The Banner 
(Christian Reformed), and was reprinted in the Presbyterian Guardian of 
September 12, 1936. The section which received the most attention read,

    It would have warmed the cockles of the heart of any Christian 
Reformed minister to hear how closely they [candidates for ordination at 
general assembly] were questioned about the two errors which are so 
extremely prevalent among American fundamentalists, Arminianism and the 
Dispensationalism of the Scofield Bible. The Assembly wanted to make 
sure that these prospective ministers were not tainted with such 
anti-reformed heresies.

Prior to this, professor John Murray of Westminster Theological Seminary 
had been discussing "The Reformed Faith and Modern Substitutes" in a 
series of articles appearing in the Presbyterian Guardian on the general 
themes of Arminianism and modern dispensationalism. One article in 
particular was given over to this latter subject.

    In entering upon an exposition of what we called "Modern 
Dispensationalism," and the establishment of our thesis that it 
contradicts the teaching of the standards of the Reformed Faith, in 
particular those of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., it is 
necessary to remind our readers that we have no objection to the word 
"dispensation," nor to the idea of designating the various periods that 
may and must be distinguished in the divine economy of the history of 
the world as distinct "dispensations." What we are intent upon showing 
is that the system of interpretation widely prevalent in this country, 
and set forth, for example, in the Scofield Reference Bible and in the 
books of various Bible teachers of prominence, is palpably inconsistent 
with the system of truth embodied in our Presbyterian standards.[29]

It is well to take cognizance of the fact that the word "premillennial," 
or reference to premillennialism, does not occur in either professor 
Kuiper's or professor Murray's articles. Mr. Murray made it clear 
that...

    The "Dispensationalism" of which we speak as heterodox from the 
standpoint of the Reformed Faith is that form of interpretation, widely 
popular at the present time, which discovers in the several 
dispensations of God's redemptive revelation distinct and even contrary 
principles of divine procedure and thus destroys the unity of God's 
dealings with fallen mankind.[30]

Furthermore, Dr. Machen emphasized that as such the premillennial view 
of the return of Christ, namely, that Jesus Christ "will return before a 
thousand-year period held to be mentioned in the Book of Revelation, 
that during that period He will reign upon this earth, and that after 
that period will come the final judgment," was not being attacked. In 
fact, he pointed out definitely,

    Can a person who holds the premillennial view be a true Calvinist; 
can he, in other words, hold truly to the Calvinistic or Reformed system 
of doctrine which is set forth in the Westminster Standards? We think 
that he can; and for that reason we think that Premillennialists as well 
as those who hold the opposing view may become ministers or elders or 
deacons in The Presbyterian Church of America.[31]

In spite of all these precautions and carefully worded statements 
safeguarding the liberty of view of the individual minister and 
congregation with respect to the return of our Lord, the Christian 
Beacon, edited by the Rev. Carl McIntire, pastor of the then Independent 
Presbyterian Church, Collingswood, New Jersey, and a minister of the 
Presbyterian Church of America, carried an editorial on October 1, 1936, 
claiming that attacks were being made upon premillennialists, as 
especially manifested in professor Kuiper's article, "Why Separation Was 
Necessary." Mr. McIntire insisted that "The remark in regard to the 
'Dispensationalism of the Scofield Bible' is an attack upon the 
premillennialists, as heretics." Professor Kuiper replied to the 
editorial, but Mr. McIntire refused to publish it. Among other things 
professor Kuiper stated in his reply,

    It is a matter of common knowledge that there is ever so much more 
to the dispensationalism of the Scofield Bible than the mere teaching of 
Premillennialism. Nor do the two stand and fall together. There are 
premillennarians who have never heard of Scofield's dispensations. More 
important than that, there are serious students of God's Word who hold 
to the premillennial return of Christ and emphatically reject Scofield's 
system of dispensations as fraught with grave error.[32]

The Presbyteries of California and New Jersey overtured the General 
Assembly, asking that some declaratory statement be adopted setting 
forth "eschatological liberty" in the church.[33] The assembly did not 
adopt such a declaration, nor write such a statement into its 
constitution, as the Presbytery of California demanded, because members 
of the assembly believed that such liberty already existed within the 
constitution of the church.

But another question began to absorb the attention of the Presbyterian 
Church of America, namely, that of Christian liberty. In numerous 
private and public utterances, Westminster Seminary and its faculty were 
attacked as an institution and a faculty which encouraged its students 
to drink fermented beverages. The source of such baseless attacks 
appeared to be those who were followers of the Rev. Carl McIntire and 
supporters of the Christian Beacon.

Dr. J. Oliver Buswell published several volumes at this time, one of 
which, The Christian Life, dealt with the subject of Christian liberty 
and worldliness. The thesis that moderate drinking inevitably leads to 
drunkenness is defended rather strongly, and total abstinence is upheld 
as the requirement in this matter for Christians.

In order to answer these charges, an editorial appeared in the 
Presbyterian Guardian stating the historic Presbyterian position 
concerning the subject of Christian liberty.[34] The Bible was set forth 
as the only rule of faith and morals and as the only guide to right 
conduct. There must be no appeal to the rules of men unless they agree 
with the Word of God. Certain things are expressly forbidden in the 
Bible, while other calls to duty are by "good and necessary consequence" 
deduced from the Scriptures. Every Christian must obey these injunctions 
and if he does not, he is engaging in sinful practice. On the other 
hand, certain things either expressly or through silence are regarded by 
the Bible as indifferent in themselves. Engaging in these practices is a 
matter of the individual's Christian liberty. He must be guided by the 
circumstances in expressing his Christian liberty, always keeping in 
mind the weaker brother and the high standard of holiness set by the 
Word of God. The editorial then continued to deal with the particular 
problem of the use of wine.

The principle enunciated was that, according to the Bible, it is not 
wrong at any and all times to partake temperately of wine. The Bible 
condemns intemperance, but clearly it allows the moderate use of wine 
under certain conditions. The editorial concluded with the warning, "In 
every instance we must keep before us the goal of the salvation and the 
edification of men's souls through our testimony to Christ. And let us 
take care that our testimony to Christ be to the Christ of the Bible. 
Jesus said, 'Blessed is he, whosoever shall find no occasion of 
stumbling in me!"'

This issue came to a climax in the Presbyterian Church of America at the 
third general assembly. Three overtures to the assembly recommended 
total abstinence as the principle to maintain, while a fourth warned the 
assembly against man-made rules and urged the church to re-study the 
subordinate standards of the church, particularly the Larger and Shorter 
Catechisms, as containing the principles of holy Scripture which is the 
guide to godly living. The three overtures relative to total abstinence 
were defeated, and the fourth overture was adopted directing the 
attention of the church to the Westminster Standards as containing 
sufficient and adequate instruction on this subject.[35]

The question of independency in church government also became a live 
issue in the third assembly as it related to support of the Independent 
Board. The church had organized a committee on foreign missions, but 
because most of its missionary volunteers had been sent out to the 
foreign field under the Independent Board, the foreign committee had 
always recommended the support of the Independent Board.

In the fall of 1936, however, a disruption had taken place in the 
Independent Board over the question of church government. The pledge of 
the Independent Board requires approval of the charter of the board, 
which charter in section III demands a belief in the "fundamental 
principles of Presbyterian church government." After the 1936 General 
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, there began to develop a 
pronounced tendency toward independency in church government on the part 
of some members. The November, 1936 meeting of the Independent Board 
produced a clash over this issue.

Dr. Machen had been president of the board since its founding, but now 
certain members of the board had grown discontented with his policy of 
preserving the board's Presbyterian character and doctrine. These 
members had met before the meeting of the board and had decided to 
attempt to remove Dr. Machen from the presidency. The discontented 
members placed an ecclesiastically independent member in nomination for 
president, and he was elected. Thus a non-Presbyterian point of view had 
gained control of the board and its original purpose to support "truly 
Biblical and truly Presbyterian" foreign missions was abandoned.

Another example of this spirit of independency among board members was 
the Rev. Merrill T. MacPherson, vice-president of the Independent Board, 
who formed an independent church known as the Church of the Open Door of 
Philadelphia in June, 1936. Its constitution, article VII, section 1, 
forbids any relationship with a denomination.

    This Church acknowledges only the Lord Jesus Christ as its Head; the 
Holy Scriptures as the only infallible guide on matters of faith, 
discipline and order; the Holy Spirit as its Teacher; and is not and 
never shall be amenable to or under the jurisdiction or supervision of 
any other ecclesiastical body of any kind or nature whatever.

Mr. MacPherson has since frequently stated that he has no desire or 
intention of uniting with any denomination. This spirit of independency 
was not manifest when he first became a member of the board and while he 
was pastor of the Central-North Broad Street Presbyterian Church. There 
were others on the Independent Board who also showed tendencies in the 
same direction.

Certain members of the board attempted to remedy this situation and to 
compel the board to remain true to its charter, but they failed and 
resigned from the board.[36] This left the Independent Board in 
opposition to the great Presbyterian purpose for which it had been 
founded. These resignations from the Independent Board caused the Third 
General Assembly to adopt a resolution urging the church not to support 
it.[37] A minority report was also presented in which the allegation of 
independency in church government was denied, and a plea for support of 
the Independent Board by the Presbyterian Church of America was entered.

As a result of these differences concerning dispensationalism, Christian 
liberty, and church government, fourteen ministers and three elders 
withdrew from the Presbyterian Church of America and formed the Bible 
Presbyterian Synod. The synod immediately announced its intention to 
revise the three hundred-year-old Westminster Confession of Faith "in 
any particulars in which the premillennial teaching of the Scriptures 
may be held to be obscured."[38]

The First General Synod of the Bible Presbyterian Synod took definite 
steps to alter the Westminster Confession of Faith so that it would 
express the premillennial view. Changes were made in chapters VIII, 
XXXII, XXXIII, and XXXIV in the Confession of Faith, and in questions 
eighty-two, and eighty-four through ninety of the Larger Catechism, in 
order to make them conform to premillennialism.[39] Thus, in a few 
months the three hundred-year-old Westminster Confession of Faith, which 
had been in harmony with the whole Presbyterian and Reformed tradition 
concerning the second coming of Jesus Christ, was hastily changed to 
conform exclusively to premillennialism.

The Fourth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America was 
concerned largely with the adoption of a form of government. The form of 
government finally adopted is essentially that which has been used by 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA for over one hundred years. In 
several instances, however, changes were made in order to guard against 
the strong tendency of centralization which had dominated the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA during the last decade. The powers of the 
presbyteries over the congregations and the powers of the general 
assembly over the church were limited. The general assembly's powers 
which had been so abused in the Presbyterian Church in the USA were 
restricted in this way:

    Whenever such deliverances, resolutions, overtures and other actions 
are additional to the specific provisions of the Constitution, they 
shall not be regarded as binding unless they have been approved by the 
general assembly and presbyteries in the manner provided in this Form of 
Government for the amendment of the Constitution.[40]

Several other minor changes were made, providing that baptized infants 
should be placed on the membership roll of the church;[41] that only 
communicant members of the church may vote in congregational 
meetings;[42] and that amendments to the form of subscription required 
of ministers, licentiates, ruling elders, and deacons must go through 
same procedure as changes in the Confession of Faith and Catechisms.[43]

The other amendments are of a very minor nature.

The Fifth General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of America voted 
not to continue the suit concerning the name of the church and adopted 
the name, "the Orthodox Presbyterian Church."

The Directory for the Public Worship of God was adopted by the Orthodox 
Presbyterian Church at the Sixth General Assembly in May, 1939. It 
contains the same principles as the one in use by the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA but yet differs from that directory in several 
important features. First, it only includes forms for the public worship 
of God and so no burial service, or form for the visitation of the sick 
is found. Second, an entire new chapter was added on the principles of 
public worship, and suggested forms which are not part of the directory 
were proposed for the celebration of the Lord's Supper, public 
profession of faith, ordinations, and installations. Third, a few 
changes which are minor but nevertheless significant concern the 
pronouncement of the apostolic benediction only at regular services of 
worship, the use of hymns which are in agreement with the Word of God, 
the celebration of the sacrament only in the church building except in 
rare cases approved by the session, and the public profession of faith 
before the congregation.[44] A Book of Discipline has been provisionally 
adopted and is likely to be adopted finally in the next general assembly 
of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church in June, 1940.

In the formation of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, Calvinism was 
given a new impetus in America. The spiritual heritage of Reformed 
teaching which had been stifled in the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
received a welcome in this church body, and the great doctrines of the 
Reformation, such as the sovereignty of God and salvation by grace 
alone, came to life again. Upon this high biblical ground the Orthodox 
Presbyterian Church stands, convinced that God will be pleased to use 
her to his glory and to the advancement of his kingdom. The original 
purpose and determination to make the church a truly biblical and truly 
Presbyterian body which would carry on the spiritual succession of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA was insured.

The Orthodox Presbyterian Church is what its name implies, truly 
Presbyterian. Its doctrinal standards, the Westminster Confession of 
Faith, and the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, are in practically the 
same form as they were when written by the Westminster divines nearly 
three hundred years ago. All compromise with modernism has been 
eliminated and strict adherence to the Presbyterian and Reformed 
traditions characterizes the testimony of the church. It is a church 
devoted to the Bible as the final authority for faith and practice and 
convinced that only through the sacrificial death of Christ upon the 
cross can men be saved.

It is too early to evaluate the importance of the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church in the religious life of America, but it is safe to state 
emphatically that this church is true to the Word of God and is true to 
the great Presbyterian heritage handed down by the church fathers of 
American Presbyterianism. While many of the Protestant churches in 
America are floundering in the quagmire of modernism and its ministers 
are preaching man-made philosophies and moral essays based upon 
naturalism, here is one church which relies not upon itself and man's 
wisdom but trusts emphatically in the Bible as God's revelation to man 
and as containing God's plan of salvation for man. The Orthodox 
Presbyterian Church's ministers do not say, thus says so and so, or 
even, so says the church, but they speak above the clamor of men, "Thus 
saith the Lord, hear ye Him!"

Chapter 13. Church Property Rights

AS SOON AS the Orthodox Presbyterian Church was formed, ministers and 
congregations of the Presbyterian Church in the USA began renouncing the 
jurisdiction of the church and uniting with the new body. This involved 
the question of the ownership of church property. Did it belong to the 
denomination as a whole or to the individual congregations which built 
it and paid for it?

A Special Committee on Legal Procedure was appointed by the 1936 General 
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA,

    to take such measures as may be adequate to maintain the full 
constitutional authority of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., guard 
all its interests and protect all its property rights, and associate 
with them, in the above responsibilities, such ministers and ruling 
elders, not exceeding seven in number, as they may deem wise counselors, 
and to make full report to the next General Assembly.[1]

Two of the six ministerial members of this committee, the Rev. George E. 
Barnes, D.D., and the Rev. Robert B. Whyte, D.D., were signers of the 
Auburn Affirmation.[2]

In practically every instance, with the exception of two congregations, 
one in North Dakota and the other in Wilmington, Delaware, those 
congregations which voted to withdraw from the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA were divided in their allegiance. In most cases only a few 
desired to remain in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, but these 
individuals, apparently, expressed no desire to prevent the vast 
majority of the congregation from using the building as a place of 
worship under their new relationship with another denomination. Yet in 
every case, whether the minority desired it or not, and even where the 
congregation voted unanimously to leave the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA, the Committee on Legal Procedure of that church entered a suit in 
the civil courts to restrain the congregation from using the property as 
a place of worship under any other denomination than the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA. Suits involving property valued at more than two 
million dollars were begun in the civil courts in the Synods of New 
England, New Jersey, Baltimore, Pennsylvania, Iowa, North Dakota, South 
Dakota, and Wisconsin.[3]

This committee used as its guide the principles of Presbyterian church 
property laid down by the Supreme Court of the United States in the case 
of Barkley vs. Hayes, which states that a local congregation is an 
integral part of the church as a whole, and as such its property is 
owned ultimately by the denomination.[4]

The most outstanding case involving church property was that of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA vs. The Presbyterian Church of 
Collingswood, New Jersey, of which the Rev. Carl McIntire was pastor. 
Mr. McIntire, a member of the Independent Board for Presbyterian Foreign 
Missions, had been suspended from the ministry of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and had subsequently renounced the jurisdiction of 
that church and had united with the Presbyterian Church of America. The 
congregation then voted on June 15, 1936, to withdraw from the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and to remain independent 
ecclesiastically, but continued to use the church building and Sunday 
School rooms, valued at some $200,000.[5] On June 26, 1936, the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, through five members of the Collingswood 
Presbyterian Church who were opposed to Mr. McIntire, applied for an 
injunction to restrain the congregation from the use of the buildings. 
The congregation filed an answer within ten days, and as a result the 
Rev. Carl McIntire and congregation were allowed to worship in the 
church until the case had been heard and a decision had been rendered.

On March 3, 1937, the case of J. Earnest Kelly versus Carl McIntire, et 
al., was heard before vice chancellor Francis B. Davis in Camden, New 
Jersey. The plaintiffs in the case argued that an individual 
Presbyterian church is an integral part of the whole denomination so 
that its property belongs to the denomination and cannot be used for any 
purpose not sanctioned by the judicatories of the church. Mr. McIntire 
had been suspended from the ministry of the church and, being under this 
censure, he had no right to preach in the church until his censures had 
been removed and his right to minister fully restored. The congregation 
had withdrawn from the denomination and so should not be allowed to use 
the building for worship but must seek other premises for such purposes.

The defendants, on the other hand, maintained

    that the agencies and judicatories of the Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A. have so departed from the fundamental principles, faith and 
constitution of the denomination, that these denominational agencies and 
those avowing loyalty to them, are not entitled to the property of the 
Collingswood Presbyterian Church as against the members thereof who have 
steadfastly remained loyal to the principles as set forth in the 
Constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. under which title 
was acquired and under which the congregation of the local church was 
formed.[6]

With reference to the Rev. Carl McIntire, the defendants claimed,

    The express violation of the Constitution of the Presbyterian Church 
in the trial and suspension of defendant, Carl McIntire, is evident in 
four particulars; first, the mandate forming the basis of the charges 
against him was an improper basis for the procedure; second, the 
presbytery failed to stay the proceedings after a complaint was filed 
with the Synod; third, there was a variance in the charges and 
specifications which were presented and those upon which the actual 
trial was held; and fourth, the synod violated the constitution in 
affirming the judgment of the lower court although many specifications 
of error were sustained.[7]

These matters mentioned above were express violations of the 
constitution of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, and the censures 
placed upon the Rev. Carl McIntire had no legal effect. In view of this 
situation, the defendants said no other action was possible than for Mr. 
McIntire to renounce the jurisdiction of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA and for the congregation to do likewise. The congregation had not 
seceded from the denomination but had simply announced that it could not 
"accept the jurisdiction of a body which openly and avowedly defies this 
Constitution."[8]

The judge ruled in favor of the Presbyterian Church in the USA on the 
principle that a local congregation is subject to the church as a whole, 
and cannot use the property contrary to the wishes of the 
denomination.[9] The judge refused to rule on the doctrinal controversy 
as immaterial to the case. Therefore the congregation was restrained 
from using the property and Mr. McIntire from preaching and conducting 
services in the building "until his censures are removed and his right 
to minister has been restored by due proceedings according to the 
constitution and practices of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A."[10] 
Mr. McIntire and the congregation which left with him did not appeal the 
decision to a higher court but left the building to worship in a newly 
constructed tabernacle.[11]

The principles by which the Special Committee on Legal Procedure of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA was guided in this case, and which were 
upheld by the civil courts in most of the property cases, were as 
follows:

    1. An individual Presbyterian Church is an integral part of the 
whole Presbyterian denomination, and is subject to the Constitution of 
the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. Its entire property belongs to the 
denomination itself, and cannot be used for any purposes which are not 
sanctioned by the judicatories of the Church.

    2. The members of an individual Presbyterian Church cannot by solemn 
resolution repudiate the authority of the Presbyterian Church in the 
United States of America, then by subsequent resolution attempt to take 
their church property out of the denomination, even if their effort in 
so doing is unanimous.

    3. In the event of secession, the property remains for the use of 
the loyal members of the congregation recognized by the judicatories of 
the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.

    4. The orders and decisions of the judicatories of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A. are final and binding upon its members and every 
part of the Church, and must be accepted in litigation before the civil 
courts as conclusive.

    5. Civil courts consider themselves incompetent judges in matters of 
faith, doctrine, and ecclesiastical law, and consequently will not 
inquire into such matters, particularly when the religious denomination 
has its own system of courts to determine cases of that character.[12]

Every case to date involving church property between the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and those who renounced its jurisdiction since 1936, 
has been awarded to the Presbyterian Church in the USA upon these 
principles, with the exception of one case.

The First Presbyterian Church in Leith, North Dakota, voted unanimously 
on August 2, 1936, to renounce the judicatories of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA. The Rev. Samuel J. Allen, the pastor, had already 
done so and had become affiliated with the then Presbyterian Church of 
America, later known as the Orthodox Presbyterian Church. Immediately, 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA, through its Presbytery of Bismarck, 
brought suit in the civil courts against the officers and members of the 
First Presbyterian Church of Leith, attempting to secure possession of 
and title to the church property. The same arguments in substance were 
presented by both parties in this case as in the case involving the 
Collingswood Presbyterian Church. However, the First Presbyterian Church 
of Leith had voted unanimously to renounce the jurisdiction of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA. On June 17, 1939, the courts handed down 
a decision in favor of the defendant church. In the mind of the court 
the case hinged upon the unanimous vote of the congregation.

    It seems clear that a minority, or even one member of a 
congregation, may prevent the use of the church property for purposes 
other than the trust for which it was created....

    If there isn't even one to object, then can the general organization 
of the denomination (plaintiff in this case) which is no part of the 
Congregation, prevent the unanimous congregation from using the property 
as it sees fit?

    The Church at Leith, North Dakota, is a North Dakota corporation 
under the control of trustees. The cestuis que trust are the members of 
the Congregation. The Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A. is in no way a 
party to this trusteeship....

    If the trustees act within the scope of their authority which they 
received from the Congregation with respect to the property, it seems 
the plaintiff in this case would be interfering with the powers and 
duties of the trustees in attempting to take the property away from 
them....

    ... The Trustees represent the Congregation, and the trustees may do 
with the property whatever the cestuis que trust unanimously consent to 
their doing.

    There was no schism. There was no disagreement whatever in the 
congregation, or with the trustees, and the court can find no operation 
of the law, or under the Constitution of the plaintiff which makes it 
the equitable owner of the property.[13]

The court in this case directly contradicted the principle laid down by 
the Special Committee on Legal Procedure of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA, that "the members of the individual Presbyterian Churches 
cannot by solemn resolution repudiate the authority of the Presbyterian 
Church in the U.S.A., then by subsequent resolution attempt to take 
their church property out of the denomination, even if their effort in 
so doing is unanimous."

A similar case is now pending before the courts of Delaware, that of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA versus the members and officers of the 
Eastlake Presbyterian Church of Wilmington, Delaware, which voted 
unanimously on June 24, 1936, to renounce the jurisdiction of that 
denomination.

Another case involving church property is now before the courts in 
Portland, Maine, but this suit is somewhat different. The Second Parish 
Presbyterian Church in Portland and its pastor, the Rev. John H. 
Skilton, voted on June 30, 1936, to withdraw from the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and to unite with the then Presbyterian Church of 
America. The Presbyterian Church in the USA applied for an injunction 
asking the court to restrain the congregation from using the property 
for worship. This the court refused to grant. The case proper is now 
being heard before the civil courts.

The Second Parish Presbyterian Church building is owned by a corporation 
known as the Second Parish in the Town of Portland, which leases the 
property rent free to the Second Parish Presbyterian Church. Members and 
contributors to the church can become members of the Second Parish in 
the Town of Portland only by election which is conducted by the 
corporation as an organization separate from the church. This means that 
the church building is held by the corporation entirely separate from 
the congregation. Since this difference in ownership obtains, the 
decision of the court is awaited with much interest.

Certain individuals of the Presbyterian Church in the USA look upon this 
legal action against members who have left the denomination as "highly 
discreditable to the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A.,"[14] because in 
most instances the church buildings were purchased by the local 
congregations without financial aid from the denomination as a whole. 
The entire proceedings have not advanced the cause of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA in the estimation of the public. As was pointed out in 
chapter twelve, the Orthodox Presbyterian Church has made such legal 
action impossible and thereby has avoided a potentially great wrong.

In practically every case the withdrawing congregations have built new 
edifices and their work has gone on unabated. The technical legalities 
have compelled the courts to yield to the demands of the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA, while the underlying doctrinal differences have been 
brushed aside. Yet the decisions in favor of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA have in no way destroyed the basic conflict of theology which 
really caused hundreds of members to leave that communion.

The ministers and the members of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church have 
demonstrated their allegiance to the Bible rather than to bricks and 
mortar, and have tried to live out the words of Martin Luther's hymn,

    Let goods and kindred go,
    This mortal life also;
    The body they may kill;
    God's truth abideth still,
    His Kingdom is forever.


Chapter 14. Reform from Within

THE "reform from within" movement in the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
is based upon the belief that the church has a sound Confession of 
Faith, and although the courts, boards, and agencies of the church have 
been disloyal to the standards in many instances and are controlled by 
those who are out of agreement with the Confession, nevertheless, it is 
the duty of each minister and member to contend for the faith and to 
lead the church back to a place of faithfulness to the Bible. This is 
the position of men like the Rev. Samuel G. Craig, D.D., editor of 
Christianity Today, who wrote, "Reform is imperatively needed and every 
true Presbyterian should give himself for the task."[1]

When the members of the Independent Board were suspended from the 
ministry of the church and the Orthodox Presbyterian Church was formed, 
Dr. C. E. Macartney and others urged the ministers and members of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA not to leave the church. But at the same 
time they deplored the "severe treatment" meted out to men like Dr. 
Machen and the other members of the Independent Board and admitted that 
we "are convinced that doctrines not in accord with her [Presbyterian 
Church in the USA] standards are being tolerated and even fostered by 
boards and agencies of the church."[2]

They have maintained this position quite consistently, for they resigned 
from membership on the board of trustees of Westminster Theological 
Seminary and refused to support the Independent Board when it became 
evident that these two organizations would eventually lead to a 
separation from the Presbyterian Church in the USA. They have always 
been of the opinion that the church could be saved from modernism and 
that their duty was to fight from within.

On the other hand, some of those who renounced the jurisdiction of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and formed the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church argue that, although the doctrinal standards of the church, with 
the exception of the 1903 amendments, are sound, the decision of the 
1936 General Assembly sitting in its highest capacity as a court of 
Jesus Christ so interpreted the constitution in favor of modernism that 
the church is now apostate, at least until that decision is reversed. In 
addition, these men reason that the boards, agencies, and courts of the 
church are completely dominated by those who are out of accord with the 
doctrines of the church. And finally, says this group, the theological 
seminaries of the church, which are the source of ministerial supply, 
are not teaching the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, but employ 
professors who deny the very essentials of the Christian faith. What is 
more, the barriers against ministerial candidates from seminaries 
outside of the Presbyterian Church in the USA are mounting each year. 
With such a deplorable situation facing the church, what possible chance 
is there of effecting any real reform?

The question arises, "What are these advocates of 'reform from within' 
doing to alter the serious doctrinal defection in the church and to 
return it to the control of those who believe that the Bible is the Word 
of God?" The attempt to reform the Presbyterian Church in the USA from 
within became an organized movement when the Presbyterian League of 
Faith was launched in April, 1931.[3] The Rev. Walter D. Buchanan, D.D., 
had been accustomed to invite well-known conservative leaders of the 
church to New York City once every month or two for the purpose of 
discussing the present situation in the church and of laying plans for 
combating the advance of modernism. It was from this group that the 
launching of Westminster Theological Seminary received great impetus and 
support. The ministerial members of the board of trustees of the 
seminary were drawn largely from these men, and the churches represented 
became the largest contributors to the institution. The men who gathered 
in New York City at the invitation of Dr. Buchanan were the recognized 
leaders and contenders for the faith. Besides Dr. Buchanan, there were 
Dr. Machen, Dr. Frank H. Stevenson, Dr. C. E. Macartney, Dr. S. G. 
Craig, Dr. O. T. Allis, Dr. David Burrell, and many others, who later 
assumed a conspicuous place in the conflict.

The proposed union between the larger Presbyterian and Reformed bodies 
in the United States, which did not proceed further than a plan, revived 
the discussion of the Auburn Affirmation as evidence of theological 
impurity. It was at this time that the Rev. E. T. Thompson, D.D., 
professor of church history at Union Theological Seminary, Richmond, 
Virginia, felt compelled to discuss the subject, "Is the Northern Church 
Theologically Sound?"[4] in order to allay suspicions in the southern 
church. He pronounced the northern church sound and the suspicions of 
his brethren in the South as groundless. But his declaration fell on 
deaf ears because discussions continued, and the three leading papers in 
the southern church, The Presbyterian Standard, The Presbyterian of the 
South, and The Christian Observer, reprinted the Auburn Affirmation in 
substance, all of which helped to focus attention on the Auburn 
Affirmation.

Dr. Buchanan and the men meeting in New York City decided that they had 
too long neglected to organize an attack on the Auburn Affirmation, and 
that the need for united action on the part of the conservatives was 
urgent. Accordingly, the organization known as The League of Faith was 
launched in April, 1931, and a constitution adopted and signed by 150 
ministers, many of whom were among the best known in the church, and 
sent to every minister in the church. Eventually about twelve hundred 
ministers joined the League, a number approximately equivalent to the 
number of those who had signed the Auburn Affirmation.

The constitution states the objects of the League to be a maintenance of 
loyalty to the Bible and insistence, in opposition to the Affirmation, 
that the full truth of the Bible, the virgin birth of Christ, the 
substitutionary atonement, the bodily resurrection, and the miracles of 
Christ are essential doctrines of the Word of God.[5]

Meetings of the League were held several times each year, usually in New 
York City at the Broadway Presbyterian Church, of which Dr. Buchanan was 
pastor, for the purpose of Christian fellowship and discussions. But no 
real program of reform was ever adopted or executed. The outstanding 
struggle with modernism on the Board of Foreign Missions was carried on 
by individuals who were members of the League but in their capacity as 
individuals. Many of the League members helped in the conflict, but at 
no time did the League as an organization enter the struggle concerning 
foreign missions. In fact, most of the members of the League regarded it 
as a protest against the Auburn Affirmation and very little beyond that.

When the members of the Independent Board were suspended from the 
ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA and the Presbyterian 
Church of America was organized in 1936, the League was reorganized and 
continued by a group of ministers led by Dr. C. E. Macartney, who were 
imbued with the idea that the Presbyterian Church in the USA was still 
fundamentally sound.

At the invitation of Dr. Macartney a group of ministers and elders met 
in Pittsburgh on June 16, 1936, and adopted resolutions expressing their 
loyalty to the standards of the church, deploring the severe treatment 
meted out to members of the Independent Board, and designating 
Christianity Today and The Presbyterian as "channels for this militant 
testimony."[6]

On June 26, 1936, the Presbyterian League of Faith convened in the 
Broadway Presbyterian Church, New York City, elected Dr. Macartney as 
its president, and expressed a determination to fight from within the 
church for loyalty to the doctrinal standards.

The League met in Columbus, Ohio, on May 25th and 26th, 1937, at the 
time of the assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, and decided 
to wage a strong fight against a proposed revision of chapter XXIII of 
the Confession of Faith, which revision was being advocated by pacifists 
in the church in order to condemn war.[7] A testimony in general terms 
extolling the importance of remaining true to the Word of God was 
adopted and also the following paragraph opposing the proposed change in 
chapter XXIII of the Confession of Faith with reference to war:

    Therefore we deplore, and pledge ourselves to oppose the adoption by 
our Church of any measure or measures which would leave our nation 
defenseless in the midst of its foes, or which would give encouragement 
to those anti-Christian and anti-social movements and organizations who 
plot for the downfall of all that the Church of Christ holds sacred.[8]

This expressed determination to oppose any change in the Westminster 
Confession of Faith, which change would outlaw all wars as un-Christian 
and sinful, became the first specific project of the reorganized League 
of Faith to keep the Confession of Faith pure, and began the movement to 
reform the church from within.

The 1938 General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA had 
adopted the report of its special committee recommending that chapter 
XXIII, part of which reads,

    It is lawful for Christians to accept and execute the offices of a 
magistrate, when called thereunto: in the managing hereof, as they ought 
especially to maintain piety, justice, and peace, according to the 
wholesome laws of each commonwealth; so, for that end, they may lawfully 
now under the New Testament, wage war upon just and necessary occasions,

be changed to read in part,

    War wherever it appears, is a manifestation of the power of sin in 
the world. It defies the righteousness of God, disrupts His worldwide 
family, and outrages the human personality which Christ Jesus came to 
redeem. Even when war is waged with sincere purpose to restrain evil, it 
tends to produce greater evils than those against which it is directed. 
The Church, which is the body of Christ, set in the world to preach the 
Gospel of Peace, must ever bear witness to this character of war.[9]

In fact, a revision of the entire chapter was proposed.

In pursuance of the endeavor to resist this change in chapter XXIII of 
the Confession of Faith, an outstanding article entitled "The Christian 
Attitude Toward War," by Dr. Loraine Boettner, a layman, appeared in 
Christianity Today.[10] Dr. Boettner contended that the Bible does not 
condemn wars which are waged upon just and necessary grounds, and on 
certain occasions God actually commanded the Israelites to go into 
battle against the enemy. He included many other arguments against the 
proposed changes and concluded, "The proposed new amendment is 
unscriptural and treasonable."

Members of the Presbyterian League of Faith wrote articles and made 
speeches against the proposed amendment. But the opponents of the 
amendment were not confined to the members of the League nor to 
so-called conservatives. Outstanding modernists like the Rev. John A. 
MacCallum, D.D., a signer of the Auburn Affirmation, fought so 
strenuously against the amendment and against pacifism in general that 
he was asked to resign as editor of The Presbyterian Tribune, whose 
board of directors were committed to the amendment.[11] The Presbytery 
of Philadelphia, which is controlled by Auburn Affirmationists, voted 
against the amendment, while the supposedly conservative Presbytery of 
Northumberland voted for it.[12]

The amendment failed to receive the required vote of two-thirds of the 
presbyteries and so was lost, but in no sense of the word can the issue 
be regarded as a doctrinal one, since modernists and Bible-believers 
fought on the same side. The Confession of Faith was not altered, but 
the battle was not in this instance between Christianity and modernism.

Since the reorganization of the League in 1936, only one struggle has 
been fought, which was an out-and-out conflict between Christianity and 
modernism. It concerned the election of the Rev. E. G. Homrighausen as 
professor of religious education at Princeton Seminary, as well as the 
presence of Dr. Emil Brunner of Zurich, Switzerland, as guest professor 
at Princeton Theological Seminary. Dr. Homrighausen had been appointed a 
professor by the board of trustees of Princeton Seminary, but his 
appointment required the confirmation of the General Assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, since Princeton is under its 
jurisdiction. Dr. Brunner had accepted the invitation of the board of 
trustees to occupy the chair of systematic theology made famous by the 
three Hodges—Charles, Archibald Alexander, and Casper Wistar.

Members of the League of Faith opposed most strenuously the election of 
Dr. Homrighausen and the presence of Dr. Brunner on the faculty at 
Princeton Seminary. Others, not members of the Presbyterian Church in 
the USA, also called attention to these two professors and their 
liberalism, indicating that Princeton Theological Seminary was no longer 
the citadel of orthodoxy, and that its reorganization in 1929 and the 
establishment of Westminster Theological Seminary the same year marked 
clearly the beginning of a trend toward modernism.

An issue of Christianity Today devoted considerable space to the 
reprinting of several articles by theologians outside of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, attacking the theological beliefs of 
these two professors.[13] One article was by Clarence Bouma of Calvin 
Seminary, and one by Cornelius Van Til of Westminster Theological 
Seminary, both of whom contended that Barthianism, which Dr. Brunner 
advocates, is directly contrary to the historic position of Calvinism 
and Christianity.

Professor Van Til pointed out that Dr. Brunner does not believe in the 
infallibility of the Bible nor even in the Scriptures as a trustworthy 
record of history. The view of history in the plain sense of the term is 
denied by Dr. Brunner and in its place he substitutes a new conception 
of history known as "supra history." Events like the bodily resurrection 
do not belong to history but to eternity. There must be a distinction 
between the dimension of becoming and that of history, according to 
Brunner. Such a distinction, said Dr. Van Til, destroys the real 
historical basis of Christianity.

In 1929 when Princeton Seminary was reorganized there were those who 
maintained that the conflict was administrative and personal, but Dr. 
Craig declared that with the coming of Dr. Homrighausen and Dr. Brunner 
no one could hold that the issue at Princeton was not one of doctrine.

    Since that event, however, a number of things have happened that 
would seem to indicate that the founders of Westminster Seminary were 
not far wrong when they maintained that a new Seminary was needed to 
carry on and perpetuate the policies and traditions of Princeton 
Theological Seminal as that institution existed prior to its 
reorganization by the General Assembly.[14]

Dr. Craig expressed the "hope that the Board of Trustees of Princeton 
Seminary would reconsider this whole matter."[15]

In subsequent issues of Christianity Today, Dr. Craig assailed the 
appointment of Dr. Brunner not only on the grounds established by Dr. 
Van Til and others, but because Dr. Brunner rejected infant baptism, the 
virgin birth, the Pauline authorship of the pastoral epistles, and 
because he maintained a wrong view of church and state. Dr. Brunner 
later denied these allegations, but Dr. Craig claimed that his 
contentions were corroborated by books and articles of Dr. 
Brunner's.[16]

In a letter to Dr. Craig professor Brunner stated, "I think it is no 
news that President MacKay whilst differing in some points from me has 
the intention of leading Princeton Seminary back to the real Reformation 
theology, the real Biblical theology of which Warfield's theology is a 
decided deviation."[17] Of this statement Dr. Craig made much, to 
indicate that the president of Princeton was intent on changing 
Princeton's historic position. The fight against Dr. Brunner's 
appointment as a professor never came to a conclusion because Dr. 
Brunner decided to return to Switzerland in 1939.

Dr. E. G. Homrighausen, who was appointed to the chair of Christian 
education, received considerable attention from Dr. Craig and others 
because he was regarded as an American exponent of Barthianism, and more 
expressly because of his view of the Bible as expressed in his book, 
Christianity in America. In this volume Dr. Homrighausen repudiated a 
belief in the full truthfulness of the Bible (p. 121) and contended that 
the gospel must be expressed in modern thought forms (p. 49).

With these facts in mind, Dr. Macartney and Dr. Craig appeared before 
the Standing Committee on Theological Seminaries of the 1938 General 
Assembly and argued against the confirmation of Dr. Homrighausen's 
appointment as professor of Christian education at Princeton Seminary. 
After hearing both sides the committee decided to take no action, so 
that the General Assembly had no opportunity to vote on the 
appointment.[18]

Between the time of the 1938 and 1939 General Assemblies of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA, Dr. Homrighausen issued a declaration of 
his faith which seemed to prove that he had changed from a Barthian to a 
staunch believer in the Bible and Calvinism.[19] This declaration 
apparently satisfied Dr. Craig and members of the League of Faith that 
Dr. Homrighausen was orthodox. The objections to his professorship were 
dropped so that his appointment was confirmed at the 1939 General 
Assembly.[20]

However, Dr. Van Til contended that the many changes in professor 
Homrighausen's theology from an out-and-out modernism to Barthianism and 
finally to a mild evangelicalism, all within the space of a few years, 
was no guarantee of his Calvinism or of his fitness as professor at an 
institution which was committed to the Westminster Confession of Faith.

    Thus the latest pronouncements of Dr. Homrighausen are at best 
hopelessly confusing. His trumpet gives forth an uncertain sound. It is 
difficult to see how anyone so confused on the fundamental issues of 
theological thought can with clarity and conviction present the Reformed 
Faith to his students....

    But granted we could overlook his Barthianism—which is absolutely 
destructive of the notion of an infallible Bible—where is the evidence 
that Dr. Homrighausen has now adopted the Reformed Faith? It is not to 
be found in the Article on "Convictions," which the editor of The 
Presbyterian commended to the commissioners of the Assembly as evidence 
on the basis of which they might judge whether Dr. Homrighausen was a 
fit candidate for a professorship at Princeton Seminary.... It has not 
been customary in the past to appoint professors at Princeton who are 
merely "on the way" to becoming Reformed; of Dr. Homrighausen it cannot 
even be shown that he is "on the way."[21]

The struggle against Professor Homrighausen thus came to an end and he 
was officially installed in the chair of Christian education at 
Princeton Theological Seminary, October 10, 1939, giving further 
evidence of the lack of strict adherence to the Westminster Confession 
of Faith which the seminary is pledged to defend.

Up to the present time no other definite projects for reform have been 
undertaken by the "reform from within" group, except that of opposing 
the proposed union between the Presbyterian Church in the USA and the 
Protestant Episcopal Church.[22] The National Committee of the Ruling 
Elders Testimony issued its initial blast against the unfaithfulness of 
the boards and agencies of the church, but since then the organization 
has remained more or less inarticulate. With respect to the whole 
movement to reform the Presbyterian Church in the USA from within, the 
question might well be asked, What are the chances for success?

The answer to this question can be given quite positively: the chances 
for success are very poor indeed! This unequivocal reply is based upon 
two considerations: First, the "reform from within" group has no 
thorough-going plan to reform the church, nor is any program being 
actively promulgated. Secondly, the facts of church history are arrayed 
against the successful reform of an individual communion when once the 
ecclesiastical organization has come under the control and influence of 
modernists.

In the first place, there is no program of reform being pursued. The 
members of the League of Faith admit that the decision of the 1936 
General Assembly in suspending members of the Independent Board from the 
ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA was a wrong decision and 
a discredit to the church. Dr. Craig wrote,

    More might be said, but surely we have said enough to justify our 
characterization of the fifth anniversary of the 1934 mandate and 
accompanying "Studies of the Constitution" as an inglorious anniversary. 
It is not necessary to approve the organization of the Independent Board 
in order to maintain that for the good of the Church they ought to be 
rescinded or at least very considerably modified.[23]

Dr. Macartney likewise stated, "Indeed, in some instances, such as the 
tragic expulsion of that great theologian, Dr. J. Gresham Machen, our 
church has seemed to witness against its creed rather than for it."

Aside from these and other statements and articles, the League is doing 
nothing to have that decision rescinded. The Presbyterian way, according 
to its Form of Government, is to send up an overture or a memorial to 
the general assembly, urging the assembly to reverse its decision. Three 
years have intervened since the decision was rendered, but so far no 
such move has been made and there is little evidence that any will be 
made.

In addition, what is the League of Faith doing to reform the boards and 
agencies of the church which the League members have declared disloyal 
to the doctrinal standards of the church? No overtures have been made 
demanding that modernist literature be withdrawn, that only sound 
literature be distributed, that no compromising unions be made, that 
only those be elected to membership on the boards who will refuse to 
compromise with unbelief. No mass meetings are being held decrying the 
condition in the church and demanding its reform. Dr. J. A. MacCallum 
probably diagnosed the situation when he wrote,

    Fortunately, with the exception of one or two minor skirmishes, all 
is now quiet on the theological front. Of course we can never tell when 
the battle will break out again in all its ancient virulence but it 
looks as though we are in for an era of theological good-feeling. The 
conservatives are not so conservative, or at least not so militant, and 
the liberals are not so sure of themselves as they were a few years ago 
when Dr. Clarence Edward Macartney was the self-appointed knight of 
reaction. His occasional Cassandra calls may be as strident as ever but 
they have lost their sometime magic and in consequence his followers 
have been reduced to a weedy segment of their former battalions.[24]

The Presbyterian, which was designated as one of the two papers to help 
in the effort to reform the church, makes it quite apparent that Dr. 
MacCallum's judgment is not far wrong. That journal publishes articles 
written by men who are modernists, as well as Bible-believers. The 
September 29, 1938 issue contained an impressive comparison of the 
Auburn Affirmation with the standards of the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA in parallel columns. The purpose of this and previous articles was 
to demonstrate how contrary is the Auburn Affirmation to the doctrines 
of the church. In the same issue of the magazine there was an article, 
"God, Youth and America," written by the Rev. Jesse H. Baird, D.D., a 
signer of the Auburn Affirmation, which the editor praised as follows: 
"Dr. Baird of our San Francisco Theological Seminary, San Anselmo, 
California, delivered this masterful address on the spiritual history of 
America at the Area Christian Endeavor Convention in July, where ten 
Western states were represented." With such contradictory testimony 
appearing in the same issue of The Presbyterian, which was conscripted 
to contend for the faith and whose editor was a vice-president of the 
League of Faith, there seems to be little hope of reform. In fact, it 
reveals that a proper conception of reform is sadly lacking. What is 
more, the attitude of those who are leading the so-called movement for 
reform has changed since the 1936 debacle.

In 1923 Dr. Macartney wrote, "The third way to control the great 
defection is by protest and appeal and ecclesiastical procedure. But 
from this method many turn away."[25] Now there seems to be a tendency 
to forget the ecclesiastical situation as a whole, except for an 
occasional verbal or written blast against modernism, and to hold to the 
conviction that the situation is quite hopeless and that the most 
important task is to hold the fort in the local church by preaching the 
gospel. Dr. Macartney evidenced this attitude when he wrote recently, 
"Therefore, I value less the whole ecclesiastical structure, and feel 
that more and more for the true witness to the gospel and the Kingdom of 
God we must depend upon the particular local church, the individual 
minister and the individual Christian."[26]

In the second place, the facts of church history do not augur well for 
the present "reform from within" cause. There is not a single instance 
in all of church history where a "reform from within" group has been 
victorious when once the church has become doctrinally corrupt in its 
ecclesiastical organization. The most outstanding example of an attempt 
to reform a corrupt church, and the one which almost parallels the 
present movement, is that which occurred in the Netherlands.

In 1834 the Rev. Hendrik De Cock was suspended from the ministry of the 
Netherlands Reformed Church because he criticized modernism within the 
church, so that De Cock and his congregation at Ulrum formed the mother 
church for a new and truly Reformed church in the Netherlands.[27] 
Gradually others were suspended from the ministry for the same reason. 
But some ministers who were themselves doctrinally sound remained in the 
church to reform it and formed a society for that purpose. They gave 
three reasons for remaining within the national church: (1) their main 
purpose was to preach the gospel of salvation to the lost; (2) the 
national church was still capable of reform; (3) the methods of those 
who withdrew were wrong.

Many years later Abraham Kuyper, who was to become one of the greatest 
theologians of the Netherlands, was born of parents who were members of 
the national church. After he was converted from liberalism to a belief 
in the Bible he saw the need for a theological faculty true to the 
faith. Under his leadership the Free University of Amsterdam was 
organized, which has become one of the truly great centers of Christian 
learning in Europe. But the tyranny of the national church became 
greater and many saw the hopelessness of reform from within, so that 
they withdrew from the church. In 1892 this group united with the church 
organized by Hendrik De Cock to form the great Reformed Churches of the 
Netherlands. The "reform from within" movement had failed miserably, and 
today it is the free Reformed Churches of the Netherlands to which 
Bible-believers look for comfort and aid in the fight for the faith.

Reform from within the Presbyterian Church in the USA seems doomed to 
failure not only because of the two main considerations already 
discussed but also because there is not a single strictly orthodox 
seminary within the church. With this situation obtaining and with these 
leaders of reform mostly older men, from where are the Bible-believing 
ministers coming to fill their places and to carry on the conflicts? In 
addition, there is the painful truth that every year scores of modernist 
and doctrinally indifferent ministers are being added to the roll to 
lead the church to a more liberal position.

No one would rejoice more than the former ministers and members of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA who have formed the Orthodox Presbyterian 
Church, if the "reform from within" group should succeed in reversing 
the 1936 decisions against the Independent Board, in gaining control of 
the boards and agencies of the church, and in placing orthodox 
professors in the theological seminaries of the church. But this seems 
impossible, not only because the reform movement has no organized plan, 
but also because the history of the Christian church seems aligned 
against it. It is strongly suspected that history will repeat itself and 
that the League of Faith has set a hopeless task before itself.

Chapter 15. Whither Protestantism?

THE ASSERTION was made in the preface of this book that the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA and many Protestant churches of America in their 
corporate testimony have turned away from historic Christianity and are 
witnessing to another gospel known as modernism. The foregoing chapters 
have attempted to prove that judgment with respect to the Presbyterian 
Church in the USA. It is not within the province of this volume to 
present evidence in substantiation of the indictment concerning 
modernism in the other Protestant churches. On the other hand, how 
anyone who has the slightest knowledge of Christianity and its theology 
can listen to the sermons over the radio which are sponsored by the 
Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America, read the 
contributions of ministers and theological professors of those churches 
in the denominational magazines, examine even superficially the 
literature which is being distributed by the boards and agencies, and 
listen to the teaching in the denominational colleges and theological 
seminaries and still believe that these churches are proclaiming the 
Christianity of the Bible and that gospel which was revived by the 
Protestant Reformation, is beyond comprehension. Modernism has won a 
sweeping victory, said Dr. Harry Emerson Fosdick, and he has never made 
a truer statement. The individual ministers in these churches who still 
believe and preach the true gospel of Jesus Christ as understood by all 
branches of Christendom for nineteen centuries are growing fewer each 
year. And with the theological seminaries by and large committed to 
modernism, this process will continue until such ministers are very few.

There are notable exceptions, however, among the large denominations. 
One of these is the Lutheran Church (Missouri Synod), which has a 
constituency of nearly one million and one of the largest Protestant 
theological seminaries, Concordia Theological Seminary, located in St. 
Louis. In the last few years one of its professors, the Rev. Walter A. 
Maier, Ph.D., has been preaching sermons over the radio which have 
warmed the hearts of those who love the gospel. It almost makes one 
believe that the spirit of Martin Luther has come to life again. A 
number of the smaller church bodies, like the Christian Reformed Church, 
are also faithful to the gospel of the Bible. But, on the whole, the 
voice which Protestantism is raising in America today is not the voice 
of Christianity, which is a condemnation of sin and a message of 
judgment to come, of salvation through the sacrificial atonement of 
Christ as a substitute for sinners, but the voice of modernism, which 
recognizes a divine spark in each man that only needs to be fanned into 
a flame and which calls on man to work out his own salvation.

Some one might ask, "What is modernism and how does it differ from 
Christianity?" At the outset it must be stated that the label, 
modernism, is question-begging and a misnomer. The religion which is 
called modernism is not new or up-to-date, as its name implies. It does 
not advance any twentieth-century discovery of religion which makes all 
other conceptions of Christianity passé. In fact, it is not a version 
nor even a perversion of Christianity, but a different religion. There 
are many kinds and degrees of modernism, but they have a common 
foundation. At the root is the denial of the supernaturalism of 
Christianity, a denial that God can and does intervene in his creation. 
In other words, its basis is naturalism.

Anyone acquainted with church history and Christian theology knows that 
such a manifestation of religion as modernism is not modern or new. 
While Jesus Christ was still upon this earth there were those who denied 
his miraculous powers and the resurrection from the dead. At one period 
in the fourth century Athanasius stood almost alone in his steadfastness 
to the Christianity of the Bible. Spinoza of the seventeenth century 
denied the miraculous elements of Christianity because, he said, 
miracles were impossible and contrary to a proper idea of God. Then came 
the scientists of the nineteenth century who asserted that, according to 
their observations and experiments in hundreds and thousands of cases, 
God did not interpose in nature by supernatural power. Therefore he has 
never done so. In the field of biblical studies, but leading in the same 
direction, the theologians of Germany such as Schleiermacher, Ritschl, 
Baur, and others asserted that, according to their findings, the 
historical accuracy of the books of the Bible is not to be trusted. It 
is difficult to know what Christ said or did, they contended, because 
the writers of the Gospels contradict themselves, thereby proving that 
the Bible is not a God-inspired document. In other words, unbelief has 
had many tides and has taken many forms, such as pantheism, deism, 
liberalism, and modernism, but they all resolve themselves into the same 
thing—naturalism.

Modernism, or unbelief, has entered the Protestant church in America in 
a very subtle way. The theological professors in America began to accept 
these modern "higher critical" views of the Bible and the naturalism of 
unbelieving science and to teach these ideas to the ministerial students 
in the seminaries. In turn, many ministers assimilated these views, 
preached them from the pulpits, and convinced the laymen, who were not 
learned in the knowledge of the Bible and Christianity, that modernism 
is the religion for this day. The colleges and universities aided in 
this process because they have accepted the dicta of modern science, 
which state that the world as it now exists is the result of natural 
processes. So today, America, and for that matter most of the western 
world, is experiencing almost complete spiritual bankruptcy. At a time 
when the strong, authoritative message of the Christian church is needed 
to call the nations and men back to the God of the Bible, there is no 
such clarion call, but instead some feeble sputterings of confidence in 
the inherent goodness of man and the hope that somehow or other he will 
muddle through. Modernism has won a sweeping victory in the Christian 
church, no doubt, but it has also left the church feeble and spiritually 
decadent.

Laymen have begun to recognize this impotency of the church in the face 
of today's problems. The editors of Fortune magazine have written a 
respectful yet searching and thought provoking indictment of the 
church's failure to lead the nation in spiritual things.

    Indeed, the pastors are not talking about the soul at all, they are 
talking about the flesh ... So long as the church pretends, or assumes 
to preach, absolute values, but actually preaches relative and secondary 
values, it will hasten this process of disintegration. We are asked to 
turn to the church for our enlightenment, but when we do so we find that 
the voice of the church is not inspired ... There is only one way out of 
the spiral. The way out is the sound of a voice, not our voice, but a 
voice coming from something not ourselves, in the existence of which we 
cannot disbelieve.[1]

The businessmen of this nation realize that even the economic and 
political welfare of America rests upon spiritual values, and that this 
spiritual leadership must be based upon absolute standards. The 
deplorable state of the church makes the church unable to answer this 
challenge in any effective way, because modernism, which is a religion 
of man and which speaks the voice of man, is in control. It is 
encouraging to those ministers who have been making this diagnosis of 
the church to find such corroboration among laymen.

What can be done about this condition in the Protestant church? Is one 
to believe that the situation is hopeless and beyond recovery? Some may 
have gathered the impression from the foregoing description that 
complete pessimism and despair must reign. Not at all! Some very 
definite and constructive steps can be taken which will help 
tremendously to alleviate the deplorable state of the church and bring 
it back to its place of power and usefulness in the life of America.

In the first place, one must have an historical perspective regarding 
the church and its various periods of spiritual apostasy and spiritual 
power before one can arrive at the proper solution to the present 
lamentable state. Such a long-range view not only will give a better 
understanding of the existing condition, but will also reveal what the 
church did in the past to recapture its power and God-given commission.

The low spiritual life of the Christian church today is not the first of 
its kind in history. In the middle ages the spiritual and moral 
corruption of the clergy and the doctrinal heresy which was being 
preached were like a plague which had struck the life of the church and 
its message. The immorality of the clergy was known to many, so that 
even the civil authorities were disgusted and called for a reform. The 
Roman church was selling indulgences, which people thought would take 
away the guilt of their sins. The total effect of the preaching gave the 
impression and the assurance that man must do penance and works of merit 
in order to inherit eternal life. Superstition, idolatry, and ignorance 
held sway to such an extent that it seemed as though the Christianity of 
the Bible would be forgotten and trampled under foot.

But God raised up prophets in that day—Luther, Zwingli, Melanchthon, 
Calvin, Knox, and others who called the people back to the God of the 
Bible. These men had been chosen and enlightened by the Spirit of God to 
preach the true gospel and to warn the people that all have sinned and 
come short of the glory of God, that none is righteous, no, not one, and 
that everyone needs the forgiveness of sin, not through the purchase of 
indulgences but through the sacrifice of the divine Son of God upon the 
cross. This salvation by the sovereign grace of God alone, apart from 
the works of man, was heralded by the reformers. The Bible was 
proclaimed the sole and final authority for faith and practice, the 
place where one can learn what he should believe about God, sin, and 
redemption. So rang out the preaching of those men of God. The 
Protestant Reformation revived the Christian church, returned it to its 
God-intended commission of preaching the gospel of the grace of God, and 
placed the church once more in a position of spiritual power and 
usefulness in the life of the nations.

Someone might object and say, "That situation was entirely different 
from the state of religion today. The attack on Christianity in this era 
is intellectual. No longer can one believe that the Bible is the Word of 
God and the authority for faith and practice, that one is saved from sin 
by the sacrifice of another, no matter how great he was. This is an age 
of reason, and Christianity is passé!"

To this every true believer in the Lord Jesus can reply with a strong 
denial. At the same time, if men still object and contend that the 
attack on Christianity today is new and more devastating, one can turn 
the minds of these to another period in the church's life when man was 
loud in his boast of learning.

The deists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, especially in 
England, also charged that men could no longer accept the Bible as the 
authority in religion, that human reason must be the determining factor. 
In fact, the deists went so far as to state that Christianity was 
founded on fiction. These men rejected revealed religion and fell back 
upon natural religion. Bishop Hoadly attacked the credibility of 
miracles; John Toland claimed that only what is rationally demonstrable 
is true; Matthew Tindal contended that man is thrown back upon reason as 
the basis for religion. These were the arguments of the intellectual 
enemies of Christianity in that day, and they are being repeated today.

The result of that attack of deism in the eighteenth century was the 
emergence of one of the classic periods of Christian apologetic. 
Sherlock, the bishop of London, wrote an able defense of the 
resurrection of Jesus Christ which, along with all other miracles, had 
been ridiculed as impossible by Woolston. George Berkeley defended 
Christianity from a philosophic point of view and maintained that 
Christian belief is necessary to reason, for without it one cannot 
explain the universe. Bishop Butler, in his Analogy of the Christian 
Religion, answered particularly the arguments of John Toland that only 
what is rationally demonstrable is true. Bishop Butler accepted the 
position of theism and then built up the whole system of Christianity, 
making his work one of the greatest apologetics of Christian history up 
to that time.[2]

In addition to this intellectual defense of Christianity, evangelists 
like Whitefield and the Wesleys called the church to repentance and 
faith in Jesus Christ. The great movement in England under the guidance 
of these men produced new consecration to the gospel and zeal to publish 
the good tidings of the grace of God. It seemed as though a new breath 
of spiritual life had been infused into the church and its influence on 
the life of the people increased.

The attack on the Bible and on Christianity as the revealed and final 
religion is basically the same today. Almost identical arguments are 
being used. The modern "higher critical" view of the Bible, on the other 
hand, has been developed largely since the eighteenth century, but it is 
based upon the assumption that religion is natural in its origin. The 
New Testament account of Christianity is said to be faulty and 
contradictory, a collection of data by ordinary men who added to the 
plain religion of Jesus. Christianity, argues the modernist, is the 
simple gospel of brotherly love and kindness preached and exemplified by 
Jesus Christ, not the supernatural religion set forth by Paul the 
apostle. He added dogmas like the virgin birth and the resurrection of 
Christ which he had borrowed from the mystery religions of the East. 
"Back to Jesus and his simple gospel of goodwill," say the modernists. 
In other words, if the naturalistic basis of religion is true, then the 
supernatural elements of the Bible must be explained away. The records 
are false and untrustworthy.

The philosophic and scientific assault upon Christianity today is also 
fundamentally the same. Christianity as preached by the church for 
nineteen centuries is unreasonable and intellectually unsound because 
its supernaturalism is not demonstrable. All of the investigations of 
thousands of scientists in many experiments have not produced one bit of 
evidence that God has ever entered the universe in a supernatural way. 
Consequently, the supernaturalism of the gospel must have been borrowed 
from older mythical religions or conjured up in the minds of the 
credulous apostles.

As in the eighteenth century and the other periods of the church's 
history when men have attacked Christianity, so today able apologists 
and defenders of the faith are arising. The scholarly treatise, The 
Origin of Paul's Religion, by J. Gresham Machen, refutes successfully 
the contention that Paul acquired his belief in the virgin birth, the 
Lord's Supper, the deity of Christ, and many other facts of Christianity 
from the mystery religions of the East. Dr. Machen proves that Paul's 
whole conception of Christianity, including these doctrines, he received 
from Jesus himself. No one, according to competent conservative 
scholars, has undermined Dr. Machen's cogent reasoning and arguments or 
disproved his thesis. Many others, like him, have taken up the defense 
of Christianity.

Scientists today are not as certain of the "assured results" of science 
as they were twenty years ago. The dogmatism in support of modern 
scientific theories is diminishing. Furthermore, has modern science 
destroyed the supernatural basis of Christianity simply because 
experimentation has not revealed any evidence of divine intervention? Is 
man the measure of all things? Are a few thousand or even a million 
experiments sufficient proof that God has not and does not interpose 
himself in the universe to accomplish his purposes? No believer in 
Christianity is opposed to science as such, because it helps man to 
understand the ways and the wonders of God in creation. It is the 
unproved theories of science which are the conclusions of insufficient 
and partial knowledge to which strenuous objections must be raised. It 
is the crass naturalistic assumptions of many scientists, which take 
into consideration only an interpretation of the facts which excludes 
God, which are most unfair to a full knowledge of the truth. Faith, 
which alone can understand the eternal spiritual things, is entirely 
discounted and ruled out of these calculations.

The distinction of modern science between natural truth and spiritual 
truth, which gives the impression that there are two sets of truth, is 
entirely false. God is the author of all truth, spiritual and natural, 
so that one cannot contradict the other. If natural truth is separated 
from the spiritual, then one will receive only a partial and a distorted 
knowledge of the facts. One cannot comprehend the natural without a 
proper conception of God. Intelligent Christians urge more searching, 
more experimentation, and more scrutiny, for Christianity thrives on the 
light, but let the scientist not claim that his assumptions of 
naturalism are proven facts.

Philosophically, the answer to the assaults on Christianity is somewhat 
different and reinforced today. Apologetes like Dr. Cornelius Van Til of 
Westminster Theological Seminary maintain that one must base the 
philosophy of Christianity upon a belief in a personal God and the 
revelation of himself in the Bible. Kant's Critique of Pure Reason has 
shown that the proofs for the existence of God from pure reason as 
historically stated are not conclusive. And even if they were conclusive 
they would only prove the existence of a finite God. Far better and far 
sounder is it to presuppose the personal God of the Scriptures and to 
argue from that impregnable base.

Others have joined with Dr. Van Til in defending historic Christianity 
philosophically, and in demonstrating that no fact of the universe can 
be fully and rightly understood except as that fact is related to God. 
Only in the light of divine revelation in the Bible can man properly 
know God and the world. Such is Christianity's answer to skeptical 
philosophers.

In the light of the attacks on Christianity, what must Protestantism do 
today? How can it once more assume its important and essential place in 
the life of the people? How can Christianity become the first concern of 
the individual?

The church today must do what it has done in ages past; it must call the 
people back to faith in the Son of God as the Savior of men and the only 
way to God, and direct their thoughts to the Bible as the only and final 
rule of faith and life. When this is done—and it must be done, for it is 
the only reasonable, and consistent view of life—then the church will 
regain its position of spiritual power, fulfill its divine commission of 
preaching the gospel of the grace of God, and become the means of 
restoring men and women to spiritual communion with God through Jesus 
Christ. The gospel is still the power of God unto salvation. It still 
has miraculous and divine efficacy to change the lives of men and women 
into saints of God. It still can make God the center of life from which 
all else radiates. And for those who by grace believe, it is doing that 
today.

The hope for this life and for the life to come is not the vitiated and 
emasculated gospel of modernism, but the gospel of genuine, supernatural 
Christianity. What possible comfort can a disillusioned, discouraged, or 
burdened man derive from the prattlings of this religion of modernism, 
which makes of God an impersonal something or suffused goodness? What 
assurance of salvation from sin and hope of life after death can it give 
a dying man, when it ridicules the atonement of Christ for sin and when 
it scoffs at personal immortality? This counterfeit gospel fails man at 
every point and in every crisis.

How different is the real gospel of Jesus Christ! To one who is burdened 
with trouble, Jesus pleads, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden and I will give you rest" (Matt 11:28). To one who is 
conscious of his sin and transgression against God and man, he says, "I 
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance" (Mark 2:17). 
And, as one faces death or stands at the grave of a loved one, the Lord 
of Glory gives the assurance, "I am the resurrection and the life: he 
that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and 
whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die" (John 11:25-26). 
This gospel of grace meets man's every problem and sustains him in every 
crisis, even death itself.

And when one contemplates the state of society and civilization today, 
the failure and the futility of modernism become all the more apparent. 
The lawlessness of men and nations, the utter disregard for the higher 
values of life, the crumbling of the foundations of society, are due to 
the fact that men have rejected the infinite God of the Bible, the 
creator and sustainer of the universe, and have substituted for him a 
finite God of their own imaginings. Each man has become a law unto 
himself, each man does what is right in his own eyes. Nations have set 
up their own standards of right and wrong, and as a result there is 
moral chaos.

The Christianity of the Bible, on the other hand, condemns the 
lawlessness of men and nations as sin against a holy and righteous God. 
It proclaims absolute values of eternal worth and makes faith in God 
through Jesus Christ the foundation for every civilization. Only in such 
a gospel is there hope for this world.

God grant that a new and true intellectual renaissance will come, which 
will enable men to think straight and to begin that thinking with God. 
God hasten the day when this renaissance will be followed by a spiritual 
reformation which will revive his church and bring healing to the 
nations of the world. God grant that Protestants will see the true peril 
and realize the situation within their gates and thus be compelled to 
demand a return to genuine biblical Christianity on the part of the 
clergy and the church in its corporate testimony. When that takes place 
the Christian church will hold its rightful place in the world and will 
fulfill the command of the Lord, "Go ye therefore, and teach all 
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost" (Matt 28:19).
