Chapter 2. The Auburn Affirmation

THE SERMON, "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" preached by the Rev. Harry 
Emerson Fosdick, D.D., in the First Presbyterian Church, New York City, 
May, 1922, was the signal for a new and public outbreak of the conflict 
between the forces of historic Christianity and modern liberalism within 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA. While many look upon this event as 
the first real skirmish between liberals and conservatives in the 
church, it is more accurate to consider it as a continuance of the 
struggle. On the other hand, it is correct to point to the publication 
of this sermon as the immediate cause for the conflict which eventually 
led to the formation of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church. As a matter of 
fact, the ensuing events show that the trend toward modernism, not only 
in the Presbyterian Church in the USA but also in many other Protestant 
churches, was very pronounced and that in many cases this form of 
religion dominated the situation.

In 1918 three churches in lower New York City united to form the First 
Presbyterian Church. The Rev. George Alexander, D.D., was called as 
pastor and the Rev. Harry Emerson Fosdick, D.D., a Baptist, was invited 
to become associate minister. The officers of the church believed that 
this arrangement of a pastor and an associate would solve the problems 
of a downtown church in a most acceptable fashion. They realized that it 
was extraordinary to ask a Baptist to act as associate minister in a 
Presbyterian church so they secured the permission of the Presbytery of 
New York to sanction the arrangement. Under this plan church attendance 
increased, and the fame of Dr. Fosdick as a preacher spread throughout 
the nation.[1]

On Sunday morning, May 21, 1922, Dr. Fosdick preached the now famous 
sermon, "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" Without his knowledge, so Dr. 
Fosdick claims, Mr. Ivy Lee had the sermon reprinted, an introduction 
added, and the title changed to, "The New Knowledge and the Christian 
Faith."[2] He then proceeded to send copies of the sermon throughout the 
country, some of which came into the hands of Presbyterian ministers in 
Philadelphia.

The Presbytery of Philadelphia then had a large majority of 
conservatives with the Rev. Clarence E. Macartney, D.D., pastor of the 
Arch Street Church, as the acknowledged leader. Informal discussions 
concerning the presence of a Baptist minister in a Presbyterian church 
who did not believe in the doctrines of the Westminster Confession of 
Faith were held by members of Philadelphia Presbytery. It was finally 
decided by this group to introduce the following overture to the 
Presbytery of Philadelphia so that the matter would be brought to the 
attention of the General Assembly. The overture was adopted on October 
16, 1922, by an overwhelming majorityâ€”seventy-two to twenty-one.[3] Part 
of it follows:

    The Presbytery of Philadelphia hereby respectfully overtures the 
General Assembly to direct the Presbytery of New York to take such 
action as will require the preaching and teaching in the First 
Presbyterian Church of New York City to conform to the system of 
doctrine taught in the Confession of Faith.[4]

The sermon, "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" contrasts the conservative 
and radical views on the virgin birth, the inspiration of the 
Scriptures, the atonement, and the second advent of Christ and pleads 
for a tolerance of both views within the Christian church. In a letter 
to Dr. Macartney, Dr. Fosdick claimed that he had been misunderstood and 
that the burden of his sermon was tolerance and not necessarily 
liberalism.[5] But in 1923 Dr. Fosdick gave the Lyman Beecher Lectures 
on Preaching before the Yale Divinity School, which were published under 
the title, "The Modern Use of the Bible," and in which he upheld 
completely the modern "higher critical" views of the books of the Bible 
as to date and authorship. In fact, in his letter to Dr. Macartney he 
admitted that he represented the liberal view. Dr. Fosdick's theological 
position ever since that time has been well-known and no attempt has 
been made on his part to conceal the fact that he has advocated 
modernism as the religion for this day and generation.

When the General Assembly met in May, 1923, the most important issue 
before it was the overture from Philadelphia concerning the presence of 
Dr. Fosdick in the pulpit of the First Presbyterian Church in New York 
City. Agitation in all of the Presbyterian papers on this point had 
aroused the church so that sympathizers with the overture and opponents 
of it were well represented among the commissioners. The issue was far 
greater than the Philadelphia overture; actually it involved not only 
doctrines peculiar to Presbyterianism, but the fundamental doctrines of 
historic Christianity. The Rev. David S. Kennedy, D.D., editor of The 
Presbyterian, stated,

    The center of the contention lies between supernaturalistic 
evangelicalism on the one side, and naturalistic rationalism on the 
other. It is a contention between two spirits and two convictions which 
are mutually exclusive and destructive; one or the other must prevail, 
and the one which prevails will determine the character and future of 
the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., and will have an important 
influence upon the testimony of the whole evangelical church.[6]

There were two leading candidates for the position of moderator of the 
General Assembly at the meeting in Indianapolis, May, 1923: the Rev. 
Charles F. Wishart, D.D., president of the College of Wooster, and the 
Honorable William Jennings Bryan, former Secretary of State under 
President Wilson. Dr. Wishart represented those in the church who stood 
for unity and inclusivism rather than a division on doctrinal grounds, 
while Mr. Bryan represented those who wanted a church pure in doctrine 
and true to the historic interpretation of Christianity and the 
Westminster Confession of Faith. His followers were regarded as the 
militant wing of the church, although the nominating speeches stressed 
the orthodoxy of both candidates. Dr. Wishart won by a majority of only 
twenty-four.[7]

After the election of the moderator, the disposition of the Philadelphia 
overture became the paramount concern of the commissioners. In fact, 
overtures of a similar nature were before the assembly from nine other 
presbyteries.[8] As is customary, this overture was placed in the hands 
of the assembly's Committee on Bills and Overtures, of which the 
chairman was the Rev. Hugh K. Walker, D.D., of Los Angeles, who was 
appointed to this position by the moderator. The usual procedure is for 
the moderator to proffer this important office to the defeated 
moderatorial candidate, which would have been Mr. Bryan, but it is 
rather indicative of the feeling between the two camps in that assembly 
that this custom was not followed.

The Committee on Bills and Overtures brought in a report rejecting the 
Philadelphia overture and recommending that the Presbytery of New York 
be allowed to conduct its own investigation and report to the 1924 
assembly, especially since the presbytery had already appointed a 
committee to institute such an investigation. The majority report signed 
by twenty-one of the twenty-two members of the committee was roundly 
scored for its straddling of the issue and for its pusillanimous 
compromise.[9]

The Rev. Gordon A. MacLennan, D.D., of Philadelphia, brought in a 
minority report signed only by himself, yet it was adopted by the 
assembly by a vote of 439 to 359.[10] It called upon the assembly to 
direct the Presbytery of New York to require the preaching and teaching 
at the First Presbyterian Church in New York City to conform to the 
Bible and the Westminster Confession of Faith. It also asked the 
assembly to reaffirm its faith in the infallibility of the Bible, in the 
virgin birth of Jesus Christ, in his substitutionary atonement on the 
cross, in his bodily resurrection, and in his mighty miracles as 
essential doctrines of holy Scripture and the Westminster Confession of 
Faith.

The majority report was championed by the Rev. Hugh K. Walker, D.D., 
chairman of the committee, Nolan R, Best, editor of The Continent, and 
by the moderator. Those in favor of the minority report were led by the 
Rev. Gordon A. MacLennan, D.D., William Jennings Bryan, and the Rev. C. 
E. Macartney, D.D. The debate was limited to ten-minute speeches, and a 
closing argument of fifteen minutes was allowed for each side.

In presenting the minority report, Dr. MacLennan said,

    It is with the firm conviction that this General Assembly will 
answer the questions of our church in a definite and concrete form that 
I present this minority report. Shall not our Assembly give answer to 
these questions declaring its absolute faith in the virgin birth, in the 
inspiration of the Scriptures and the vicarious death on Calvary, and 
the bodily resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and in the mighty 
miracles which He wrought while here on earth?[11]

In closing the debate for the minority report Dr. Macartney asserted,

    I wish I could pay tribute to the majority report. But I cannot. It 
is a masterpiece of whitewash, and the man who wrote it ought to seek 
employment as an exterior decorator... We take our stand upon the New 
Testament and the Confession of Faith.... What you have heard here this 
afternoon is but the "sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry 
trees." The storm is coming, and you cannot stop it with any 
pusillanimous compromise.[12]

Those who argued in favor of the majority report contended that the 
matter of pulpit supplies in the First Presbyterian Church of New York 
City rested with the Presbytery of New York. This presbytery had already 
appointed a committee to investigate the situation, so that it would be 
discourteous and unpresbyterian to interfere in the matter.

Following the assembly, the editor of The Continent wrote, "Men who 
insist that these and other theological formulas are vital to the 
perpetuation of Christianity are without exception men who have mistaken 
religion's first definitionâ€”Christianity is not a dogma but a life."[13] 
The Rev. Alexander MacColl, D.D., pastor of the Second Presbyterian 
Church, Philadelphia, was quoted as having said,

    Let us be quite clear that the advocates of this materialistic 
philosophy, which robs life of all its glory and its beauty, have their 
chief allies today in those religious teachers whose expression of 
spiritual realities is always in material terms, whose perpetual 
emphasis is upon physical facts, upon a physical birth, physical blood, 
a physical ascension and coming again; the letter of a book.[14]

This decision of the General Assembly was hailed by the orthodox as a 
great victory for historic Christianity and "the faith which was once 
delivered unto the saints." But the rejoicing was to be short-lived. The 
liberals were thoroughly aroused and determined to do everything to 
bring the corporate witness of the church into conformity with their 
point of view. While the Rev. George Alexander, D.D., pastor of the 
First Presbyterian Church of New York City, said that he would attempt 
to carry out the mandate of the assembly, the leaders of New York 
Presbytery displayed little intention to comply. As soon as the action 
was taken by the assembly, a protest was filed with the assembly 
disapproving of the decision because it was not substantiated by 
evidence, because it passed judgment upon a matter not rightly before 
the assembly, and because it imposed doctrinal tests upon office-bearers 
not allowed by the constitution of the church.[15]

When the Presbytery of New York met on June 11, 1923, it proceeded to 
ignore the intent of the assembly's action, which was to rid the church 
of false doctrine, by licensing two young men, Henry P. Van Dusen and 
Cedric O. Lehman, who refused to affirm their faith in the virgin 
birthâ€”one of the doctrines which Dr. Fosdick had attacked. A group of 
ministers and elders in New York Presbytery, led by the Rev. Walter D. 
Buchanan, D.D., filed a protest with the presbytery against the action. 
This protest or complaint was carried to the General Assembly in 1924, 
but the Permanent Judicial Commission of the assembly ruled that the 
complaint must first be remitted to the Synod of New York. At a later 
date Mr. Van Dusen was not only ordained by New York Presbytery, but he 
also became a professor at Union Theological Seminary, an outstanding 
modernist institution.[16]

At the same meeting of New York Presbytery the action of the General 
Assembly with respect to Dr. Fosdick was referred to the special 
committee of three ministers and two elders who had been appointed by 
the presbytery on April 9, 1923, in answer to a request from the 
Harlem-New York Church to investigate matters at the First Presbyterian 
Church.[17]

On October 1, 1923, and on January 14, 1924, the committee reported to 
the presbytery and on February 4, 1924, its recommendations were 
adopted. The committee came to four major conclusions and 
recommendations: (1) they were convinced that the doctrines of grace 
were being proclaimed in the pulpit of the First Church, (2) they 
expressed their confidence and loyalty in the session of the First 
Church, (3) they expressed their readiness to receive more reports on 
the subject in general, and (4) they affirmed their faith in the Bible. 
They also reported that the sermon, "Shall the Fundamentalists Win?" was 
perhaps ill-advised and that it had been distributed without the 
knowledge of the session of the First Church.[18]

This action was not at all satisfactory to the conservatives in the 
Presbytery of New York, who immediately drew up a complaint to be 
presented to the General Assembly meeting in Grand Rapids in 1924. The 
Permanent Judicial Commission of General Assembly held in Grand Rapids 
ruled that the presbytery and its committee had obeyed the mandate of 
the assembly, but that the situation at the First Church would be 
clarified if Dr. Fosdick would express his purpose as to whether he 
intended to enter the ministry of the Presbyterian Church in the USA or 
to remain a minister of the Baptist denomination.

    We therefore recommend that the Presbytery of New York be 
instructed, through its committee or through the session of the First 
Presbyterian Church, to take up with Dr. Fosdick this question to the 
end that he may determine whether it is his pleasure to enter the 
Presbyterian church and thus be in a regular relationship with the First 
Presbyterian Church as one of its pastors.[19]

The New York Presbytery's committee to deal with this matter addressed a 
letter to Dr. Fosdick asking him to define his relationship to the First 
Presbyterian Church of New York City, and to state his intentions with 
reference to ministerial membership in the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA. Dr. Fosdick replied in a letter to the Rev. Edgar W. Work, D.D., 
chairman of the presbytery's committee, in which he refused to unite 
with the Presbyterian Church in the USA because of his unwillingness to 
subscribe to any confession of faith on the ground that it would violate 
his conscience. In the same letter he mentioned his intention to resign 
as associate minister of the First Church.[20]

The First Church accepted Dr. Fosdick's resignation as associate 
minister to take effect in March, 1925, but also extended an invitation 
to him to preach for them "when not otherwise engaged."[21]

Both the action of the General Assembly and that of the First 
Presbyterian Church of New York were strongly assailed by the 
conservatives of the church at large. The editor of one religious weekly 
called the assembly's decision "A Monstrous Suggestion."

    It seems almost incredible that anyone should even suggest that the 
disturbance over Dr. Fosdick has been occasioned by the fact that he is 
not a Presbyterian minister. The disturbance arose from the beliefâ€”in 
our judgment a well grounded beliefâ€”that his teachings not only openly 
deny the essential doctrines of the Presbyterian Church, but they are 
"subversive of the truth of Christianity as received, confessed, held 
and defended by the Christian church of all ages."[22]

In commenting on the invitation of the First Presbyterian Church of New 
York City to Dr. Fosdick to preach for them "when not otherwise 
engaged," Dr. Macartney wrote, "We cannot think, either, that the 
special preacher could lend himself to this plan to evade the will of 
the Presbyterian Church."[23] In spite of this opposition and in spite 
of the apparent evasion of the assembly's action, the First Church of 
New York City continued to have Dr. Fosdick fill the pulpit as a supply 
until March 1, 1925.[24]

In this connection it is interesting and informing to read the comment 
of the Rev. Albert C. Dieffenbach, D.D., then editor of the Unitarian 
weekly, The Christian Register,

    I have the profoundest respect for a man who is consistently a 
fundamentalist, or for a man who is consistently a Roman Catholic, but I 
have no respect for the attitude of Dr. Fosdick.... When he goes to 
Cambridge he speaks in terms of liberalism and when he comes to New York 
he says, "I am an evangelical Christian!"[25]

While this controversy between Dr. Fosdick and the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA was continuing, the conflict between modernists and 
conservatives in the church at large became more and more stormy. On 
October 30, 1923, at a gathering in New York City sponsored by the Rev. 
Walter D. Buchanan, D.D. and attended largely by ministers and elders of 
New York City and vicinity, Dr. J. Gresham Machen, then assistant 
professor of New Testament at Princeton Theological Seminary, and Dr. 
Macartney spoke of the need of contending for the faith. Dr. Macartney 
stressed the importance of being loyal to the creed of the church and 
Dr. Machen showed that the neo-Christianity preached by the liberals was 
not a perversion of Christianity but a new and different religion.

Two large mass meetings were held on December 10 and 14, 1923, in New 
York City and Philadelphia, both of which were addressed by the Rev. 
Maitland Alexander, D.D., a former moderator of the General Assembly and 
then pastor of the large and influential First Presbyterian Church in 
Pittsburgh, on the subject, "The Maintenance of the Reformed 
Theology."[26] Dr. Alexander not only pointed out the faithfulness of 
the Westminster standards to the New Testament, but he also emphasized 
the importance of ordaining ministers and elders who would be true to 
the standards of the church, and of electing members to the boards and 
agencies of the church who would maintain the Reformed faith.

It was during this height of the controversy in the Presbyterian Church 
in the USA that the small but significant book, Christianity and 
Liberalism, by J. Gresham Machen, appeared. This book, which was much 
discussed and was accepted as the best statement of the issue between 
modernism and historic Christianity, compelled the public to recognize 
Dr. Machen as the intellectual leader of those who believed in the 
Christianity of the Bible. He demonstrated quite conclusively that the 
religion of liberalism or modernism was not even a perversion of 
Christianity, like Roman Catholicism, but rather a new and different 
religion. Walter Lippmann, the well-known publicist, characterized the 
book as follows: "For its acumen, for its saliency, and for its wit this 
cool and stringent defense of orthodox Protestantism is, I think, the 
best popular argument produced by either side in the current 
controversy."[27]

The modernists were also much stirred over the turn of events. A 
committee of 150 Presbyterian ministers with headquarters at 10 Nelson 
Street, Auburn, New York, issued a document on December 26, 1923, in 
answer to the action of the General Assembly concerning the Philadelphia 
overture. This document is commonly called the "Auburn Affirmation," and 
requires detailed study because it has profoundly affected the course of 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA.[28]

The contention of the Affirmation is twofold: first, that the General 
Assembly has no constitutional right to elevate the five doctrines 
mentioned as special tests for ordination to the ministry, unless the 
constitution be changed by a vote of the presbyteries; and secondly, 
that the five doctrines enumerated in the assembly's action are 
non-essential to the system of doctrine taught in the holy Scriptures 
and are merely theories of those facts and doctrines.

There have been opinions expressed by many Presbyterians of high repute 
relative to the constitutionality of the doctrinal deliverance of the 
1923 General Assembly. Two conservatives like Dr. D. S. Kennedy and Dr. 
J. Gresham Machen differed on this question. Dr. Kennedy maintained that 
"The whole structure of the Form of Government and Book of Discipline 
makes the interpretation of the courts binding and the interpretation of 
the general assembly as final."[29] On the other hand, Dr. Machen argued 
in favor of the constitutionality of the deliverance, not because the 
general assembly has a right to demand allegiance to these five 
doctrines as part of the constitutional questions for ordination, but on 
the ground that these five doctrines are taught in the word of God. 
Those who agreed with Dr. Kennedy contended that every candidate for 
ordination must answer the question, "Do you sincerely receive and adopt 
the Confession of Faith of this church as containing the system of 
doctrine taught in the Scriptures?" and that every one of the five 
doctrines mentioned in the deliverance is essential to the system of 
doctrine taught in the Scriptures.

The weight of the law seems to be on the side of the Auburn Affirmation. 
There are already certain questions asked of a candidate for the 
ministry in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, and if further and 
special tests for ordination are to be given, an overture to this effect 
would have to be sent down to the presbyteries for ratification. It is 
altogether likely that the General Assembly does not have the power to 
bind the presbyteries to "any essential and necessary articles" unless 
the presbyteries have so voted. The matter of the constitutionality of 
the deliverance is not important to the main issue. As a matter of fact, 
if the question of constitutionality were the only point, it would 
hardly be worth discussing. It is the second contention of the 
Affirmation with respect to the essential nature of the five doctrines 
which makes the subject of historical significance.

There have been three ways in which the vow, "Do you sincerely receive 
and adopt the Confession of Faith as containing the system of doctrine 
taught in the Scriptures?" has been interpreted: (1) the candidate 
assents to every proposition in the Confession of Faith, (2) the 
candidate accepts the Confession of Faith as containing the "substance" 
of the doctrine taught in the Bible, and (3) the candidate receives the 
Confession as containing the "system" of doctrine taught in the 
Bible.[30]

Very few have held the position that every article in the Confession of 
Faith must be accepted as essential to the system of truth. In fact, the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA has never officially maintained that 
every article in the Confession of Faith is essential to the system of 
doctrine. For example, the chapter on Marriage and Divorce recognizes 
that "such willful desertion as can no way be remedied by the church or 
civil magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of 
marriage."[31]

There are many ministers in the church who recognize that there is only 
one biblical ground of divorce, namely, adultery. The Presbyterian 
Church in the USA has never refused ordination to anyone for differences 
on this point as well as others nor has it held this as vital to the 
system of doctrine.

The signers of the Auburn Affirmation expressed their agreement with the 
second interpretation, that the Confession of Faith contains the 
"substance" of the doctrine taught in the Bible. They argued that the 
Synod of Philadelphia in the Adopting Act of 1729 had declared,

    All the ministers of this Synod or that shall hereafter be admitted 
into this Synod, shall declare their agreement in and approbation of the 
Confession of Faith with the Larger and Shorter Catechisms of the 
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, as being, in all the essential and 
necessary articles, good forms of sound words and systems of Christian 
doctrine, and do also adopt the said Confession and Catechisms as the 
confession of our faith.[32]

They maintained that this Act gives great liberty in assuming the 
ordination vow and has never been abrogated.

Those who were opposed to this interpretation pointed to the fact that 
an Act Explaining the Adopting Act was passed by the Synod of 
Philadelphia in 1736, in which it is stated specifically that, with the 
exception of chapters twenty and twenty-three, the Confession of Faith 
is to be regarded as the faith of the church.[33] Furthermore, the Act 
explained that if anyone did not subscribe to certain articles, the 
members of the synod were to decide whether those articles were 
essential to the system of doctrine or not.

    ...and in case any minister of this Synod, or any candidate for the 
ministry, shall have any scruple with respect to any article or articles 
of said Confession or Catechisms, he shall at the time of his making 
said declaration declare his sentiments to the Presbytery or Synod, who 
shall, notwithstanding, admit him to the exercise of the ministry within 
our bounds, and to ministerial commission, if the Synod or Presbytery 
shall judge his scruple or mistake to be only about articles not 
essential and necessary in doctrine, worship or government.[34]

In other words, no such latitudinarian principle of interpretation of 
the Confession as that advocated by the Auburn Affirmation was to be 
allowed. If such an interpretation were permitted, the conservatives 
maintained, and each individual could determine just what is essential 
to the system of truth, it is conceivable that even the doctrine of the 
Trinity might be omitted, thereby making the Confession meaningless.[35]

The third interpretation is the one which the Presbyterian Church in the 
USA has always employed, namely, that the candidate receives the 
Confession of Faith as containing the "system" of doctrine taught in the 
Bible. This means more than acceptance of certain individual articles or 
isolated sections; rather, it involves a well-defined plan of redemption 
with its doctrines of God, man, sin, and salvation, which has come to be 
known as the "Reformed theology" or "Calvinism," and which is set forth 
in the Scriptures. Dr. Charles Hodge, the famous Princeton theologian, 
was very emphatic on this point.

    If the question, "What is the system of doctrine taught by the 
Reformed Churches?" be submitted to a hundred Romanists, to a hundred 
Lutherans, to a hundred members of the Church of England, or to a 
hundred skeptics, if intelligent and candid, they would all give 
precisely the same answer. There is not the slightest dispute among 
disinterested scholars as to what doctrines do, and what do not belong 
to the faith of the Reformed. And, therefore, any man who receives these 
several classes of doctrine, (viz.: those common to all Christians, 
those common to all Protestants, and those peculiar to the Reformed 
Churches) holds in its integrity the system of doctrine contained in the 
Westminster Confession.[36]

The five doctrines enunciated in the Deliverance of the 1923 General 
Assembly, however, are not peculiar to the Reformed theology nor even to 
Protestantism, but are common to all Christians, Protestants, Roman 
Catholics, and Greek Orthodox alike. Consequently, the real issue is not 
the technical point of the constitutionality of the deliverance nor even 
the question of the system of doctrine peculiar to Presbyterianism, but 
rather whether or not these five doctrines are taught in the Bible and 
essential to any system of doctrine which calls itself Christian. A 
study of each doctrine will show how true this is.

The first doctrine mentioned by the General Assembly of 1923 reads, "It 
is an essential doctrine of the Word of God and our standards that the 
Holy Spirit did so inspire, guide and move the writers of Holy 
Scripture, as to keep them from error." With respect to this, the Auburn 
Affirmation states,

    There is no assertion in the Scriptures that their writers were 
"kept from error"! The Confession of Faith does not make this assertion; 
and it is significant that this assertion is not found in the Apostles' 
Creed or the Nicene Creed or in any other of the great Reformation 
confessions.... The doctrine of inerrancy, intended to enhance the 
authority of the Scriptures, in fact impairs their supreme authority for 
faith and life, and weakens the testimony of the church to the power of 
God unto salvation through Jesus Christ.

In answer the conservatives maintained that each minister must give an 
affirmative reply to the question, "Do you believe the Scriptures of the 
Old and New Testaments to be the Word of God, the only infallible rule 
of faith and practice?"

The Confession of Faith, chapter I, section V, which treats "Of the Holy 
Scripture" does not employ the phrase, "kept from error," but it does 
contain such expressions as, "the entire perfection thereof " and "our 
full persuasion and assurance of the infallible truth" which imply and 
connote inerrancy. Furthermore, they argued, in 1893 the General 
Assembly suspended the Rev. Charles A. Briggs, D.D., professor at Union 
Theological Seminary, New York City, because he believed in the errancy 
of holy Scripture.[37] In other words, the church had already 
interpreted the constitution with respect to the inspiration of the 
Bible and exactly as the Deliverance of 1923 had stated. What is more, 
it is clear that the other branches of the Christian churchâ€”the Roman 
Catholic Church as expressed in the Council of Trent, and the Greek 
Orthodox Church as expressed through its confessions and 
catechismsâ€”believe in the full truthfulness of the Bible. The Council of 
Trent describes the books of the Bible as having come down to the 
church, "the Holy Ghost dictating."[38] The Greek Orthodox Church 
doctrine, as expressed in "The Confession of Dositheus," is that the 
inerrancy and infallibility of the church's judgment is based upon the 
absolute inerrancy of the Bible.[39] In other words, this doctrine of an 
infallible Bible has been the belief of the Christian church these many 
centuries.

The second doctrine contained in the deliverance reads, "It is an 
essential doctrine of the Word of God and our standards that our Lord 
Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary." Concerning this statement the 
Auburn Affirmation affirms,

    We all believe from our hearts... that Jesus Christ was God manifest 
in the flesh.... But we are united in believing that these [five 
doctrines] are not the only theories allowed by the Scriptures and our 
standards as explanations of these facts and doctrines of our religion, 
whatever theories they may employ to explain them, are worthy of all 
confidence and fellowship.

It is plain from this assertion that the Auburn Affirmation regards the 
virgin birth as a theory of the incarnation. The narratives in Matthew 
and Luke, on the other hand, are very explicit in their description of 
the birth of Jesus Christ. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the 
womb of the virgin Mary (Matt 1:20, Luke 1:34-35). That statement of an 
historical event in the external world in the two gospels is either true 
or false. It is not a theory, for to make such a claim would be to 
reduce the gospel story to an absurdity and to make nonsense of the 
language. Furthermore, it is beyond dispute that the Roman Catholic 
Church, the Greek Orthodox Church, and the various branches of 
Protestantism clearly teach a belief in the virgin birth of Christ.

The statement of the deliverance with reference to the atonement of 
Christ for sin reads, "It is an essential doctrine of the Word of God 
and our standards that Christ offered up Himself a sacrifice to satisfy 
divine justice and to reconcile us to God." The Auburn Affirmation 
states, "that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, and 
through Him we have our redemption."

No one can object to the statement of the Auburn Affirmation about the 
atonement because it is a partial quotation from the Bible (II Cor 
5:19), but when the assertion of the deliverance is referred to as a 
theory of the atonement and that other theories which may be employed to 
explain the doctrine are worthy of all confidence, then an entirely 
different situation obtains and the question of anti-scriptural views 
comes into consideration. The Confession of Faith uses practically the 
same language as the deliverance to describe the sacrifice of Christ.

    The Lord Jesus, by his perfect obedience and sacrifice of himself 
which he through the eternal Spirit once offered up unto God, hath fully 
satisfied the justice of his Father.[40]

Officially, the Presbyterian Church in the USA has never taught any 
other view of the atonement than that expressed in the deliverance. In 
fact, its essential features are common to the Latin, Lutheran, and 
Reformed churches. In discussing the various theories of atonement, Dr. 
Charles Hodge wrote,

    The first is that which has been for ages regarded as the orthodox 
doctrine; in its essential features common to the Latin, Lutheran, and 
Reformed churches.... According to this doctrine the work of Christ is a 
real satisfaction, of infinite inherent merit, to the vindicatory 
justice of God; so that He saves his people by doing for them, and in 
their stead, what they were unable to do for themselves, satisfying the 
demands of the law in their behalf, and bearing its penalty in their 
stead; whereby they are reconciled to God, receive the Holy Ghost, and 
are made partakers of the life of Christ to their present sanctification 
and eternal salvation.[41]

The fourth statement of the deliverance reads:

    It is an essential doctrine of the Word of God and of our standards 
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, that on the third day He arose again 
from the dead with the same body with which He suffered, with which He 
also ascended into heaven, and there sitteth at the right hand of His 
Father, making intercession.

In opposition to this view of the deliverance, the Auburn Affirmation 
states, "that having died for our sins He rose from the dead and is our 
everlasting saviour." The proper implication of this statement is that 
the resurrection of Christ was not necessarily a bodily one, especially 
since the Auburn Affirmation claims that the bodily resurrection is only 
one of many theories. With reference to this doctrine the deliverance 
quoted directly from the Confession of Faith.[42]

If the bodily resurrection of Christ is only a theory, then the 
fifteenth chapter of 1 Corinthians is mistaken, because it is devoted 
almost exclusively to a discussion and proof of the resurrection of 
Christ and the assertion that the resurrection was a bodily one. It also 
makes of no meaning the claim of Christ to Thomas, "Handle me, and see; 
for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have" (Luke 24:39). 
In fact, no other theory of the resurrection is taught or implied in the 
Scripture. In addition, all branches of Christendom in their creeds 
teach the bodily resurrection of Christ. Of that there can be no 
question. So again the fact becomes clear that the issue raised by the 
Auburn Affirmation concerns the fundamental basis of Christianity, and 
not doctrines peculiarly Presbyterian.

The fifth doctrine of the deliverance reads,

    It is an essential doctrine of the Word of God as the supreme 
standard of our faith that our Lord Jesus showed His power by working 
mighty miracles. This working was not contrary to nature, but superior 
to it.

The Auburn Affirmation states, "that in His earthly ministry He wrought 
many mighty works."

Here the attempt is made by the Auburn Affirmation to undermine the 
entire supernatural element in the works of Christ and to make them to 
appear as mighty, but explainable to this generation by natural causes. 
The Confession of Faith reads, "God, in his ordinary providence, maketh 
use of means, yet is free to work without, above, and against them, at 
his pleasure."[43] At this point the tendency toward naturalism in the 
Affirmation becomes more evident, and the real underlying difference 
between it and historic Christianity is clear. It is here that the 
contention between two spirits, two convictions, and two conceptions of 
Christianity becomes most plain, and anyone who would understand this 
conflict correctly must honestly recognize that fact. The essential 
nature of the miraculous is evident not only in the works of Christ but 
in the whole of the New Testament. Eliminate that or try to distinguish 
between miraculous and non-miraculous Christianity, and no Christianity 
remains. What is more, no informed person would question the assertion 
that the Roman Catholic Church and the Greek Orthodox Church believe in 
the supernatural character of Christ's miracles.

It is obvious to any honest, clear-thinking man that there exists a 
world of difference concerning the essential nature of Christianity 
between the Deliverance of the 1923 Assembly and the Auburn Affirmation. 
The deliverance holds to a supernatural religion which comes as a 
revelation from a personal God, while the Affirmation supports the view 
that the Bible may be a revelation from God but no one can be sure of 
it, and that the miraculous aspects of Christianity are to be questioned 
and perhaps explained on a naturalistic basis. As Dr. Machen so ably 
argued many times, the religion of the Affirmation is a new and 
different religion, separate and distinct from historic Christianity.

The issuance of the Auburn Affirmation called forth a veritable flood of 
articles for and against it. These articles dealt with the 
constitutionality of the deliverance, but more especially with the 
doctrinal questions raised by the Affirmation. It became evident that 
this issue would be one of the main considerations at the General 
Assembly in May, 1924.

When the assembly met at Grand Rapids in May, 1924, the following 
overture from the Presbytery of Cincinnati concerning the Affirmation 
was presented and, according to custom, sent to the Committee on Bills 
and Overtures of which the Rev. Maitland Alexander, D.D., was chairman.

    The Presbytery of Cincinnati would respectfully place in your hands 
the accompanying pamphlet, entitled, "An Affirmation," that you may be 
"well advised" of its contents and purposes and that your venerable body 
may exercise intelligently, under the guidance of the Divine Spirit, its 
"powers of deciding in all controversies respecting doctrine; of 
reproving, warning, or bearing testimony against error in doctrine, or 
immorality in practice, in any church, Presbytery or Synod;" "and of 
repressing schismatical conventions and disputation."[44]

The Committee debated this overture as well as several others of a 
similar nature for five days, and then recommended that no action be 
taken.[45]

Since Dr. Clarence E. Macartney, an outstanding conservative leader in 
that assembly, was elected moderator, and since Dr. Maitland Alexander 
and William Jennings Bryan, both of whom were well-known conservatives, 
were members of the Committee on Bills and Overtures, the question has 
often been asked, "Why was not some action taken against the Auburn 
Affirmation and its signers?" Dr. Alexander and elder A. Marshall 
Thompson have partially answered that question in their letters to The 
Presbyterian,[46] by stating that the committee was dominated by 
liberals thirteen to nine, so that every report coming from the 
committee represented the liberal point of view. Dr. Alexander further 
states that the General Assembly laid the matter on the table on motion 
of Dr. Mark A. Matthews, and that by unanimous vote. The fact remains 
that as far as the record is concerned, there was no protest and no 
dissenting vote. It is also surprising that very little or no comment is 
made concerning this overture in the report of the proceedings of the 
General Assembly in such a magazine as The Presbyterian, which was then 
the most aggressive organ for the faith. The statute of limitations 
which outlaws action against individuals one year after an offense has 
been committed, did not apply because only six months had elapsed since 
the issuance of the Auburn Affirmation in December, 1923.[47]

There seems to be no sound explanation of this action and attitude of 
the conservatives except that they made a grave mistake. No advice was 
given to the church concerning the Auburn Affirmation and, as a result, 
the matter has troubled the church ever since. One editor asked the 
rhetorical question, "What has become of `An Affirmation,' signed by 150 
ministers of the Presbyterian church, which number, through the labors 
and at the expense of Union Seminary, New York, was increased to twelve 
hundred?" Then he answered his own question, "It is dead."[48] But the 
church was to discover to its regret that the Affirmation was far from 
dead.

On the other hand, large mass meetings were held in several cities, 
deploring the doctrinal decadence in the Presbyterian Church in the USA 
as evidenced by the Auburn Affirmation. One such gathering took place in 
Cincinnati under the leadership of the Rev. Frank H. Stevenson, D.D., 
then pastor of the Church of the Covenant of Cincinnati, and one of the 
founders of Westminster Theological Seminary. In fact, the situation in 
the church became so acute that the 1925 General Assembly appointed a 
committee of fifteen with the following instructions,

    That a Commission of fifteen members be appointed to study the 
present spiritual condition of our Church and the causes making for 
unrest, and report to the next General Assembly, to the end that purity, 
peace, unity and progress of the Church may be assured.[49]

No Auburn Affirmationist was appointed to the commission, nor was any 
out-and-out member of the orthodox wing of the church. It was evident 
that this commission was appointed to still the voice of objection which 
the Auburn Affirmation had created.

The commission made reports to the 1926 and 1927 General Assemblies, 
both of which were adopted. As a whole, the reports dealt with church 
polity, the powers of the general assembly and presbyteries, ordination, 
licensure, essential and necessary articles of faith, and many other 
kindred subjects, but failed completely to point out the "causes making 
for unrest" in the church, which was the main purpose of the commission. 
It hid behind a barrage of technicalities, most of which were according 
to the constitution of the church, but made no adequate proposals "to 
the end that purity, peace, unity and progress of the Church may be 
assured," and recognized no deep-seated doctrinal difference among the 
ministers in the church, but rather urged brotherly consideration and 
fair play. A short quotation from the reports will demonstrate the 
spirit of doctrinal inclusivism of the members and their attitude toward 
the great doctrinal issues involved in the conflict.

    Two controlling factors emerge. One is, that the Presbyterian system 
admits of diversity of view where the core of truth is identical. 
Another is, that the Church has flourished best and showed most clearly 
the good hand of God upon it, when it laid aside its tendencies to 
stress these differences, and put the emphasis on its unity of 
spirit.[50]

It is a matter of great sorrow that no attempt whatsoever was made at 
the time to bring individual signers of the Auburn Affirmation to trial. 
This method would have been the proper one, for when heresy exists among 
ministers in the Presbyterian Church in the USA, charges must be filed 
against a particular minister with the presbytery. The orthodox 
ministers of the church wrote many pamphlets and made many speeches 
against the Auburn Affirmation, but no individual signer of that 
document was charged with heresy. This grave error caused irreparable 
harm in the church and furthered the cause of the modernists in the 
church. The Presbyterian League of Faith was organized in 1931 as a 
direct testimony against the Auburn Affirmation, and its constitution 
was signed by about twelve hundred ministers, but this did not result in 
any action against signers of the Affirmation (see chapter fourteen).

One attempt was made to bring the Auburn Affirmationists to trial in the 
Presbytery of Philadelphia in October, 1934, when the Rev. H. McAllister 
Griffiths and elders Murray Forst Thompson and Gordon H. Clark lodged 
six charges against the eleven signers of the Affirmation in the 
Presbytery of Philadelphia for violation of their ordination vows.[51] 
Through questionable methods and technical maneuvers the Affirmationists 
in the presbytery succeeded in keeping the charges from being filed. In 
addition, the legal difficulty imposed by the Book of Discipline in the 
statute of limitations, which requires charges to be filed within one 
year after an offense has been committed, would have militated against 
the success of this move. Yet the initiators of the charge felt morally 
obligated to start this suit in order to show the church that they 
regarded the signers of the Affirmation as heretics. When the Auburn 
Affirmation was issued in 1923, Mr. Griffiths was not a minister of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and Messrs. Thompson and Clark were not 
elders.

So the episode of the Auburn Affirmation ended, with the modernists 
scoring a decisive victory as shown by their success in restraining the 
church from admitting doctrinal heresy, at least in an official manner, 
and in keeping signers of the Affirmation in positions of great power in 
the church. It is very revealing to study the membership lists of the 
boards and agencies of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. In 1927, when 
the commission of fifteen made its last report, many signers of the 
Affirmation were on those boards. The Board of Foreign Missions had 
four, the Board of National Missions seven, the Board of Christian 
Education three, and the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General 
Assembly, which is practically the final arbiter of doctrine in the 
church, had two. Dr. D. S. Kennedy, editor of The Presbyterian in 1924, 
said that the Auburn Affirmation was dead; subsequent events prove that 
its signers were more alive than ever and that its spirit dominated the 
church. The following chapters will attempt to prove that fact.
