Chapter 9. The 1935 General Assembly

THE 1935 General Assembly met in Cincinnati, Ohio, in an atmosphere 
tense with feeling for and against the deliverance concerning the 
Independent Board and its members. The conviction of Dr. Machen by New 
Brunswick Presbytery had created more antagonism against the hierarchy 
of the church, as well as a feeling of futility in the hearts of the 
conservatives, while the vast majority of the church was more determined 
than ever to rid the church of the "trouble makers." It was manifest 
that the church would witness a pitched battle between the two forces.

Shortly before the convening of the General Assembly, a very significant 
"Testimony" against the 1934 deliverance, under the auspices of a 
nationwide committee of ruling elders, was addressed to the entire 
eldership of the Presbyterian Church in the USA. It is important to note 
that these elders of the committee, none of whom was connected with the 
Independent Board, stated deliberately,

    We believe that doctrinal differences lie at the heart of and 
furnish the motivating cause for the present discord in our Church, and 
that issues having the aspect of administrative and governmental matters 
are only collateral manifestations and outgrowths of fundamental and 
irreconcilable differences in belief.[1]

The Rev. Burleigh Cruickshank, D.D., not associated with the Independent 
Board, also wrote, "The real issue is between two theological points of 
view which have become, during the last years, mutually exclusive."[2]

The Rev. William C. Robinson, D.D., a professor in Columbia Theological 
Seminary, Decatur, Georgia, and a minister of the Presbyterian Church in 
the US (southern Presbyterian), made the accusation, "Theoretically, 
your church stands upon the Word of God as the rule of faith and 
practice. I regret to state, however, that practically she seems to be 
making the voice of the Church her rule of faith and manners."[3] Such 
testimony is in direct contradiction to the opinion of the Special 
Judicial Commission of New Brunswick Presbytery, which claimed that the 
issue was administrative and not doctrinal.

Thirteen presbyteries had sent overtures or resolutions relative to the 
Independent Board. Six urged the General Assembly to take care that the 
foreign missionary program of the church be in full accord with the 
Bible, and that only those who are fully aware of the danger in which 
the church stands and who are faithful to the Word of God be elected to 
membership on the Board of Foreign Missions. Five overtures and four 
resolutions asked the General Assembly to rescind the action against the 
members of the Independent Board or drop the process against them.[4]

But the opposition to and agreement with the action against the 
Independent Board which had been generated since the 1934 General 
Assembly found even more vehement and drastic expression in the General 
Assembly. The Assembly was hardly officially constituted when the Rev. 
George E. Barnes, D.D., a signer of the Auburn Affirmation and a 
minister in Philadelphia, arose and read a petition signed by other 
ministers, protesting the enrollment of the Rev. H. McAllister 
Griffiths, the Rev. Merrill T. MacPherson of Philadelphia Presbytery, 
and the Rev. Carl McIntire of West Jersey Presbytery on the ground of 
their refusal to resign from the Independent Board. The petition was 
given to the Standing Committee on Polity, and the three ministers were 
granted full membership in the Assembly pending the report of the 
committee.[5]

On Monday, May 27, the General Assembly adopted the committee's report, 
recommending "That the Rev. H. McAllister Griffiths and the Rev. Merrill 
T. MacPherson, of the Presbytery of Philadelphia, and the Rev. Carl 
McIntire of the Presbytery of West Jersey, be not enrolled in this 
General Assembly."[6] The three unseated commissioners were allowed to 
speak a few words of protest and later in the Assembly a formal protest 
against this action was filed by certain members of the Assembly.[7]

This action not only demonstrated the temper of the General Assembly and 
its control by those who were set against the Independent Board, but it 
also showed little regard for the constitutional rights of the three 
commissioners. These men were members in good and regular standing in 
their presbyteries and had been duly elected as commissioners to the 
General Assembly. They were not under the condemnation of their 
presbyteries, nor had they been cited to appear before their 
presbyteries because they had failed to obey the "mandate" of the 
General Assembly relative to the Independent Board. The General Assembly 
of 1934 had instructed the presbyteries "to institute, or cause to be 
instituted, promptly such disciplinary action as is set forth in the 
Book of Discipline,"[8] if the members of the Independent Board within 
their jurisdiction did not resign from the Independent Board. Until a 
minister or member of the Independent Board had been brought to trial 
and some disciplinary action pronounced upon him by his presbytery, he 
remained a member of the presbytery in good and regular standing. In 
other words, the General Assembly had no constitutional right to deprive 
him of membership in the Assembly. When the Assembly ousted these three 
ministers by a majority vote it exhibited the worst kind of tyranny.

This action also made it plain that the General Assembly failed to 
distinguish between administrative and judicial actions. When the 
General Assembly delivered its "mandate" against the Independent Board, 
it was acting in its administrative capacity. The special commission of 
1925 made an observation which has always been accepted and agreed to by 
the Presbyterian Church in the USA:

    The General Assembly sits sometimes in an executive and 
administrative capacity, again it may act as a legislative body; and yet 
again as a judicial tribunal, but always with restricted powers.... The 
failure to distinguish among these functions performed by the Assembly, 
as they have been distinguished in our American civil government, is the 
cause of the confusion which has crept into our minds regarding this 
matter.[9]

The late Francis L. Patton called administrative acts of the General 
Assembly "pious advice." The very essence of Presbyterianism is that the 
liberties of the individual minister or member are protected because 
those rights can only be abrogated by judicial process, which begins 
ordinarily in a presbytery and proceeds through the synod and general 
assembly. The general assembly is just as bound by the constitution in 
its acts as the humblest member of the church. In other words, the 
members of the Independent Board had not disobeyed an order of the 
supreme court of the church simply because no case in connection with 
membership on the Independent Board had as yet come before the General 
Assembly sitting in its judicial capacity as a court of Jesus Christ. In 
the meantime, the so-called mandate of the 1934 General Assembly only 
had the force of an administrative action which presbyteries or 
individuals are not compelled to follow.

The irony of the whole situation was seen in the fact that the one who 
had raised the protest against the three members of the Assembly was a 
signer of the Auburn Affirmation. As such, he had himself defied the 
action of the 1923 General Assembly which declared that certain 
doctrines are essential to the Word of God. His right to disregard an 
administrative act of the General Assembly had been concededâ€”although 
while doing so he revealed heretical tendencies, since the five 
doctrines mentioned in the Affirmation are at the very heart and core of 
Christianity. And yet Dr. Barnes, who had denied the very essence of 
historic Christianity as taught by the Presbyterian Church in the USA, 
now stood up and urged that the Assembly deprive men of their 
constitutional rights because they had disregarded a declaration of the 
Assembly pertaining to the administration of the church. The shift of 
the church from the conservative to the liberal doctrinal position and 
also a drift toward tyranny can be seen quite clearly from this 
procedure. Such action would have been incredible twenty-five years 
earlier.

The cleavage in the 1935 General Assembly was also plain in the election 
of the moderator. Dr. Stewart M. Robinson, editor of The Presbyterian, 
was nominated by the Rev. Burleigh Cruickshank, D.D. of Philadelphia, on 
the platform of loyalty to the Bible and the need for reform within the 
church. The Rev. Joseph A. Vance, D.D., of Detroit, was placed before 
the General Assembly as president of the Board of National Missions, and 
staunch defender of the status quo in the church. He was a typical 
"machine" man. Several others were nominated but these men typified the 
two doctrinal factions within the church, although Dr. Robinson had 
never been associated with the Independent Board movement nor had he 
been actively aligned with the group in the church which had made a 
consistent fight for the faith. Dr. Vance was elected by an overwhelming 
majority, making it evident again that the church was controlled by 
those who were liberals and who were content with the drift of the 
church toward unbelief.

A surprise came when the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General 
Assembly presented its decision in the Blackstone-Kauffroth case. These 
two young men, James H. Blackstone and John A. Kauffroth, had presented 
themselves for licensure to the Presbytery of Chester on June 12, 
1934.[10] In addition to the regular constitutional questions, several 
relative to the foreign missions situation, occasioned by the "mandate" 
against the Independent Board, were asked the candidates. Then each one 
read a prepared statement, saying that at present the Board of Foreign 
Missions, in his opinion, was not entirely loyal to the constitution of 
the church; however, they said that they held themselves open to receive 
new facts.[11]

After these statements the presbytery, by a vote of forty-five to 
twenty-two, proceeded to license the two candidates in the regular 
constitutional manner. Against this action seventeen members of the 
presbytery complained to the Synod of Pennsylvania.[12] The Judicial 
Commission of the Synod of Pennsylvania sustained the complainants. In 
turn, the action of the synod was complained against which brought the 
case before the Permanent Judicial Commission of the General Assembly. 
The Permanent Judicial Commission reversed the decision of the synod, 
and found that the presbytery had acted properly in licensing the two 
candidates.[13]

This decision implied what members of the Independent Board and 
conservatives had been saying, namely, that the mandate of 1934 adds to 
the constitution of the church when it requires blind allegiance to the 
boards of the church and makes it the duty of each member to support the 
authorized missionary program of the church, whether or not he regards 
it as in accord with the Bible. In other words, the decision of the 
Permanent Judicial Commission, which became the decision of the General 
Assembly in the Blackstone-Kauffroth case, repudiated the central 
principle upon which the action of the 1934 General Assembly was based, 
that of blind allegiance to the boards.

Immediately, modernists in the Assembly interpreted the decision as 
favoring them, because each presbytery was left free to do as it 
pleased. A careful reading of the decision, however, reveals that 
presbyteries must proceed strictly according to the constitution. While 
this decision practically reversed the action of the 1934 Assembly, it 
became clear almost immediately that those in control of the machinery 
of the church would not be bound by it.

What took place in New Brunswick Presbytery on April 6, 1936, 
established this statement. Nine candidates for licensure appeared 
before the presbytery and each one was asked questions to this effect: 
"Are you willing to support the authorized boards and agencies of the 
Presbyterian Church in the USA and particularly the Board of Foreign 
Missions?" The presbytery asked this question on the basis of its rule 
passed on September 26, 1933,

    All candidates seeking licensure or ordination shall be examined as 
to their willingness to support the regularly authorized Boards and 
Agencies of the Presbyterian Church in the U.S.A., particularly the 
Board of Foreign Missions. A record of this examination shall be made in 
the Minutes of Presbytery.

Six candidates answered the above question in the affirmative, while the 
other three expressed their unwillingness to make a blanket pledge for 
the future, but they finally satisfied the presbytery that they could 
support the boards as then constituted, and would withdraw from the 
church if there came a time when they could not give unquestioned 
loyalty to the boards.[14]

Another instance of the same nature, proving that the rulers of the 
church refused to be bound by a General Assembly decision even though it 
was in a judicial case, and therefore final, occurred in Kalamazoo 
Presbytery with respect to the reception of the Rev. G. H. Snell from 
the Presbytery of Cincinnati. Mr. Snell had been called as pastor of the 
Presbyterian Church at Allegan, Michigan, but the presbytery refused to 
receive him because he would not give a blanket pledge of loyalty to the 
boards. However, it allowed him to remain as stated supply of the 
church.[15] Such were the reactions of the ecclesiastical rulers to the 
decision of the Permanent judicial Commission in the 
Blackstone-Kauffroth case.

The overtures and resolutions urging the General Assembly to rescind the 
action against the Independent Board were voted down with dispatch, and 
to show the temper of the 1935 Assembly more pointedly, it concurred in 
the resolution of the Presbytery of Niobrara, reaffirming the action of 
the 1934 General Assembly relating to the Independent Board.[16]

The Presbyteries of Chester and Philadelphia had always been regarded as 
outstanding conservative strongholds which the modernist element had 
found it difficult, if not impossible, to control. It was the Presbytery 
of Philadelphia under the leadership of the Rev. Clarence E. Macartney, 
D.D., which had initiated the action against Dr. Harry E. Fosdick. In 
fact, Philadelphia Presbytery had led the fight to keep the church true 
to the Bible and the Westminster Confession of Faith. This fact had 
troubled the leaders of the church very much, but the action which was 
adopted at the 1935 General Assembly eventually solved that problem and 
placed the modernists and the ecclesiastical "machine" group in complete 
domination of these presbyteries. Two memorials, identical in form, one 
from a group of eighteen ministers and twenty-nine elders in Chester 
Presbytery, and the other signed by fifteen ministers and ninety-eight 
elders in Philadelphia Presbytery, petitioned the General Assembly to 
investigate conditions in those presbyteries.[17]

It is significant that of the five ministers designated by the 
self-appointed group in Philadelphia Presbytery to argue their case 
before the standing committee of the General Assembly, four were signers 
of the Auburn Affirmation. The Committee on Bills and Overtures 
recommended that a commission be appointed for the investigation and 
report to the next assembly.[18]

The ecclesiastical organization was determined to crush the evangelical 
majorities in these presbyteries and compel them to do their bidding. In 
the next chapter the complete success of this determination will be 
considered.

In conclusion, it is well to recognize one rather amusing incident in 
the 1935 Assembly which illustrates further the true condition of the 
church, as well as the complete doctrinal indifference and insincerity 
of some members. After the three members of the General Assembly were 
unseated, considerable comment resulted in the newspapers, over the 
radio, and among laymen visiting in Cincinnati. To answer this 
unfavorable publicity, the Rev. W. C. Covert, D.D., moderator of the 
1934 General Assembly, asked for the floor and, after making threatening 
remarks to the offenders, called upon the Assembly to recite the 
Apostles' Creed in order to demonstrate the doctrinal soundness of the 
church. After the Assembly had recited the creed, one member arose and 
asked naively if the Assembly would not go on record as showing that it 
really believed the creed. The moderator answered that of course the 
Assembly believed the creed. But it was apparent to everyone that such a 
request showed definitely that the integrity of the church's own 
pronouncements of doctrinal soundness was questioned. And well might 
that suspicion be, when it is realized that signers of the Auburn 
Affirmation, who had denied certain dogmas of the creed as essential to 
Christianity, repeated the creed with the rest.[19]

The 1935 Assembly gave modernism another victory. The church in its 
corporate witness was nearer the goal of complete capitulation to 
unbelief. Anyone who could not see that the struggle in the church was 
between two different conceptions of religion must have been blind.
