

Chapter 1


Once upon a time and a very good time it was there was a moocow coming
down along the road and this moocow that was coming down along the road
met a nicens little boy named baby tuckoo...

His father told him that story: his father looked at him through a
glass: he had a hairy face.

He was baby tuckoo. The moocow came down the road where Betty Byrne
lived: she sold lemon platt.

    O, the wild rose blossoms
    On the little green place.

He sang that song. That was his song.

    O, the green wothe botheth.

When you wet the bed first it is warm then it gets cold. His mother put
on the oilsheet. That had the queer smell.

His mother had a nicer smell than his father. She played on the piano
the sailor's hornpipe for him to dance. He danced:

    Tralala lala,
    Tralala tralaladdy,
    Tralala lala,
    Tralala lala.

Uncle Charles and Dante clapped. They were older than his father and
mother but uncle Charles was older than Dante.

Dante had two brushes in her press. The brush with the maroon velvet
back was for Michael Davitt and the brush with the green velvet back
was for Parnell. Dante gave him a cachou every time he brought her a
piece of tissue paper.

The Vances lived in number seven. They had a different father and
mother. They were Eileen's father and mother. When they were grown up
he was going to marry Eileen. He hid under the table. His mother said:

--O, Stephen will apologize.

Dante said:

--O, if not, the eagles will come and pull out his eyes.--

    Pull out his eyes,
    Apologize,
    Apologize,
    Pull out his eyes.
    Apologize,
    Pull out his eyes,
    Pull out his eyes,
    Apologize.

* * * * *

The wide playgrounds were swarming with boys. All were shouting and the
prefects urged them on with strong cries. The evening air was pale and
chilly and after every charge and thud of the footballers the greasy
leather orb flew like a heavy bird through the grey light. He kept on
the fringe of his line, out of sight of his prefect, out of the reach
of the rude feet, feigning to run now and then. He felt his body small
and weak amid the throng of the players and his eyes were weak and
watery. Rody Kickham was not like that: he would be captain of the
third line all the fellows said.

Rody Kickham was a decent fellow but Nasty Roche was a stink. Rody
Kickham had greaves in his number and a hamper in the refectory. Nasty
Roche had big hands. He called the Friday pudding dog-in-the-blanket.
And one day he had asked:

--What is your name?

Stephen had answered: Stephen Dedalus.

Then Nasty Roche had said:

--What kind of a name is that?

And when Stephen had not been able to answer Nasty Roche had asked:

--What is your father?

Stephen had answered:

--A gentleman.

Then Nasty Roche had asked:

--Is he a magistrate?

He crept about from point to point on the fringe of his line, making
little runs now and then. But his hands were bluish with cold. He kept
his hands in the side pockets of his belted grey suit. That was a belt
round his pocket. And belt was also to give a fellow a belt. One day a
fellow said to Cantwell:

--I'd give you such a belt in a second.

Cantwell had answered:

--Go and fight your match. Give Cecil Thunder a belt. I'd like to see
you. He'd give you a toe in the rump for yourself.

That was not a nice expression. His mother had told him not to speak
with the rough boys in the college. Nice mother! The first day in the
hall of the castle when she had said goodbye she had put up her veil
double to her nose to kiss him: and her nose and eyes were red. But he
had pretended not to see that she was going to cry. She was a nice
mother but she was not so nice when she cried. And his father had given
him two five-shilling pieces for pocket money. And his father had told
him if he wanted anything to write home to him and, whatever he did,
never to peach on a fellow. Then at the door of the castle the rector
had shaken hands with his father and mother, his soutane fluttering in
the breeze, and the car had driven off with his father and mother on
it. They had cried to him from the car, waving their hands:

--Goodbye, Stephen, goodbye!

--Goodbye, Stephen, goodbye!

He was caught in the whirl of a scrimmage and, fearful of the flashing
eyes and muddy boots, bent down to look through the legs. The fellows
were struggling and groaning and their legs were rubbing and kicking
and stamping. Then Jack Lawton's yellow boots dodged out the ball and
all the other boots and legs ran after. He ran after them a little way
and then stopped. It was useless to run on. Soon they would be going
home for the holidays. After supper in the study hall he would change
the number pasted up inside his desk from seventy-seven to seventy-six.

It would be better to be in the study hall than out there in the cold.
The sky was pale and cold but there were lights in the castle. He
wondered from which window Hamilton Rowan had thrown his hat on the
ha-ha and had there been flowerbeds at that time under the windows. One
day when he had been called to the castle the butler had shown him the
marks of the soldiers' slugs in the wood of the door and had given him
a piece of shortbread that the community ate. It was nice and warm to
see the lights in the castle. It was like something in a book. Perhaps
Leicester Abbey was like that. And there were nice sentences in Doctor
Cornwell's Spelling Book. They were like poetry but they were only
sentences to learn the spelling from.


    Wolsey died in Leicester Abbey
    Where the abbots buried him.
    Canker is a disease of plants,
    Cancer one of animals.


It would be nice to lie on the hearthrug before the fire, leaning his
head upon his hands, and think on those sentences. He shivered as if he
had cold slimy water next his skin. That was mean of Wells to shoulder
him into the square ditch because he would not swop his little snuff
box for Wells's seasoned hacking chestnut, the conqueror of forty. How
cold and slimy the water had been! A fellow had once seen a big rat
jump into the scum. Mother was sitting at the fire with Dante waiting
for Brigid to bring in the tea. She had her feet on the fender and her
jewelly slippers were so hot and they had such a lovely warm smell!
Dante knew a lot of things. She had taught him where the Mozambique
Channel was and what was the longest river in America and what was the
name of the highest mountain in the moon. Father Arnall knew more than
Dante because he was a priest but both his father and uncle Charles
said that Dante was a clever woman and a well-read woman. And when
Dante made that noise after dinner and then put up her hand to her
mouth: that was heartburn.

A voice cried far out on the playground:

--All in!

Then other voices cried from the lower and third lines:

--All in! All in!

The players closed around, flushed and muddy, and he went among them,
glad to go in. Rody Kickham held the ball by its greasy lace. A fellow
asked him to give it one last: but he walked on without even answering
the fellow. Simon Moonan told him not to because the prefect was
looking. The fellow turned to Simon Moonan and said:

--We all know why you speak. You are McGlade's suck.

Suck was a queer word. The fellow called Simon Moonan that name because
Simon Moonan used to tie the prefect's false sleeves behind his back
and the prefect used to let on to be angry. But the sound was ugly.
Once he had washed his hands in the lavatory of the Wicklow Hotel and
his father pulled the stopper up by the chain after and the dirty water
went down through the hole in the basin. And when it had all gone down
slowly the hole in the basin had made a sound like that: suck. Only
louder.

To remember that and the white look of the lavatory made him feel cold
and then hot. There were two cocks that you turned and water came out:
cold and hot. He felt cold and then a little hot: and he could see the
names printed on the cocks. That was a very queer thing.

And the air in the corridor chilled him too. It was queer and wettish.
But soon the gas would be lit and in burning it made a light noise like
a little song. Always the same: and when the fellows stopped talking in
the playroom you could hear it.

It was the hour for sums. Father Arnall wrote a hard sum on the board
and then said:

--Now then, who will win? Go ahead, York! Go ahead, Lancaster!

Stephen tried his best, but the sum was too hard and he felt confused.
The little silk badge with the white rose on it that was pinned on the
breast of his jacket began to flutter. He was no good at sums, but he
tried his best so that York might not lose. Father Arnall's face looked
very black, but he was not in a wax: he was laughing. Then Jack Lawton
cracked his fingers and Father Arnall looked at his copybook and said:

--Right. Bravo Lancaster! The red rose wins. Come on now, York! Forge
ahead!

Jack Lawton looked over from his side. The little silk badge with the
red rose on it looked very rich because he had a blue sailor top on.
Stephen felt his own face red too, thinking of all the bets about who
would get first place in elements, Jack Lawton or he. Some weeks Jack
Lawton got the card for first and some weeks he got the card for first.
His white silk badge fluttered and fluttered as he worked at the next
sum and heard Father Arnall's voice. Then all his eagerness passed away
and he felt his face quite cool. He thought his face must be white
because it felt so cool. He could not get out the answer for the sum
but it did not matter. White roses and red roses: those were beautiful
colours to think of. And the cards for first place and second place and
third place were beautiful colours too: pink and cream and lavender.
Lavender and cream and pink roses were beautiful to think of. Perhaps a
wild rose might be like those colours and he remembered the song about
the wild rose blossoms on the little green place. But you could not
have a green rose. But perhaps somewhere in the world you could.

The bell rang and then the classes began to file out of the rooms and
along the corridors towards the refectory. He sat looking at the two
prints of butter on his plate but could not eat the damp bread. The
tablecloth was damp and limp. But he drank off the hot weak tea which
the clumsy scullion, girt with a white apron, poured into his cup. He
wondered whether the scullion's apron was damp too or whether all white
things were cold and damp. Nasty Roche and Saurin drank cocoa that
their people sent them in tins. They said they could not drink the tea;
that it was hogwash. Their fathers were magistrates, the fellows said.

All the boys seemed to him very strange. They had all fathers and
mothers and different clothes and voices. He longed to be at home and
lay his head on his mother's lap. But he could not: and so he longed
for the play and study and prayers to be over and to be in bed.

He drank another cup of hot tea and Fleming said:

--What's up? Have you a pain or what's up with you?

--I don't know, Stephen said.

--Sick in your breadbasket, Fleming said, because your face looks
white. It will go away.

--O yes, Stephen said.

But he was not sick there. He thought that he was sick in his heart if
you could be sick in that place. Fleming was very decent to ask him. He
wanted to cry. He leaned his elbows on the table and shut and opened
the flaps of his ears. Then he heard the noise of the refectory every
time he opened the flaps of his ears. It made a roar like a train at
night. And when he closed the flaps the roar was shut off like a train
going into a tunnel. That night at Dalkey the train had roared like
that and then, when it went into the tunnel, the roar stopped. He
closed his eyes and the train went on, roaring and then stopping;
roaring again, stopping. It was nice to hear it roar and stop and then
roar out of the tunnel again and then stop.

Then the higher line fellows began to come down along the matting in
the middle of the refectory, Paddy Rath and Jimmy Magee and the
Spaniard who was allowed to smoke cigars and the little Portuguese who
wore the woolly cap. And then the lower line tables and the tables of
the third line. And every single fellow had a different way of walking.

He sat in a corner of the playroom pretending to watch a game of
dominoes and once or twice he was able to hear for an instant the
little song of the gas. The prefect was at the door with some boys and
Simon Moonan was knotting his false sleeves. He was telling them
something about Tullabeg.

Then he went away from the door and Wells came over to Stephen and
said:

--Tell us, Dedalus, do you kiss your mother before you go to bed?

Stephen answered:

--I do.

Wells turned to the other fellows and said:

--O, I say, here's a fellow says he kisses his mother every night
before he goes to bed.

The other fellows stopped their game and turned round, laughing.
Stephen blushed under their eyes and said:

--I do not.

Wells said:

--O, I say, here's a fellow says he doesn't kiss his mother before he
goes to bed.

They all laughed again. Stephen tried to laugh with them. He felt his
whole body hot and confused in a moment. What was the right answer to
the question? He had given two and still Wells laughed. But Wells must
know the right answer for he was in third of grammar. He tried to think
of Wells's mother but he did not dare to raise his eyes to Wells's
face. He did not like Wells's face. It was Wells who had shouldered him
into the square ditch the day before because he would not swop his
little snuff box for Wells's seasoned hacking chestnut, the conqueror
of forty. It was a mean thing to do; all the fellows said it was. And
how cold and slimy the water had been! And a fellow had once seen a big
rat jump plop into the scum.

The cold slime of the ditch covered his whole body; and, when the bell
rang for study and the lines filed out of the playrooms, he felt the
cold air of the corridor and staircase inside his clothes. He still
tried to think what was the right answer. Was it right to kiss his
mother or wrong to kiss his mother? What did that mean, to kiss? You
put your face up like that to say good night and then his mother put
her face down. That was to kiss. His mother put her lips on his cheek;
her lips were soft and they wetted his cheek; and they made a tiny
little noise: kiss. Why did people do that with their two faces?

Sitting in the study hall he opened the lid of his desk and changed the
number pasted up inside from seventy-seven to seventy-six. But the
Christmas vacation was very far away: but one time it would come
because the earth moved round always.

There was a picture of the earth on the first page of his geography: a
big ball in the middle of clouds. Fleming had a box of crayons and one
night during free study he had coloured the earth green and the clouds
maroon. That was like the two brushes in Dante's press, the brush with
the green velvet back for Parnell and the brush with the maroon velvet
back for Michael Davitt. But he had not told Fleming to colour them
those colours. Fleming had done it himself.

He opened the geography to study the lesson; but he could not learn the
names of places in America. Still they were all different places that
had different names. They were all in different countries and the
countries were in continents and the continents were in the world and
the world was in the universe.

He turned to the flyleaf of the geography and read what he had written
there: himself, his name and where he was.


    Stephen Dedalus
    Class of Elements
    Clongowes Wood College
    Sallins
    County Kildare
    Ireland
    Europe
    The World
    The Universe


That was in his writing: and Fleming one night for a cod had written on
the opposite page:


    Stephen Dedalus is my name,
    Ireland is my nation.
    Clongowes is my dwellingplace
    And heaven my expectation.


He read the verses backwards but then they were not poetry. Then he
read the flyleaf from the bottom to the top till he came to his own
name. That was he: and he read down the page again. What was after the
universe?

Nothing. But was there anything round the universe to show where it
stopped before the nothing place began?

It could not be a wall; but there could be a thin thin line there all
round everything. It was very big to think about everything and
everywhere. Only God could do that. He tried to think what a big
thought that must be; but he could only think of God. God was God's
name just as his name was Stephen. DIEU was the French for God and that
was God's name too; and when anyone prayed to God and said DIEU then
God knew at once that it was a French person that was praying. But,
though there were different names for God in all the different
languages in the world and God understood what all the people who
prayed said in their different languages, still God remained always the
same God and God's real name was God.

It made him very tired to think that way. It made him feel his head
very big. He turned over the flyleaf and looked wearily at the green
round earth in the middle of the maroon clouds. He wondered which was
right, to be for the green or for the maroon, because Dante had ripped
the green velvet back off the brush that was for Parnell one day with
her scissors and had told him that Parnell was a bad man. He wondered
if they were arguing at home about that. That was called politics.
There were two sides in it: Dante was on one side and his father and Mr
Casey were on the other side but his mother and uncle Charles were on
no side. Every day there was something in the paper about it.

It pained him that he did not know well what politics meant and that he
did not know where the universe ended. He felt small and weak. When
would he be like the fellows in poetry and rhetoric? They had big
voices and big boots and they studied trigonometry. That was very far
away. First came the vacation and then the next term and then vacation
again and then again another term and then again the vacation. It was
like a train going in and out of tunnels and that was like the noise of
the boys eating in the refectory when you opened and closed the flaps
of the ears. Term, vacation; tunnel, out; noise, stop. How far away it
was! It was better to go to bed to sleep. Only prayers in the chapel
and then bed. He shivered and yawned. It would be lovely in bed after
the sheets got a bit hot. First they were so cold to get into. He
shivered to think how cold they were first. But then they got hot and
then he could sleep. It was lovely to be tired. He yawned again. Night
prayers and then bed: he shivered and wanted to yawn. It would be
lovely in a few minutes. He felt a warm glow creeping up from the cold
shivering sheets, warmer and warmer till he felt warm all over, ever so
warm and yet he shivered a little and still wanted to yawn.

The bell rang for night prayers and he filed out of the study hall
after the others and down the staircase and along the corridors to the
chapel. The corridors were darkly lit and the chapel was darkly lit.
Soon all would be dark and sleeping. There was cold night air in the
chapel and the marbles were the colour the sea was at night. The sea
was cold day and night: but it was colder at night. It was cold and
dark under the seawall beside his father's house. But the kettle would
be on the hob to make punch.

The prefect of the chapel prayed above his head and his memory knew the
responses:


    O Lord open our lips
    And our mouths shall announce Thy praise.
    Incline unto our aid, O God!
    O Lord make haste to help us!


There was a cold night smell in the chapel. But it was a holy smell. It
was not like the smell of the old peasants who knelt at the back of the
chapel at Sunday mass. That was a smell of air and rain and turf and
corduroy. But they were very holy peasants. They breathed behind him on
his neck and sighed as they prayed. They lived in Clane, a fellow said:
there were little cottages there and he had seen a woman standing at
the half-door of a cottage with a child in her arms as the cars had
come past from Sallins. It would be lovely to sleep for one night in
that cottage before the fire of smoking turf, in the dark lit by the
fire, in the warm dark, breathing the smell of the peasants, air and
rain and turf and corduroy. But O, the road there between the trees
was dark! You would be lost in the dark. It made him afraid to think
of how it was.

He heard the voice of the prefect of the chapel saying the last
prayers. He prayed it too against the dark outside under the trees.


  VISIT, WE BESEECH THEE, O LORD, THIS HABITATION AND DRIVE
  AWAY FROM IT ALL THE SNARES OF THE ENEMY. MAY THY HOLY
  ANGELS DWELL HEREIN TO PRESERVE US IN PEACE AND MAY THY
  BLESSINGS BE ALWAYS UPON US THROUGH CHRIST OUR LORD.
  AMEN.


His fingers trembled as he undressed himself in the dormitory. He told
his fingers to hurry up. He had to undress and then kneel and say his
own prayers and be in bed before the gas was lowered so that he might
not go to hell when he died. He rolled his stockings off and put on his
nightshirt quickly and knelt trembling at his bedside and repeated his
prayers quickly, fearing that the gas would go down. He felt his
shoulders shaking as he murmured:

    God bless my father and my mother and spare them to me!
    God bless my little brothers and sisters and spare them to me!
    God bless Dante and Uncle Charles and spare them to me!


He blessed himself and climbed quickly into bed and, tucking the end of
the nightshirt under his feet, curled himself together under the cold
white sheets, shaking and trembling. But he would not go to hell when
he died; and the shaking would stop. A voice bade the boys in the
dormitory good night. He peered out for an instant over the coverlet
and saw the yellow curtains round and before his bed that shut him off
on all sides. The light was lowered quietly.

The prefect's shoes went away. Where? Down the staircase and along the
corridors or to his room at the end? He saw the dark. Was it true about
the black dog that walked there at night with eyes as big as
carriage-lamps? They said it was the ghost of a murderer. A long shiver
of fear flowed over his body. He saw the dark entrance hall of the
castle. Old servants in old dress were in the ironing-room above the
staircase. It was long ago. The old servants were quiet. There was a
fire there, but the hall was still dark. A figure came up the staircase
from the hall. He wore the white cloak of a marshal; his face was pale
and strange; he held his hand pressed to his side. He looked out of
strange eyes at the old servants. They looked at him and saw their
master's face and cloak and knew that he had received his death-wound.
But only the dark was where they looked: only dark silent air. Their
master had received his death-wound on the battlefield of Prague far
away over the sea. He was standing on the field; his hand was pressed
to his side; his face was pale and strange and he wore the white cloak
of a marshal.

O how cold and strange it was to think of that! All the dark was cold
and strange. There were pale strange faces there, great eyes like
carriage-lamps. They were the ghosts of murderers, the figures of
marshals who had received their death-wound on battlefields far away
over the sea. What did they wish to say that their faces were so
strange?


VISIT, WE BESEECH THEE, O LORD, THIS HABITATION AND DRIVE AWAY FROM IT
ALL...


Going home for the holidays! That would be lovely: the fellows had told
him. Getting up on the cars in the early wintry morning outside the
door of the castle. The cars were rolling on the gravel. Cheers for the
rector!

Hurray! Hurray! Hurray!

The cars drove past the chapel and all caps were raised. They drove
merrily along the country roads. The drivers pointed with their whips
to Bodenstown. The fellows cheered. They passed the farmhouse
of the Jolly Farmer. Cheer after cheer after cheer. Through Clane they
drove, cheering and cheered. The peasant women stood at the half-doors,
the men stood here and there. The lovely smell there was in the wintry
air: the smell of Clane: rain and wintry air and turf smouldering and
corduroy.

The train was full of fellows: a long long chocolate train with cream
facings. The guards went to and fro opening, closing, locking,
unlocking the doors. They were men in dark blue and silver; they had
silvery whistles and their keys made a quick music: click, click:
click, click.

And the train raced on over the flat lands and past the Hill of Allen.
The telegraph poles were passing, passing. The train went on and on. It
knew. There were lanterns in the hall of his father's house and ropes
of green branches. There were holly and ivy round the pierglass and
holly and ivy, green and red, twined round the chandeliers. There were
red holly and green ivy round the old portraits on the walls. Holly and
ivy for him and for Christmas.

Lovely...

All the people. Welcome home, Stephen! Noises of welcome. His mother
kissed him. Was that right? His father was a marshal now: higher than a
magistrate. Welcome home, Stephen!

Noises...

There was a noise of curtain-rings running back along the rods, of
water being splashed in the basins. There was a noise of rising and
dressing and washing in the dormitory: a noise of clapping of hands as
the prefect went up and down telling the fellows to look sharp. A pale
sunlight showed the yellow curtains drawn back, the tossed beds. His
bed was very hot and his face and body were very hot.

He got up and sat on the side of his bed. He was weak. He tried to pull
on his stocking. It had a horrid rough feel. The sunlight was queer and
cold.

Fleming said:

--Are you not well?

He did not know; and Fleming said:

--Get back into bed. I'll tell McGlade you're not well.

--He's sick.

--Who is?

--Tell McGlade.

--Get back into bed.

--Is he sick?

A fellow held his arms while he loosened the stocking clinging to his
foot and climbed back into the hot bed.

He crouched down between the sheets, glad of their tepid glow. He heard
the fellows talk among themselves about him as they dressed for mass.
It was a mean thing to do, to shoulder him into the square ditch, they
were saying.

Then their voices ceased; they had gone. A voice at his bed said:

--Dedalus, don't spy on us, sure you won't?

Wells's face was there. He looked at it and saw that Wells was afraid.

--I didn't mean to. Sure you won't?

His father had told him, whatever he did, never to peach on a fellow.
He shook his head and answered no and felt glad.

Wells said:

--I didn't mean to, honour bright. It was only for cod. I'm sorry.

The face and the voice went away. Sorry because he was afraid. Afraid
that it was some disease. Canker was a disease of plants and cancer one
of animals: or another different. That was a long time ago then out on
the playgrounds in the evening light, creeping from point to point on
the fringe of his line, a heavy bird flying low through the grey light.
Leicester Abbey lit up. Wolsey died there. The abbots buried him
themselves.

It was not Wells's face, it was the prefect's. He was not foxing. No,
no: he was sick really. He was not foxing. And he felt the prefect's
hand on his forehead; and he felt his forehead warm and damp against
the prefect's cold damp hand. That was the way a rat felt, slimy and
damp and cold. Every rat had two eyes to look out of. Sleek slimy
coats, little little feet tucked up to jump, black slimy eyes to look
out of. They could understand how to jump. But the minds of rats could
not understand trigonometry. When they were dead they lay on their
sides. Their coats dried then. They were only dead things.

The prefect was there again and it was his voice that was saying that
he was to get up, that Father Minister had said he was to get up and
dress and go to the infirmary. And while he was dressing himself as
quickly as he could the prefect said:

--We must pack off to Brother Michael because we have the
collywobbles!

He was very decent to say that. That was all to make him laugh. But he
could not laugh because his cheeks and lips were all shivery: and then
the prefect had to laugh by himself.

The prefect cried:

--Quick march! Hayfoot! Strawfoot!

They went together down the staircase and along the corridor and past
the bath. As he passed the door he remembered with a vague fear the
warm turf-coloured bogwater, the warm moist air, the noise of plunges,
the smell of the towels, like medicine.

Brother Michael was standing at the door of the infirmary and from the
door of the dark cabinet on his right came a smell like medicine. That
came from the bottles on the shelves. The prefect spoke to Brother
Michael and Brother Michael answered and called the prefect sir. He had
reddish hair mixed with grey and a queer look. It was queer that he
would always be a brother. It was queer too that you could not call him
sir because he was a brother and had a different kind of look. Was he
not holy enough or why could he not catch up on the others?

There were two beds in the room and in one bed there was a fellow: and
when they went in he called out:

--Hello! It's young Dedalus! What's up?

--The sky is up, Brother Michael said.

He was a fellow out of the third of grammar and, while Stephen was
undressing, he asked Brother Michael to bring him a round of buttered
toast.

--Ah, do! he said.

--Butter you up! said Brother Michael. You'll get your walking papers
in the morning when the doctor comes.

--Will I? the fellow said. I'm not well yet.

Brother Michael repeated:

--You'll get your walking papers. I tell you.

He bent down to rake the fire. He had a long back like the long back of
a tramhorse. He shook the poker gravely and nodded his head at the
fellow out of third of grammar.

Then Brother Michael went away and after a while the fellow out of
third of grammar turned in towards the wall and fell asleep.

That was the infirmary. He was sick then. Had they written home to tell
his mother and father? But it would be quicker for one of the priests
to go himself to tell them. Or he would write a letter for the priest
to bring.


    Dear Mother,

    I am sick. I want to go home. Please come and take me home.
    I am in the infirmary.

    Your fond son,
    Stephen


How far away they were! There was cold sunlight outside the window. He
wondered if he would die. You could die just the same on a sunny day.
He might die before his mother came. Then he would have a dead mass in
the chapel like the way the fellows had told him it was when Little had
died. All the fellows would be at the mass, dressed in black, all with
sad faces. Wells too would be there but no fellow would look at him.
The rector would be there in a cope of black and gold and there would
be tall yellow candles on the altar and round the catafalque. And they
would carry the coffin out of the chapel slowly and he would be buried
in the little graveyard of the community off the main avenue of limes.
And Wells would be sorry then for what he had done. And the bell would
toll slowly.

He could hear the tolling. He said over to himself the song that Brigid
had taught him.


    Dingdong! The castle bell!
    Farewell, my mother!
    Bury me in the old churchyard
    Beside my eldest brother.
    My coffin shall be black,
    Six angels at my back,
    Two to sing and two to pray
    And two to carry my soul away.


How beautiful and sad that was! How beautiful the words were where they
said BURY ME IN THE OLD CHURCHYARD! A tremor passed over his body. How
sad and how beautiful! He wanted to cry quietly but not for himself:
for the words, so beautiful and sad, like music. The bell! The bell!
Farewell! O farewell!

The cold sunlight was weaker and Brother Michael was standing at his
bedside with a bowl of beef-tea. He was glad for his mouth was hot and
dry. He could hear them playing in the playgrounds. And the day was
going on in the college just as if he were there.

Then Brother Michael was going away and the fellow out of the third of
grammar told him to be sure and come back and tell him all the news in
the paper. He told Stephen that his name was Athy and that his father
kept a lot of racehorses that were spiffing jumpers and that his father
would give a good tip to Brother Michael any time he wanted it because
Brother Michael was very decent and always told him the news out of the
paper they got every day up in the castle. There was every kind of news
in the paper: accidents, shipwrecks, sports, and politics.

--Now it is all about politics in the papers, he said. Do your people
talk about that too?

--Yes, Stephen said.

--Mine too, he said.

Then he thought for a moment and said:

--You have a queer name, Dedalus, and I have a queer name too, Athy.
My name is the name of a town. Your name is like Latin.

Then he asked:

--Are you good at riddles?

Stephen answered:

--Not very good.

Then he said:

--Can you answer me this one? Why is the county of Kildare like the
leg of a fellow's breeches?

Stephen thought what could be the answer and then said:

--I give it up.

--Because there is a thigh in it, he said. Do you see the joke? Athy
is the town in the county Kildare and a thigh is the other thigh.

--Oh, I see, Stephen said.

--That's an old riddle, he said.

After a moment he said:

--I say!

--What? asked Stephen.

--You know, he said, you can ask that riddle another way.

--Can you? said Stephen.

--The same riddle, he said. Do you know the other way to ask it?

--No, said Stephen.

--Can you not think of the other way? he said.

He looked at Stephen over the bedclothes as he spoke. Then he lay back
on the pillow and said:

--There is another way but I won't tell you what it is.

Why did he not tell it? His father, who kept the racehorses, must be a
magistrate too like Saurin's father and Nasty Roche's father. He
thought of his own father, of how he sang songs while his mother played
and of how he always gave him a shilling when he asked for sixpence and
he felt sorry for him that he was not a magistrate like the other boys'
fathers. Then why was he sent to that place with them? But
his father had told him that he would be no stranger there because his
granduncle had presented an address to the liberator there fifty years
before. You could know the people of that time by their old dress. It
seemed to him a solemn time: and he wondered if that was the time when
the fellows in Clongowes wore blue coats with brass buttons and yellow
waistcoats and caps of rabbitskin and drank beer like grown-up people
and kept greyhounds of their own to course the hares with.

He looked at the window and saw that the daylight had grown weaker.
There would be cloudy grey light over the playgrounds. There was no
noise on the playgrounds. The class must be doing the themes or perhaps
Father Arnall was reading out of the book.

It was queer that they had not given him any medicine. Perhaps Brother
Michael would bring it back when he came. They said you got stinking
stuff to drink when you were in the infirmary. But he felt better now
than before. It would be nice getting better slowly. You could get a
book then. There was a book in the library about Holland. There were
lovely foreign names in it and pictures of strange looking cities and
ships. It made you feel so happy.

How pale the light was at the window! But that was nice. The fire rose
and fell on the wall. It was like waves. Someone had put coal on and he
heard voices. They were talking. It was the noise of the waves. Or the
waves were talking among themselves as they rose and fell.

He saw the sea of waves, long dark waves rising and falling, dark under
the moonless night. A tiny light twinkled at the pierhead where the
ship was entering: and he saw a multitude of people gathered by the
waters' edge to see the ship that was entering their harbour. A tall
man stood on the deck, looking out towards the flat dark land: and by
the light at the pierhead he saw his face, the sorrowful face of
Brother Michael.

He saw him lift his hand towards the people and heard him say in a loud
voice of sorrow over the waters:

--He is dead. We saw him lying upon the catafalque. A wail of sorrow
went up from the people.

--Parnell! Parnell! He is dead!

They fell upon their knees, moaning in sorrow.

And he saw Dante in a maroon velvet dress and with a green velvet
mantle hanging from her shoulders walking proudly and silently past the
people who knelt by the water's edge.


* * * * *


A great fire, banked high and red, flamed in the grate and under the
ivy-twined branches of the chandelier the Christmas table was spread.
They had come home a little late and still dinner was not ready: but it
would be ready in a jiffy his mother had said. They were waiting for
the door to open and for the servants to come in, holding the big
dishes covered with their heavy metal covers.

All were waiting: uncle Charles, who sat far away in the shadow of the
window, Dante and Mr Casey, who sat in the easy-chairs at either side
of the hearth, Stephen, seated on a chair between them, his feet
resting on the toasted boss. Mr Dedalus looked at himself in the
pierglass above the mantelpiece, waxed out his moustache ends and then,
parting his coat-tails, stood with his back to the glowing fire: and
still from time to time he withdrew a hand from his coat-tail to wax
out one of his moustache ends. Mr Casey leaned his head to one side
and, smiling, tapped the gland of his neck with his fingers. And
Stephen smiled too for he knew now that it was not true that Mr Casey
had a purse of silver in his throat. He smiled to think how the silvery
noise which Mr Casey used to make had deceived him. And when he had
tried to open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse of silver was hidden
there he had seen that the fingers could not be straightened out: and
Mr Casey had told him that he had got those three cramped fingers
making a birthday present for Queen Victoria. Mr Casey tapped the gland
of his neck and smiled at Stephen with sleepy eyes: and Mr Dedalus said
to him:

--Yes. Well now, that's all right. O, we had a good walk, hadn't we,
John? Yes... I wonder if there's any likelihood of dinner this evening.
Yes... O, well now, we got a good breath of ozone round the Head today. Ay,
bedad.

He turned to Dante and said:

--You didn't stir out at all, Mrs Riordan?

Dante frowned and said shortly:

--No.

Mr Dedalus dropped his coat-tails and went over to the sideboard. He
brought forth a great stone jar of whisky from the locker and filled
the decanter slowly, bending now and then to see how much he had poured
in. Then replacing the jar in the locker he poured a little of the
whisky into two glasses, added a little water and came back with them
to the fireplace.

--A thimbleful, John, he said, just to whet your appetite.

Mr Casey took the glass, drank, and placed it near him on the
mantelpiece. Then he said:

--Well, I can't help thinking of our friend Christopher manufacturing...

He broke into a fit of laughter and coughing and added:

--...manufacturing that champagne for those fellows.

Mr Dedalus laughed loudly.

--Is it Christy? he said. There's more cunning in one of those warts
on his bald head than in a pack of jack foxes.

He inclined his head, closed his eyes, and, licking his lips profusely,
began to speak with the voice of the hotel keeper.

--And he has such a soft mouth when he's speaking to you, don't you
know. He's very moist and watery about the dewlaps, God bless him.

Mr Casey was still struggling through his fit of coughing and laughter.
Stephen, seeing and hearing the hotel keeper through his father's face
and voice, laughed.

Mr Dedalus put up his eyeglass and, staring down at him, said quietly
and kindly:

--What are you laughing at, you little puppy, you?

The servants entered and placed the dishes on the table. Mrs Dedalus
followed and the places were arranged.

--Sit over, she said.

Mr Dedalus went to the end of the table and said:

--Now, Mrs Riordan, sit over. John, sit you down, my hearty.

He looked round to where uncle Charles sat and said:

--Now then, sir, there's a bird here waiting for you.

When all had taken their seats he laid his hand on the cover and then
said quickly, withdrawing it:

--Now, Stephen.

Stephen stood up in his place to say the grace before meals:


Bless us, O Lord, and these Thy gifts which through
Thy bounty we are about to receive through Christ our
Lord. Amen.


All blessed themselves and Mr Dedalus with a sigh of pleasure lifted
from the dish the heavy cover pearled around the edge with glistening
drops.

Stephen looked at the plump turkey which had lain, trussed and
skewered, on the kitchen table. He knew that his father had paid a
guinea for it in Dunn's of D'Olier Street and that the man had prodded
it often at the breastbone to show how good it was: and he remembered
the man's voice when he had said:

--Take that one, sir. That's the real Ally Daly.

Why did Mr Barrett in Clongowes call his pandybat a turkey? But
Clongowes was far away: and the warm heavy smell of turkey and ham and
celery rose from the plates and dishes and the great fire was banked
high and red in the grate and the green ivy and red holly made you feel
so happy and when dinner was ended the big plum pudding would be
carried in, studded with peeled almonds and sprigs of holly, with
bluish fire running around it and a little green flag flying from the
top.

It was his first Christmas dinner and he thought of his little brothers
and sisters who were waiting in the nursery, as he had often waited,
till the pudding came. The deep low collar and the Eton jacket made him
feel queer and oldish: and that morning when his mother had brought him
down to the parlour, dressed for mass, his father had cried. That was
because he was thinking of his own father. And uncle Charles had said
so too.

Mr Dedalus covered the dish and began to eat hungrily. Then he said:

--Poor old Christy, he's nearly lopsided now with roguery.

--Simon, said Mrs Dedalus, you haven't given Mrs Riordan any sauce.

Mr Dedalus seized the sauceboat.

--Haven't I? he cried. Mrs Riordan, pity the poor blind. Dante covered
her plate with her hands and said:

--No, thanks.

Mr Dedalus turned to uncle Charles.

--How are you off, sir?

--Right as the mail, Simon.

--You, John?

--I'm all right. Go on yourself.

--Mary? Here, Stephen, here's something to make your hair curl.

He poured sauce freely over Stephen's plate and set the boat again on
the table. Then he asked uncle Charles was it tender. Uncle Charles
could not speak because his mouth was full; but he nodded that it was.

--That was a good answer our friend made to the canon. What? said Mr
Dedalus.

--I didn't think he had that much in him, said Mr Casey.

--I'LL PAY YOUR DUES, FATHER, WHEN YOU CEASE TURNING THE HOUSE OF GOD
INTO A POLLING-BOOTH.

--A nice answer, said Dante, for any man calling himself a catholic to
give to his priest.

--They have only themselves to blame, said Mr Dedalus suavely. If they
took a fool's advice they would confine their attention to religion.

--It is religion, Dante said. They are doing their duty in warning the
people.

--We go to the house of God, Mr Casey said, in all humility to pray to
our Maker and not to hear election addresses.

--It is religion, Dante said again. They are right. They must direct
their flocks.

--And preach politics from the altar, is it? asked Mr Dedalus.

--Certainly, said Dante. It is a question of public morality. A priest
would not be a priest if he did not tell his flock what is right and
what is wrong.

Mrs Dedalus laid down her knife and fork, saying:

--For pity sake and for pity sake let us have no political discussion
on this day of all days in the year.

--Quite right, ma'am, said uncle Charles. Now, Simon, that's quite
enough now. Not another word now.

--Yes, yes, said Mr Dedalus quickly.

He uncovered the dish boldly and said:

--Now then, who's for more turkey?

Nobody answered. Dante said:

--Nice language for any catholic to use!

--Mrs Riordan, I appeal to you, said Mrs Dedalus, to let the matter
drop now.

Dante turned on her and said:

--And am I to sit here and listen to the pastors of my church being
flouted?

--Nobody is saying a word against them, said Mr Dedalus, so long as
they don't meddle in politics.

--The bishops and priests of Ireland have spoken, said Dante, and they
must be obeyed.

--Let them leave politics alone, said Mr Casey, or the people may
leave their church alone.

--You hear? said Dante, turning to Mrs Dedalus.

--Mr Casey! Simon! said Mrs Dedalus, let it end now.

--Too bad! Too bad! said uncle Charles.

--What? cried Mr Dedalus. Were we to desert him at the bidding of the
English people?

--He was no longer worthy to lead, said Dante. He was a public sinner.

--We are all sinners and black sinners, said Mr Casey coldly.

--WOE BE TO THE MAN BY WHOM THE SCANDAL COMETH! said Mrs Riordan. IT
WOULD BE BETTER FOR HIM THAT A MILLSTONE WERE TIED ABOUT HIS NECK AND
THAT HE WERE CAST INTO THE DEPTHS OF THE SEA RATHER THAN THAT HE SHOULD
SCANDALIZE ONE OF THESE, MY LEAST LITTLE ONES. That is the language of
the Holy Ghost.

--And very bad language if you ask me, said Mr Dedalus coolly.

--Simon! Simon! said uncle Charles. The boy.

--Yes, yes, said Mr Dedalus. I meant about the... I was thinking about the
bad language of the railway porter. Well now, that's all right. Here,
Stephen, show me your plate, old chap. Eat away now. Here.

He heaped up the food on Stephen's plate and served uncle Charles and
Mr Casey to large pieces of turkey and splashes of sauce. Mrs Dedalus
was eating little and Dante sat with her hands in her lap. She was red
in the face. Mr Dedalus rooted with the carvers at the end of the dish
and said:

--There's a tasty bit here we call the pope's nose. If any lady or
gentleman...

He held a piece of fowl up on the prong of the carving fork. Nobody
spoke. He put it on his own plate, saying:

--Well, you can't say but you were asked. I think I had better eat it
myself because I'm not well in my health lately.

He winked at Stephen and, replacing the dish-cover, began to eat again.

There was a silence while he ate. Then he said:

--Well now, the day kept up fine after all. There were plenty of
strangers down too.

Nobody spoke. He said again:

--I think there were more strangers down than last Christmas.

He looked round at the others whose faces were bent towards their
plates and, receiving no reply, waited for a moment and said bitterly:

--Well, my Christmas dinner has been spoiled anyhow.

--There could be neither luck nor grace, Dante said, in a house where
there is no respect for the pastors of the church.

Mr Dedalus threw his knife and fork noisily on his plate.

--Respect! he said. Is it for Billy with the lip or for the tub of
guts up in Armagh? Respect!

--Princes of the church, said Mr Casey with slow scorn.

--Lord Leitrim's coachman, yes, said Mr Dedalus.

--They are the Lord's anointed, Dante said. They are an honour to their
country.

--Tub of guts, said Mr Dedalus coarsely. He has a handsome face, mind
you, in repose. You should see that fellow lapping up his bacon and
cabbage of a cold winter's day. O Johnny!

He twisted his features into a grimace of heavy bestiality and made a
lapping noise with his lips.

--Really, Simon, you should not speak that way before Stephen. It's
not right.

--O, he'll remember all this when he grows up, said Dante hotly--the
language he heard against God and religion and priests in his own home.

--Let him remember too, cried Mr Casey to her from across the table,
the language with which the priests and the priests' pawns broke
Parnell's heart and hounded him into his grave. Let him remember that
too when he grows up.

--Sons of bitches! cried Mr Dedalus. When he was down they turned on
him to betray him and rend him like rats in a sewer. Low-lived dogs!
And they look it! By Christ, they look it!

--They behaved rightly, cried Dante. They obeyed their bishops and
their priests. Honour to them!

--Well, it is perfectly dreadful to say that not even for one day in
the year, said Mrs Dedalus, can we be free from these dreadful
disputes!

Uncle Charles raised his hands mildly and said:

--Come now, come now, come now! Can we not have our opinions whatever
they are without this bad temper and this bad language? It is too bad
surely.

Mrs Dedalus spoke to Dante in a low voice but Dante said loudly:

--I will not say nothing. I will defend my church and my religion when
it is insulted and spit on by renegade catholics.

Mr Casey pushed his plate rudely into the middle of the table and,
resting his elbows before him, said in a hoarse voice to his host:

--Tell me, did I tell you that story about a very famous spit?

--You did not, John, said Mr Dedalus.

--Why then, said Mr Casey, it is a most instructive story. It happened
not long ago in the county Wicklow where we are now.

He broke off and, turning towards Dante, said with quiet indignation:

--And I may tell you, ma'am, that I, if you mean me, am no renegade
catholic. I am a catholic as my father was and his father before him
and his father before him again, when we gave up our lives rather than
sell our faith.

--The more shame to you now, Dante said, to speak as you do.

--The story, John, said Mr Dedalus smiling. Let us have the story
anyhow.

--Catholic indeed! repeated Dante ironically. The blackest protestant
in the land would not speak the language I have heard this evening.

Mr Dedalus began to sway his head to and fro, crooning like a country
singer.

--I am no protestant, I tell you again, said Mr Casey, flushing.

Mr Dedalus, still crooning and swaying his head, began to sing in a
grunting nasal tone:


  O, come all you Roman catholics
  That never went to mass.


He took up his knife and fork again in good humour and set to eating,
saying to Mr Casey:

--Let us have the story, John. It will help us to digest.

Stephen looked with affection at Mr Casey's face which stared across
the table over his joined hands. He liked to sit near him at the fire,
looking up at his dark fierce face. But his dark eyes were never fierce
and his slow voice was good to listen to. But why was he then against
the priests? Because Dante must be right then. But he had heard his
father say that she was a spoiled nun and that she had come out of the
convent in the Alleghanies when her brother had got the money from the
savages for the trinkets and the chainies. Perhaps that made her severe
against Parnell. And she did not like him to play with Eileen because
Eileen was a protestant and when she was young she knew children that
used to play with protestants and the protestants used to make fun of
the litany of the Blessed Virgin. TOWER OF IVORY, they used to say,
HOUSE OF GOLD! How could a woman be a tower of ivory or a house of
gold? Who was right then? And he remembered the evening in the
infirmary in Clongowes, the dark waters, the light at the pierhead and
the moan of sorrow from the people when they had heard.

Eileen had long white hands. One evening when playing tig she had put
her hands over his eyes: long and white and thin and cold and soft.
That was ivory: a cold white thing. That was the meaning of TOWER OF
IVORY.

--The story is very short and sweet, Mr Casey said. It was one day
down in Arklow, a cold bitter day, not long before the chief died. May
God have mercy on him!

He closed his eyes wearily and paused. Mr Dedalus took a bone from his
plate and tore some meat from it with his teeth, saying:

--Before he was killed, you mean.

Mr Casey opened his eyes, sighed and went on:

--It was down in Arklow one day. We were down there at a meeting and
after the meeting was over we had to make our way to the railway
station through the crowd. Such booing and baaing, man, you never
heard. They called us all the names in the world. Well there was one
old lady, and a drunken old harridan she was surely, that paid all her
attention to me. She kept dancing along beside me in the mud bawling
and screaming into my face: PRIEST-HUNTER! THE PARIS FUNDS! MR FOX!
KITTY O'SHEA!

--And what did you do, John? asked Mr Dedalus.

--I let her bawl away, said Mr Casey. It was a cold day and to keep up
my heart I had (saving your presence, ma'am) a quid of Tullamore in my
mouth and sure I couldn't say a word in any case because my mouth was
full of tobacco juice.

--Well, John?

--Well. I let her bawl away, to her heart's content, KITTY O'SHEA and
the rest of it till at last she called that lady a name that I won't
sully this Christmas board nor your ears, ma'am, nor my own lips by
repeating.

He paused. Mr Dedalus, lifting his head from the bone, asked:

--And what did you do, John?

--Do! said Mr Casey. She stuck her ugly old face up at me when she
said it and I had my mouth full of tobacco juice. I bent down to her
and PHTH! says I to her like that.

He turned aside and made the act of spitting.

--PHTH! says I to her like that, right into her eye.

He clapped his hand to his eye and gave a hoarse scream of pain.

--O JESUS, MARY AND JOSEPH! says she. I'M BLINDED! I'M BLINDED AND
DROWNDED!

He stopped in a fit of coughing and laughter, repeating:

--I'M BLINDED ENTIRELY.

Mr Dedalus laughed loudly and lay back in his chair while uncle Charles
swayed his head to and fro.

Dante looked terribly angry and repeated while they laughed:

--Very nice! Ha! Very nice!

It was not nice about the spit in the woman's eye.

But what was the name the woman had called Kitty O'Shea that Mr Casey
would not repeat? He thought of Mr Casey walking through the crowds of
people and making speeches from a wagonette. That was what he had been
in prison for and he remembered that one night Sergeant O'Neill had
come to the house and had stood in the hall, talking in a low voice
with his father and chewing nervously at the chinstrap of his cap. And
that night Mr Casey had not gone to Dublin by train but a car had come
to the door and he had heard his father say something about the
Cabinteely road.

He was for Ireland and Parnell and so was his father: and so was Dante
too for one night at the band on the esplanade she had hit a gentleman
on the head with her umbrella because he had taken off his hat when the
band played GOD SAVE THE QUEEN at the end.

Mr Dedalus gave a snort of contempt.

--Ah, John, he said. It is true for them. We are an unfortunate
priest-ridden race and always were and always will be till the end of
the chapter.

Uncle Charles shook his head, saying:

--A bad business! A bad business!

Mr Dedalus repeated:

--A priest-ridden Godforsaken race!

He pointed to the portrait of his grandfather on the wall to his right.

--Do you see that old chap up there, John? he said. He was a good
Irishman when there was no money in the job. He was condemned to death
as a whiteboy. But he had a saying about our clerical friends, that he
would never let one of them put his two feet under his mahogany.

Dante broke in angrily:

--If we are a priest-ridden race we ought to be proud of it! They are the
apple of God's eye. TOUCH THEM NOT, says Christ, FOR THEY ARE THE APPLE
OF MY EYE.

--And can we not love our country then? asked Mr Casey. Are we not to
follow the man that was born to lead us?

--A traitor to his country! replied Dante. A traitor, an adulterer!
The priests were right to abandon him. The priests were always the true
friends of Ireland.

--Were they, faith? said Mr Casey.

He threw his fist on the table and, frowning angrily, protruded one
finger after another.

--Didn't the bishops of Ireland betray us in the time of the union
when Bishop Lanigan presented an address of loyalty to the Marquess
Cornwallis? Didn't the bishops and priests sell the aspirations of
their country in 1829 in return for catholic emancipation? Didn't they
denounce the fenian movement from the pulpit and in the confession box?
And didn't they dishonour the ashes of Terence Bellew MacManus?

His face was glowing with anger and Stephen felt the glow rise to his
own cheek as the spoken words thrilled him. Mr Dedalus uttered a guffaw
of coarse scorn.

--O, by God, he cried, I forgot little old Paul Cullen! Another apple
of God's eye!

Dante bent across the table and cried to Mr Casey:

--Right! Right! They were always right! God and morality and religion
come first.

Mrs Dedalus, seeing her excitement, said to her:

--Mrs Riordan, don't excite yourself answering them.

--God and religion before everything! Dante cried. God and religion
before the world.

Mr Casey raised his clenched fist and brought it down on the table with
a crash.

--Very well then, he shouted hoarsely, if it comes to that, no God for
Ireland!

--John! John! cried Mr Dedalus, seizing his guest by the coat sleeve.

Dante stared across the table, her cheeks shaking. Mr Casey struggled
up from his chair and bent across the table towards her, scraping the
air from before his eyes with one hand as though he were tearing aside
a cobweb.

--No God for Ireland! he cried. We have had too much God In Ireland.
Away with God!

--Blasphemer! Devil! screamed Dante, starting to her feet and almost
spitting in his face.

Uncle Charles and Mr Dedalus pulled Mr Casey back into his chair again,
talking to him from both sides reasonably. He stared before him out of
his dark flaming eyes, repeating:

--Away with God, I say!

Dante shoved her chair violently aside and left the table, upsetting
her napkin-ring which rolled slowly along the carpet and came to rest
against the foot of an easy-chair. Mrs Dedalus rose quickly and
followed her towards the door. At the door Dante turned round violently
and shouted down the room, her cheeks flushed and quivering with rage:

--Devil out of hell! We won! We crushed him to death! Fiend!

The door slammed behind her.

Mr Casey, freeing his arms from his holders, suddenly bowed his head on
his hands with a sob of pain.

--Poor Parnell! he cried loudly. My dead king!

He sobbed loudly and bitterly.

Stephen, raising his terror-stricken face, saw that his father's eyes
were full of tears.


* * * * *


The fellows talked together in little groups.

One fellow said:

--They were caught near the Hill of Lyons.

--Who caught them?

--Mr Gleeson and the minister. They were on a car. The same fellow
added:

--A fellow in the higher line told me.

Fleming asked:

--But why did they run away, tell us?

--I know why, Cecil Thunder said. Because they had fecked cash out of
the rector's room.

--Who fecked it?

--Kickham's brother. And they all went shares in it.

--But that was stealing. How could they have done that?

--A fat lot you know about it, Thunder! Wells said. I know why they
scut.

--Tell us why.

--I was told not to, Wells said.

--O, go on, Wells, all said. You might tell us. We won't let it out.

Stephen bent forward his head to hear. Wells looked round to see if
anyone was coming. Then he said secretly:

--You know the altar wine they keep in the press in the sacristy?

--Yes.

--Well, they drank that and it was found out who did it by the smell.
And that's why they ran away, if you want to know.

And the fellow who had spoken first said:

--Yes, that's what I heard too from the fellow in the higher line.

The fellows all were silent. Stephen stood among them, afraid to speak,
listening. A faint sickness of awe made him feel weak. How could they
have done that? He thought of the dark silent sacristy. There were dark
wooden presses there where the crimped surplices lay quietly folded. It
was not the chapel but still you had to speak under your breath. It was
a holy place. He remembered the summer evening he had been there to be
dressed as boatbearer, the evening of the Procession to the little
altar in the wood. A strange and holy place. The boy that held the
censer had swung it lifted by the middle chain to keep the coals
lighting. That was called charcoal: and it had burned quietly as the
fellow had swung it gently and had given off a weak sour smell. And
then when all were vested he had stood holding out the boat to the
rector and the rector had put a spoonful of incense in it and it had
hissed on the red coals.

The fellows were talking together in little groups here and there on
the playground. The fellows seemed to him to have grown smaller: that
was because a sprinter had knocked him down the day before, a fellow
out of second of grammar. He had been thrown by the fellow's machine
lightly on the cinder path and his spectacles had been broken in three
pieces and some of the grit of the cinders had gone into his mouth.

That was why the fellows seemed to him smaller and farther away and the
goalposts so thin and far and the soft grey sky so high up. But there
was no play on the football grounds for cricket was coming: and some
said that Barnes would be prof and some said it would be Flowers. And
all over the playgrounds they were playing rounders and bowling
twisters and lobs. And from here and from there came the sounds of the
cricket bats through the soft grey air. They said: pick, pack, pock,
puck: little drops of water in a fountain slowly falling in the
brimming bowl.

Athy, who had been silent, said quietly:

--You are all wrong.

All turned towards him eagerly.

--Why?

--Do you know?

--Who told you?

--Tell us, Athy.

Athy pointed across the playground to where Simon Moonan was walking by
himself kicking a stone before him.

--Ask him, he said.

The fellows looked there and then said:

--Why him?

--Is he in it?

Athy lowered his voice and said:

--Do you know why those fellows scut? I will tell you but you must not
let on you know.

--Tell us, Athy. Go on. You might if you know.

He paused for a moment and then said mysteriously:

--They were caught with Simon Moonan and Tusker Boyle in the square one
night.

The fellows looked at him and asked:

--Caught?

--What doing?

Athy said:

--Smugging.

All the fellows were silent: and Athy said:

--And that's why.

Stephen looked at the faces of the fellows but they were all looking
across the playground. He wanted to ask somebody about it. What did
that mean about the smugging in the square? Why did the five fellows
out of the higher line run away for that? It was a joke, he thought.
Simon Moonan had nice clothes and one night he had shown him a ball of
creamy sweets that the fellows of the football fifteen had rolled down
to him along the carpet in the middle of the refectory when he was at
the door. It was the night of the match against the Bective Rangers;
and the ball was made just like a red and green apple only it opened
and it was full of the creamy sweets. And one day Boyle had said that
an elephant had two tuskers instead of two tusks and that was why he
was called Tusker Boyle but some fellows called him Lady Boyle because
he was always at his nails, paring them.

Eileen had long thin cool white hands too because she was a girl. They
were like ivory; only soft. That was the meaning of TOWER OF IVORY but
protestants could not understand it and made fun of it. One day he had
stood beside her looking into the hotel grounds. A waiter was running
up a trail of bunting on the flagstaff and a fox terrier was scampering
to and fro on the sunny lawn. She had put her hand into his pocket
where his hand was and he had felt how cool and thin and soft her hand
was. She had said that pockets were funny things to have: and then all
of a sudden she had broken away and had run laughing down the sloping
curve of the path. Her fair hair had streamed out behind her like gold
in the sun. TOWER OF IVORY. HOUSE OF GOLD. By thinking of things you
could understand them.

But why in the square? You went there when you wanted to do something.
It was all thick slabs of slate and water trickled all day out of tiny
pinholes and there was a queer smell of stale water there. And behind
the door of one of the closets there was a drawing in red pencil of a
bearded man in a Roman dress with a brick in each hand and underneath
was the name of the drawing:


Balbus was building a wall.


Some fellow had drawn it there for a cod. It had a funny face but it
was very like a man with a beard. And on the wall of another closet
there was written in backhand in beautiful writing:


Julius Caesar wrote The Calico Belly.


Perhaps that was why they were there because it was a place where some
fellows wrote things for cod. But all the same it was queer what Athy
said and the way he said it. It was not a cod because they had run
away. He looked with the others across the playground and began to feel
afraid.

At last Fleming said:

--And we are all to be punished for what other fellows did?

--I won't come back, see if I do, Cecil Thunder said. Three days' silence
in the refectory and sending us up for six and eight every minute.

--Yes, said Wells. And old Barrett has a new way of twisting the note
so that you can't open it and fold it again to see how many ferulae you
are to get. I won't come back too.

--Yes, said Cecil Thunder, and the prefect of studies was in second of
grammar this morning.

--Let us get up a rebellion, Fleming said. Will we?

All the fellows were silent. The air was very silent and you could hear
the cricket bats but more slowly than before: pick, pock.

Wells asked:

--What is going to be done to them?

--Simon Moonan and Tusker are going to be flogged, Athy said, and the
fellows in the higher line got their choice of flogging or being
expelled.

--And which are they taking? asked the fellow who had spoken first.

--All are taking expulsion except Corrigan, Athy answered. He's going
to be flogged by Mr Gleeson.

--I know why, Cecil Thunder said. He is right and the other fellows
are wrong because a flogging wears off after a bit but a fellow that
has been expelled from college is known all his life on account of it.
Besides Gleeson won't flog him hard.

--It's best of his play not to, Fleming said.

--I wouldn't like to be Simon Moonan and Tusker, Cecil Thunder said.
But I don't believe they will be flogged. Perhaps they will be sent up
for twice nine.

--No, no, said Athy. They'll both get it on the vital spot. Wells
rubbed himself and said in a crying voice:

--Please, sir, let me off!

Athy grinned and turned up the sleeves of his jacket, saying:

    It can't be helped;
    It must be done.
    So down with your breeches
    And out with your bum.

The fellows laughed; but he felt that they were a little afraid. In the
silence of the soft grey air he heard the cricket bats from here and
from there: pock. That was a sound to hear but if you were hit then you
would feel a pain. The pandybat made a sound too but not like that. The
fellows said it was made of whalebone and leather with lead inside: and
he wondered what was the pain like. There were different kinds of
sounds. A long thin cane would have a high whistling sound and he
wondered what was that pain like. It made him shivery to think of it
and cold: and what Athy said too. But what was there to laugh at in it?
It made him shivery: but that was because you always felt like a shiver
when you let down your trousers. It was the same in the bath when you
undressed yourself. He wondered who had to let them down, the master or
the boy himself. O how could they laugh about it that way?

He looked at Athy's rolled-up sleeves and knuckly inky hands. He had
rolled up his sleeves to show how Mr Gleeson would roll up his sleeves.
But Mr Gleeson had round shiny cuffs and clean white wrists and fattish
white hands and the nails of them were long and pointed. Perhaps he
pared them too like Lady Boyle. But they were terribly long and pointed
nails. So long and cruel they were, though the white fattish hands were
not cruel but gentle. And though he trembled with cold and fright to
think of the cruel long nails and of the high whistling sound of the cane
and of the chill you felt at the end of your shirt when you undressed
yourself yet he felt a feeling of queer quiet pleasure inside him to think
of the white fattish hands, clean and strong and gentle. And he thought of
what Cecil Thunder had said: that Mr Gleeson would not flog Corrigan hard.
And Fleming had said he would not because it was best of his play not
to. But that was not why

A voice from far out on the playground cried:

--All in!

And other voices cried:

--All in! All in!

During the writing lesson he sat with his arms folded, listening to the
slow scraping of the pens. Mr Harford went to and fro making little
signs in red pencil and sometimes sitting beside the boy to show him
how to hold his pen. He had tried to spell out the headline for himself
though he knew already what it was for it was the last of the book.
ZEAL WITHOUT PRUDENCE IS LIKE A SHIP ADRIFT. But the lines of the
letters were like fine invisible threads and it was only by closing his
right eye tight and staring out of the left eye that he could make out
the full curves of the capital.

But Mr Harford was very decent and never got into a wax. All the other
masters got into dreadful waxes. But why were they to suffer for what
fellows in the higher line did? Wells had said that they had drunk some
of the altar wine out of the press in the sacristy and that it had been
found out who had done it by the smell. Perhaps they had stolen a
monstrance to run away with and sell it somewhere. That must have been
a terrible sin, to go in there quietly at night, to open the dark press
and steal the flashing gold thing into which God was put on the altar
in the middle of flowers and candles at benediction while the incense
went up in clouds at both sides as the fellow swung the censer and
Dominic Kelly sang the first part by himself in the choir. But God was
not in it of course when they stole it. But still it was a strange and
a great sin even to touch it. He thought of it with deep awe; a
terrible and strange sin: it thrilled him to think of it in the silence
when the pens scraped lightly. But to drink the altar wine out of the
press and be found out by the smell was a sin too: but it was not
terrible and strange. It only made you feel a little sickish on account
of the smell of the wine. Because on the day when he had made his first
holy communion in the chapel he had shut his eyes and opened his mouth
and put out his tongue a little: and when the rector had stooped down
to give him the holy communion he had smelt a faint winy smell off the
rector's breath after the wine of the mass. The word was beautiful:
wine. It made you think of dark purple because the grapes were dark
purple that grew in Greece outside houses like white temples. But the
faint smell of the rector's breath had made him feel a sick feeling on
the morning of his first communion. The day of your first communion was
the happiest day of your life. And once a lot of generals had asked
Napoleon what was the happiest day of his life. They thought he would
say the day he won some great battle or the day he was made an emperor.
But he said:

--Gentlemen, the happiest day of my life was the day on which I made
my first holy communion.

Father Arnall came in and the Latin lesson began and he remained still,
leaning on the desk with his arms folded. Father Arnall gave out the
theme-books and he said that they were scandalous and that they were
all to be written out again with the corrections at once. But the worst
of all was Fleming's theme because the pages were stuck together by a
blot: and Father Arnall held it up by a corner and said it was an
insult to any master to send him up such a theme. Then he asked Jack
Lawton to decline the noun MARE and Jack Lawton stopped at the ablative
singular and could not go on with the plural.

--You should be ashamed of yourself, said Father Arnall sternly. You,
the leader of the class!

Then he asked the next boy and the next and the next. Nobody knew.
Father Arnall became very quiet, more and more quiet as each boy tried
to answer it and could not. But his face was black-looking and
his eyes were staring though his voice was so quiet. Then he asked
Fleming and Fleming said that the word had no plural. Father Arnall
suddenly shut the book and shouted at him:

--Kneel out there in the middle of the class. You are one of the
idlest boys I ever met. Copy out your themes again the rest of you.

Fleming moved heavily out of his place and knelt between the two last
benches. The other boys bent over their theme-books and began to write.
A silence filled the classroom and Stephen, glancing timidly at Father
Arnall's dark face, saw that it was a little red from the wax he was in.

Was that a sin for Father Arnall to be in a wax or was he allowed to
get into a wax when the boys were idle because that made them study
better or was he only letting on to be in a wax? It was because he was
allowed, because a priest would know what a sin was and would not do
it. But if he did it one time by mistake what would he do to go to
confession? Perhaps he would go to confession to the minister. And if
the minister did it he would go to the rector: and the rector to the
provincial: and the provincial to the general of the jesuits. That was
called the order: and he had heard his father say that they were all
clever men. They could all have become high-up people in the world if
they had not become jesuits. And he wondered what Father Arnall and
Paddy Barrett would have become and what Mr McGlade and Mr Gleeson
would have become if they had not become jesuits. It was hard to think
what because you would have to think of them in a different way with
different coloured coats and trousers and with beards and moustaches
and different kinds of hats.

The door opened quietly and closed. A quick whisper ran through the
class: the prefect of studies. There was an instant of dead silence and
then the loud crack of a pandybat on the last desk. Stephen's heart
leapt up in fear.

--Any boys want flogging here, Father Arnall? cried the prefect of
studies. Any lazy idle loafers that want flogging in this class?

He came to the middle of the class and saw Fleming on his knees.

--Hoho! he cried. Who is this boy? Why is he on his knees? What is
your name, boy?

--Fleming, sir.

--Hoho, Fleming! An idler of course. I can see it in your eye. Why is
he on his knees, Father Arnall?

--He wrote a bad Latin theme, Father Arnall said, and he missed all
the questions in grammar.

--Of course he did! cried the prefect of studies, of course he did! A
born idler! I can see it in the corner of his eye.

He banged his pandybat down on the desk and cried:

--Up, Fleming! Up, my boy!

Fleming stood up slowly.

--Hold out! cried the prefect of studies.

Fleming held out his hand. The pandybat came down on it with a loud
smacking sound: one, two, three, four, five, six.

--Other hand!

The pandybat came down again in six loud quick smacks.

--Kneel down! cried the prefect of studies.

Fleming knelt down, squeezing his hands under his armpits, his face
contorted with pain; but Stephen knew how hard his hands were because
Fleming was always rubbing rosin into them. But perhaps he was in great
pain for the noise of the pandybat was terrible. Stephen's heart was
beating and fluttering.

--At your work, all of you! shouted the prefect of studies. We want no
lazy idle loafers here, lazy idle little schemers. At your work, I tell
you. Father Dolan will be in to see you every day. Father Dolan will be
in tomorrow.

He poked one of the boys in the side with his pandybat, saying:

--You, boy! When will Father Dolan be in again?

--Tomorrow, sir, said Tom Furlong's voice.

--Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow, said the prefect of studies.
Make up your minds for that. Every day Father Dolan. Write away. You,
boy, who are you?

Stephen's heart jumped suddenly.

--Dedalus, sir.

--Why are you not writing like the others?

--I...my...

He could not speak with fright.

--Why is he not writing, Father Arnall?

--He broke his glasses, said Father Arnall, and I exempted him from
work.

--Broke? What is this I hear? What is this? Your name is! said the
prefect of studies.

--Dedalus, sir.

--Out here, Dedalus. Lazy little schemer. I see schemer in your face.
Where did you break your glasses?

Stephen stumbled into the middle of the class, blinded by fear and haste.

--Where did you break your glasses? repeated the prefect of studies.

--The cinder-path, sir.

--Hoho! The cinder-path! cried the prefect of studies. I know that trick.

Stephen lifted his eyes in wonder and saw for a moment Father Dolan's
white-grey not young face, his baldy white-grey head with fluff at the
sides of it, the steel rims of his spectacles and his no-coloured eyes
looking through the glasses. Why did he say he knew that trick?

--Lazy idle little loafer! cried the prefect of studies. Broke my
glasses! An old schoolboy trick! Out with your hand this moment!

Stephen closed his eyes and held out in the air his trembling hand with
the palm upwards. He felt the prefect of studies touch it for a moment
at the fingers to straighten it and then the swish of the sleeve of the
soutane as the pandybat was lifted to strike. A hot burning stinging
tingling blow like the loud crack of a broken stick made his trembling
hand crumple together like a leaf in the fire: and at the sound and the
pain scalding tears were driven into his eyes. His whole body was shaking
with fright, his arm was shaking and his crumpled burning livid hand shook
like a loose leaf in the air. A cry sprang to his lips, a prayer to be let
off. But though the tears scalded his eyes and his limbs quivered with
pain and fright he held back the hot tears and the cry that scalded his
throat.

--Other hand! shouted the prefect of studies.

Stephen drew back his maimed and quivering right arm and held out his
left hand. The soutane sleeve swished again as the pandybat was lifted
and a loud crashing sound and a fierce maddening tingling burning pain
made his hand shrink together with the palms and fingers in a livid
quivering mass. The scalding water burst forth from his eyes and,
burning with shame and agony and fear, he drew back his shaking arm in
terror and burst out into a whine of pain. His body shook with a palsy
of fright and in shame and rage he felt the scalding cry come from his
throat and the scalding tears falling out of his eyes and down his
flaming cheeks.

--Kneel down, cried the prefect of studies.

Stephen knelt down quickly pressing his beaten hands to his sides. To
think of them beaten and swollen with pain all in a moment made him
feel so sorry for them as if they were not his own but someone else's
that he felt sorry for. And as he knelt, calming the last sobs in his
throat and feeling the burning tingling pain pressed into his sides, he
thought of the hands which he had held out in the air with the palms up
and of the firm touch of the prefect of studies when he had steadied
the shaking fingers and of the beaten swollen reddened mass of palm and
fingers that shook helplessly in the air.

--Get at your work, all of you, cried the prefect of studies from the
door. Father Dolan will be in every day to see if any boy, any lazy
idle little loafer wants flogging. Every day. Every day.

The door closed behind him.

The hushed class continued to copy out the themes. Father Arnall rose
from his seat and went among them, helping the boys with gentle words
and telling them the mistakes they had made. His voice was very gentle
and soft. Then he returned to his seat and said to Fleming and Stephen:

--You may return to your places, you two.

Fleming and Stephen rose and, walking to their seats, sat down.
Stephen, scarlet with shame, opened a book quickly with one weak hand
and bent down upon it, his face close to the page.

It was unfair and cruel because the doctor had told him not to read
without glasses and he had written home to his father that morning to
send him a new pair. And Father Arnall had said that he need not study
till the new glasses came. Then to be called a schemer before the class
and to be pandied when he always got the card for first or second and
was the leader of the Yorkists! How could the prefect of studies know
that it was a trick? He felt the touch of the prefect's fingers as they
had steadied his hand and at first he had thought he was going to shake
hands with him because the fingers were soft and firm: but then in an
instant he had heard the swish of the soutane sleeve and the crash. It
was cruel and unfair to make him kneel in the middle of the class then:
and Father Arnall had told them both that they might return to their
places without making any difference between them. He listened to
Father Arnall's low and gentle voice as he corrected the themes.
Perhaps he was sorry now and wanted to be decent. But it was unfair and
cruel. The prefect of studies was a priest but that was cruel and
unfair. And his white-grey face and the no-coloured eyes behind the
steel-rimmed spectacles were cruel looking because he had steadied the
hand first with his firm soft fingers and that was to hit it better and
louder.

--It's a stinking mean thing, that's what it is, said Fleming in the
corridor as the classes were passing out in file to the refectory, to
pandy a fellow for what is not his fault.

--You really broke your glasses by accident, didn't you? Nasty Roche
asked.

Stephen felt his heart filled by Fleming's words and did not answer.

--Of course he did! said Fleming. I wouldn't stand it. I'd go up and
tell the rector on him.

--Yes, said Cecil Thunder eagerly, and I saw him lift the pandy-bat
over his shoulder and he's not allowed to do that.

--Did they hurt you much? Nasty Roche asked.

--Very much, Stephen said.

--I wouldn't stand it, Fleming repeated, from Baldyhead or any other
Baldyhead. It's a stinking mean low trick, that's what it is. I'd go
straight up to the rector and tell him about it after dinner.

--Yes, do. Yes, do, said Cecil Thunder.

--Yes, do. Yes, go up and tell the rector on him, Dedalus, said Nasty
Roche, because he said that he'd come in tomorrow again and pandy you.

--Yes, yes. Tell the rector, all said.

And there were some fellows out of second of grammar listening and one
of them said:

--The senate and the Roman people declared that Dedalus had been
wrongly punished.

It was wrong; it was unfair and cruel; and, as he sat in the refectory,
he suffered time after time in memory the same humiliation until he
began to wonder whether it might not really be that there was something
in his face which made him look like a schemer and he wished he had a
little mirror to see. But there could not be; and it was unjust and
cruel and unfair.

He could not eat the blackish fish fritters they got on Wednesdays in
lent and one of his potatoes had the mark of the spade in it. Yes, he
would do what the fellows had told him. He would go up and tell the
rector that he had been wrongly punished. A thing like that had been
done before by somebody in history, by some great person whose head was
in the books of history. And the rector would declare that he had been
wrongly punished because the senate and the Roman people always
declared that the men who did that had been wrongly punished. Those
were the great men whose names were in Richmal Magnall's Questions.
History was all about those men and what they did and that was what
Peter Parley's Tales about Greece and Rome were all about. Peter Parley
himself was on the first page in a picture. There was a road over a
heath with grass at the side and little bushes: and Peter Parley had a
broad hat like a protestant minister and a big stick and he was walking
fast along the road to Greece and Rome.

It was easy what he had to do. All he had to do was when the dinner was
over and he came out in his turn to go on walking but not out to the
corridor but up the staircase on the right that led to the castle. He
had nothing to do but that: to turn to the right and walk fast up the
staircase and in half a minute he would be in the low dark narrow
corridor that led through the castle to the rector's room. And every
fellow had said that it was unfair, even the fellow out of second of
grammar who had said that about the senate and the Roman people.

What would happen?

He heard the fellows of the higher line stand up at the top of the
refectory and heard their steps as they came down the matting: Paddy
Rath and Jimmy Magee and the Spaniard and the Portuguese and the fifth
was big Corrigan who was going to be flogged by Mr Gleeson. That was
why the prefect of studies had called him a schemer and pandied him for
nothing: and, straining his weak eyes, tired with the tears, he watched
big Corrigan's broad shoulders and big hanging black head passing in the
file. But he had done something and besides Mr Gleeson would not flog him
hard: and he remembered how big Corrigan looked in the bath. He had skin
the same colour as the turf-coloured bogwater in the shallow end of the
bath and when he walked along the side his feet slapped loudly on the wet
tiles and at every step his thighs shook a little because he was fat.

The refectory was half empty and the fellows were still passing out in
file. He could go up the staircase because there was never a priest or
a prefect outside the refectory door. But he could not go. The rector
would side with the prefect of studies and think it was a schoolboy
trick and then the prefect of studies would come in every day the same,
only it would be worse because he would be dreadfully waxy at any
fellow going up to the rector about him. The fellows had told him to go
but they would not go themselves. They had forgotten all about it. No,
it was best to forget all about it and perhaps the prefect of studies
had only said he would come in. No, it was best to hide out of the way
because when you were small and young you could often escape that way.

The fellows at his table stood up. He stood up and passed out among
them in the file. He had to decide. He was coming near the door. If he
went on with the fellows he could never go up to the rector because he
could not leave the playground for that. And if he went and was pandied
all the same all the fellows would make fun and talk about young
Dedalus going up to the rector to tell on the prefect of studies.

He was walking down along the matting and he saw the door before him.
It was impossible: he could not. He thought of the baldy head of the
prefect of studies with the cruel no-coloured eyes looking at him and
he heard the voice of the prefect of studies asking him twice what his
name was. Why could he not remember the name when he was told the first
time? Was he not listening the first time or was it to make fun out of
the name? The great men in the history had names like that and nobody
made fun of them. It was his own name that he should have made fun of
if he wanted to make fun. Dolan: it was like the name of a woman who
washed clothes.

He had reached the door and, turning quickly up to the right, walked up
the stairs and, before he could make up his mind to come back, he had
entered the low dark narrow corridor that led to the castle. And as he
crossed the threshold of the door of the corridor he saw, without
turning his head to look, that all the fellows were looking after him
as they went filing by.

He passed along the narrow dark corridor, passing little doors that
were the doors of the rooms of the community. He peered in front of him
and right and left through the gloom and thought that those must be
portraits. It was dark and silent and his eyes were weak and tired with
tears so that he could not see. But he thought they were the portraits
of the saints and great men of the order who were looking down on him
silently as he passed: saint Ignatius Loyola holding an open book and
pointing to the words AD MAJOREM DEI GLORIAM in it; saint Francis
Xavier pointing to his chest; Lorenzo Ricci with his berretta on his
head like one of the prefects of the lines, the three patrons of holy
youth--saint Stanislaus Kostka, saint Aloysius Gonzago, and Blessed
John Berchmans, all with young faces because they died when they were
young, and Father Peter Kenny sitting in a chair wrapped in a big
cloak.

He came out on the landing above the entrance hall and looked about
him. That was where Hamilton Rowan had passed and the marks of the
soldiers' slugs were there. And it was there that the old servants had
seen the ghost in the white cloak of a marshal.

An old servant was sweeping at the end of the landing. He asked him
where was the rector's room and the old servant pointed to the door at
the far end and looked after him as he went on to it and knocked.

There was no answer. He knocked again more loudly and his heart jumped
when he heard a muffled voice say:

--Come in!

He turned the handle and opened the door and fumbled for the handle of
the green baize door inside. He found it and pushed it open and went in.

He saw the rector sitting at a desk writing. There was a skull on the
desk and a strange solemn smell in the room like the old leather of
chairs.

His heart was beating fast on account of the solemn place he was in and
the silence of the room: and he looked at the skull and at the rector's
kind-looking face.

--Well, my little man, said the rector, what is it?

Stephen swallowed down the thing in his throat and said:

--I broke my glasses, sir.

The rector opened his mouth and said:

--O!

Then he smiled and said:

--Well, if we broke our glasses we must write home for a new pair.

--I wrote home, sir, said Stephen, and Father Arnall said I am not to
study till they come.

--Quite right! said the rector.

Stephen swallowed down the thing again and tried to keep his legs and
his voice from shaking.

--But, sir--

--Yes?

--Father Dolan came in today and pandied me because I was not writing
my theme.

The rector looked at him in silence and he could feel the blood rising
to his face and the tears about to rise to his eyes.

The rector said:

--Your name is Dedalus, isn't it?

--Yes, sir...

--And where did you break your glasses?

--On the cinder-path, sir. A fellow was coming out of the bicycle
house and I fell and they got broken. I don't know the fellow's name.

The rector looked at him again in silence. Then he smiled and said:

--O, well, it was a mistake; I am sure Father Dolan did not know.

--But I told him I broke them, sir, and he pandied me.

--Did you tell him that you had written home for a new pair? the
rector asked.

--No, sir.

--O well then, said the rector, Father Dolan did not understand. You can
say that I excuse you from your lessons for a few days.

Stephen said quickly for fear his trembling would prevent him:

--Yes, sir, but Father Dolan said he will come in tomorrow to pandy me
again for it.

--Very well, the rector said, it is a mistake and I shall speak to
Father Dolan myself. Will that do now?

Stephen felt the tears wetting his eyes and murmured:

--O yes sir, thanks.

The rector held his hand across the side of the desk where the skull
was and Stephen, placing his hand in it for a moment, felt a cool moist
palm.

--Good day now, said the rector, withdrawing his hand and bowing.

--Good day, sir, said Stephen.

He bowed and walked quietly out of the room, closing the doors
carefully and slowly.

But when he had passed the old servant on the landing and was again in
the low narrow dark corridor he began to walk faster and faster. Faster
and faster he hurried on through the gloom excitedly. He bumped his
elbow against the door at the end and, hurrying down the staircase,
walked quickly through the two corridors and out into the air.

He could hear the cries of the fellows on the playgrounds. He broke
into a run and, running quicker and quicker, ran across the cinderpath
and reached the third line playground, panting.

The fellows had seen him running. They closed round him in a ring,
pushing one against another to hear.

--Tell us! Tell us!

--What did he say?

--Did you go in?

--What did he say?

--Tell us! Tell us!

He told them what he had said and what the rector had said and, when he
had told them, all the fellows flung their caps spinning up into the
air and cried:

--Hurroo!

They caught their caps and sent them up again spinning sky-high and
cried again:

--Hurroo! Hurroo!

They made a cradle of their locked hands and hoisted him up among them
and carried him along till he struggled to get free. And when he had
escaped from them they broke away in all directions, flinging their
caps again into the air and whistling as they went spinning up and
crying:

--Hurroo!

And they gave three groans for Baldyhead Dolan and three cheers for
Conmee and they said he was the decentest rector that was ever in
Clongowes.

The cheers died away in the soft grey air. He was alone. He was happy
and free; but he would not be anyway proud with Father Dolan. He would
be very quiet and obedient: and he wished that he could do something
kind for him to show him that he was not proud.

The air was soft and grey and mild and evening was coming. There was
the smell of evening in the air, the smell of the fields in the country
where they digged up turnips to peel them and eat them when they went
out for a walk to Major Barton's, the smell there was in the little
wood beyond the pavilion where the gallnuts were.

The fellows were practising long shies and bowling lobs and slow
twisters. In the soft grey silence he could hear the bump of the balls:
and from here and from there through the quiet air the sound of the
cricket bats: pick, pack, pock, puck: like drops of water in a fountain
falling softly in the brimming bowl.




Chapter 2


Uncle Charles smoked such black twist that at last his nephew suggested
to him to enjoy his morning smoke in a little outhouse at the end of
the garden.

--Very good, Simon. All serene, Simon, said the old man tranquilly.
Anywhere you like. The outhouse will do me nicely: it will be more
salubrious.

--Damn me, said Mr Dedalus frankly, if I know how you can smoke such
villainous awful tobacco. It's like gunpowder, by God.

--It's very nice, Simon, replied the old man. Very cool and
mollifying.

Every morning, therefore, uncle Charles repaired to his outhouse but
not before he had greased and brushed scrupulously his back hair and
brushed and put on his tall hat. While he smoked the brim of his tall
hat and the bowl of his pipe were just visible beyond the jambs of the
outhouse door. His arbour, as he called the reeking outhouse which he
shared with the cat and the garden tools, served him also as a
sounding-box: and every morning he hummed contentedly one of his
favourite songs: O, TWINE ME A BOWER or BLUE EYES AND GOLDEN HAIR or
THE GROVES OF BLARNEY while the grey and blue coils of smoke rose
slowly from his pipe and vanished in the pure air.

During the first part of the summer in Blackrock uncle Charles was
Stephen's constant companion. Uncle Charles was a hale old man with a
well tanned skin, rugged features and white side whiskers. On week days
he did messages between the house in Carysfort Avenue and those shops
in the main street of the town with which the family dealt. Stephen was
glad to go with him on these errands for uncle Charles helped him very
liberally to handfuls of whatever was exposed in open boxes and barrels
outside the counter. He would seize a handful of grapes and sawdust or
three or four American apples and thrust them generously into his
grandnephew's hand while the shopman smiled uneasily; and, on Stephen's
feigning reluctance to take them, he would frown and say:

--Take them, sir. Do you hear me, sir? They're good for your bowels.

When the order list had been booked the two would go on to the park
where an old friend of Stephen's father, Mike Flynn, would be found
seated on a bench, waiting for them. Then would begin Stephen's run
round the park. Mike Flynn would stand at the gate near the railway
station, watch in hand, while Stephen ran round the track in the style
Mike Flynn favoured, his head high lifted, his knees well lifted and
his hands held straight down by his sides. When the morning practice
was over the trainer would make his comments and sometimes illustrate
them by shuffling along for a yard or so comically in an old pair of
blue canvas shoes. A small ring of wonderstruck children and nursemaids
would gather to watch him and linger even when he and uncle Charles had
sat down again and were talking athletics and politics. Though he had
heard his father say that Mike Flynn had put some of the best runners
of modern times through his hands Stephen often glanced at his
trainer's flabby stubble-covered face, as it bent over the long stained
fingers through which he rolled his cigarette, and with pity at the
mild lustreless blue eyes which would look up suddenly from the task
and gaze vaguely into the blue distance while the long swollen fingers
ceased their rolling and grains and fibres of tobacco fell back into
the pouch.

On the way home uncle Charles would often pay a visit to the chapel
and, as the font was above Stephen's reach, the old man would dip his
hand and then sprinkle the water briskly about Stephen's clothes and on
the floor of the porch. While he prayed he knelt on his red
handkerchief and read above his breath from a thumb blackened prayer
book wherein catchwords were printed at the foot of every page. Stephen
knelt at his side respecting, though he did not share, his piety. He
often wondered what his grand-uncle prayed for so seriously. Perhaps he
prayed for the souls in purgatory or for the grace of a happy death or
perhaps he prayed that God might send him back a part of the big
fortune he had squandered in Cork.

On Sundays Stephen with his father and his grand-uncle took their
constitutional. The old man was a nimble walker in spite of his corns
and often ten or twelve miles of the road were covered. The little
village of Stillorgan was the parting of the ways. Either they went to
the left towards the Dublin mountains or along the Goatstown road and
thence into Dundrum, coming home by Sandyford. Trudging along the road
or standing in some grimy wayside public house his elders spoke
constantly of the subjects nearer their hearts, of Irish politics, of
Munster and of the legends of their own family, to all of which Stephen
lent an avid ear. Words which he did not understand he said over and
over to himself till he had learnt them by heart: and through them he
had glimpses of the real world about them. The hour when he too would
take part in the life of that world seemed drawing near and in secret
he began to make ready for the great part which he felt awaited him the
nature of which he only dimly apprehended.

His evenings were his own; and he pored over a ragged translation of
THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO. The figure of that dark avenger stood forth
in his mind for whatever he had heard or divined in childhood of the
strange and terrible. At night he built up on the parlour table an
image of the wonderful island cave out of transfers and paper flowers
and coloured tissue paper and strips of the silver and golden paper in
which chocolate is wrapped. When he had broken up this scenery, weary
of its tinsel, there would come to his mind the bright picture of
Marseille, of sunny trellises, and of Mercedes.

Outside Blackrock, on the road that led to the mountains, stood a small
whitewashed house in the garden of which grew many rosebushes: and in
this house, he told himself, another Mercedes lived. Both on the
outward and on the homeward journey he measured distance by this
landmark: and in his imagination he lived through a long train of
adventures, marvellous as those in the book itself, towards the close
of which there appeared an image of himself, grown older and sadder,
standing in a moonlit garden with Mercedes who had so many years before
slighted his love, and with a sadly proud gesture of refusal, saying:

--Madam, I never eat muscatel grapes.

He became the ally of a boy named Aubrey Mills and founded with him a
gang of adventurers in the avenue. Aubrey carried a whistle dangling
from his buttonhole and a bicycle lamp attached to his belt while the
others had short sticks thrust daggerwise through theirs. Stephen, who
had read of Napoleon's plain style of dress, chose to remain unadorned
and thereby heightened for himself the pleasure of taking counsel with
his lieutenant before giving orders. The gang made forays into the
gardens of old maids or went down to the castle and fought a battle on
the shaggy weed-grown rocks, coming home after it weary stragglers with
the stale odours of the foreshore in their nostrils and the rank oils
of the seawrack upon their hands and in their hair.

Aubrey and Stephen had a common milkman and often they drove out in the
milk-car to Carrickmines where the cows were at grass. While the men
were milking the boys would take turns in riding the tractable mare
round the field. But when autumn came the cows were driven home from
the grass: and the first sight of the filthy cowyard at Stradbrook with
its foul green puddles and clots of liquid dung and steaming bran
troughs, sickened Stephen's heart. The cattle which had seemed so
beautiful in the country on sunny days revolted him and he could not
even look at the milk they yielded.

The coming of September did not trouble him this year for he was not to
be sent back to Clongowes. The practice in the park came to an end when
Mike Flynn went into hospital. Aubrey was at school and had only an
hour or two free in the evening. The gang fell asunder and there were
no more nightly forays or battles on the rocks. Stephen sometimes went
round with the car which delivered the evening milk and these chilly
drives blew away his memory of the filth of the cowyard and he felt no
repugnance at seeing the cow hairs and hayseeds on the milkman's coat.
Whenever the car drew up before a house he waited to catch a glimpse of
a well scrubbed kitchen or of a softly lighted hall and to see how the
servant would hold the jug and how she would close the door. He thought
it should be a pleasant life enough, driving along the roads every
evening to deliver milk, if he had warm gloves and a fat bag of
gingernuts in his pocket to eat from. But the same foreknowledge which
had sickened his heart and made his legs sag suddenly as he raced round
the park, the same intuition which had made him glance with mistrust at
his trainer's flabby stubble-covered face as it bent heavily over his long
stained fingers, dissipated any vision of the future. In a vague way he
understood that his father was in trouble and that this was the reason
why he himself had not been sent back to Clongowes. For some time he
had felt the slight change in his house; and those changes in what he
had deemed unchangeable were so many slight shocks to his boyish
conception of the world. The ambition which he felt astir at times in
the darkness of his soul sought no outlet. A dusk like that of the
outer world obscured his mind as he heard the mare's hoofs clattering
along the tramtrack on the Rock Road and the great can swaying and
rattling behind him.

He returned to Mercedes and, as he brooded upon her image, a strange
unrest crept into his blood. Sometimes a fever gathered within him and
led him to rove alone in the evening along the quiet avenue. The peace
of the gardens and the kindly lights in the windows poured a tender
influence into his restless heart. The noise of children at play
annoyed him and their silly voices made him feel, even more keenly than
he had felt at Clongowes, that he was different from others. He did not
want to play. He wanted to meet in the real world the unsubstantial
image which his soul so constantly beheld. He did not know where to
seek it or how, but a premonition which led him on told him that this
image would, without any overt act of his, encounter him. They would
meet quietly as if they had known each other and had made their tryst,
perhaps at one of the gates or in some more secret place. They would be
alone, surrounded by darkness and silence: and in that moment of
supreme tenderness he would be transfigured.

He would fade into something impalpable under her eyes and then in a
moment he would be transfigured. Weakness and timidity and inexperience
would fall from him in that magic moment.


* * * * *


Two great yellow caravans had halted one morning before the door and
men had come tramping into the house to dismantle it. The furniture had
been hustled out through the front garden which was strewn with wisps
of straw and rope ends and into the huge vans at the gate. When all had
been safely stowed the vans had set off noisily down the avenue: and
from the window of the railway carriage, in which he had sat with his
red-eyed mother, Stephen had seen them lumbering along the Merrion
Road.

The parlour fire would not draw that evening and Mr Dedalus rested the
poker against the bars of the grate to attract the flame. Uncle Charles
dozed in a corner of the half furnished uncarpeted room and near him
the family portraits leaned against the wall. The lamp on the table
shed a weak light over the boarded floor, muddied by the feet of the
van-men. Stephen sat on a footstool beside his father listening to a
long and incoherent monologue. He understood little or nothing of it at
first but he became slowly aware that his father had enemies and that
some fight was going to take place. He felt, too, that he was being
enlisted for the fight, that some duty was being laid upon his
shoulders. The sudden flight from the comfort and revery of Blackrock,
the passage through the gloomy foggy city, the thought of the bare
cheerless house in which they were now to live made his heart heavy,
and again an intuition, a foreknowledge of the future came to him. He
understood also why the servants had often whispered together in the
hall and why his father had often stood on the hearthrug with his back
to the fire, talking loudly to uncle Charles who urged him to sit down
and eat his dinner.

--There's a crack of the whip left in me yet, Stephen, old chap, said
Mr Dedalus, poking at the dull fire with fierce energy. We're not dead
yet, sonny. No, by the Lord Jesus (God forgive me) not half dead.

Dublin was a new and complex sensation. Uncle Charles had grown so
witless that he could no longer be sent out on errands and the disorder
in settling in the new house left Stephen freer than he had been in
Blackrock. In the beginning he contented himself with circling timidly
round the neighbouring square or, at most, going half way down one of
the side streets but when he had made a skeleton map of the city in his
mind he followed boldly one of its central lines until he reached the
customhouse. He passed unchallenged among the docks and along the quays
wondering at the multitude of corks that lay bobbing on the surface of
the water in a thick yellow scum, at the crowds of quay porters and the
rumbling carts and the ill-dressed bearded policeman. The vastness and
strangeness of the life suggested to him by the bales of merchandise
stocked along the walls or swung aloft out of the holds of steamers
wakened again in him the unrest which had sent him wandering in the
evening from garden to garden in search of Mercedes. And amid this new
bustling life he might have fancied himself in another Marseille but that
he missed the bright sky and the sun-warmed trellises of the wineshops.
A vague dissatisfaction grew up within him as he looked on the quays and
on the river and on the lowering skies and yet he continued to wander up
and down day after day as if he really sought someone that eluded him.

He went once or twice with his mother to visit their relatives: and
though they passed a jovial array of shops lit up and adorned for
Christmas his mood of embittered silence did not leave him. The causes
of his embitterment were many, remote and near. He was angry with
himself for being young and the prey of restless foolish impulses,
angry also with the change of fortune which was reshaping the world
about him into a vision of squalor and insincerity. Yet his anger lent
nothing to the vision. He chronicled with patience what he saw,
detaching himself from it and tasting its mortifying flavour in secret.

He was sitting on the backless chair in his aunt's kitchen. A lamp with
a reflector hung on the japanned wall of the fireplace and by its light
his aunt was reading the evening paper that lay on her knees. She
looked a long time at a smiling picture that was set in it and said
musingly:

--The beautiful Mabel Hunter!

A ringletted girl stood on tiptoe to peer at the picture and said softly:

--What is she in, mud?

--In a pantomime, love.

The child leaned her ringletted head against her mother's sleeve,
gazing on the picture, and murmured as if fascinated:

--The beautiful Mabel Hunter!

As if fascinated, her eyes rested long upon those demurely taunting
eyes and she murmured devotedly:

--Isn't she an exquisite creature?

And the boy who came in from the street, stamping crookedly under his
stone of coal, heard her words. He dropped his load promptly on the
floor and hurried to her side to see. He mauled the edges of the paper
with his reddened and blackened hands, shouldering her aside and
complaining that he could not see.

He was sitting in the narrow breakfast room high up in the old
dark-windowed house. The firelight flickered on the wall and beyond the
window a spectral dusk was gathering upon the river. Before the fire an
old woman was busy making tea and, as she bustled at the task, she told
in a low voice of what the priest and the doctor had said. She told too
of certain changes they had seen in her of late and of her odd ways and
sayings. He sat listening to the words and following the ways of
adventure that lay open in the coals, arches and vaults and winding
galleries and jagged caverns.

Suddenly he became aware of something in the doorway. A skull appeared
suspended in the gloom of the doorway. A feeble creature like a monkey
was there, drawn thither by the sound of voices at the fire. A whining
voice came from the door asking:

--Is that Josephine?

The old bustling woman answered cheerily from the fireplace:

--No, Ellen, it's Stephen.

--O... O, good evening, Stephen.

He answered the greeting and saw a silly smile break over the face in
the doorway.

--Do you want anything, Ellen? asked the old woman at the fire.

But she did not answer the question and said:

--I thought it was Josephine. I thought you were Josephine, Stephen.

And, repeating this several times, she fell to laughing feebly.

He was sitting in the midst of a children's party at Harold's Cross.
His silent watchful manner had grown upon him and he took little part
in the games. The children, wearing the spoils of their crackers,
danced and romped noisily and, though he tried to share their
merriment, he felt himself a gloomy figure amid the gay cocked hats and
sunbonnets.

But when he had sung his song and withdrawn into a snug corner of the
room he began to taste the joy of his loneliness. The mirth, which in
the beginning of the evening had seemed to him false and trivial, was
like a soothing air to him, passing gaily by his senses, hiding from
other eyes the feverish agitation of his blood while through the
circling of the dancers and amid the music and laughter her glance
travelled to his corner, flattering, taunting, searching, exciting his
heart.

In the hall the children who had stayed latest were putting on their
things: the party was over. She had thrown a shawl about her and, as
they went together towards the tram, sprays of her fresh warm breath
flew gaily above her cowled head and her shoes tapped blithely on the
glassy road.

It was the last tram. The lank brown horses knew it and shook their
bells to the clear night in admonition. The conductor talked with the
driver, both nodding often in the green light of the lamp. On the empty
seats of the tram were scattered a few coloured tickets. No sound of
footsteps came up or down the road. No sound broke the peace of the
night save when the lank brown horses rubbed their noses together and
shook their bells.

They seemed to listen, he on the upper step and she on the lower. She
came up to his step many times and went down to hers again between
their phrases and once or twice stood close beside him for some moments
on the upper step, forgetting to go down, and then went down. His heart
danced upon her movements like a cork upon a tide. He heard what her
eyes said to him from beneath their cowl and knew that in some dim
past, whether in life or revery, he had heard their tale before. He saw
her urge her vanities, her fine dress and sash and long black
stockings, and knew that he had yielded to them a thousand times. Yet a
voice within him spoke above the noise of his dancing heart, asking him
would he take her gift to which he had only to stretch out his hand.
And he remembered the day when he and Eileen had stood looking into the
hotel grounds, watching the waiters running up a trail of bunting on
the flagstaff and the fox terrier scampering to and fro on the sunny
lawn and how, all of a sudden, she had broken out into a peal of
laughter and had run down the sloping curve of the path. Now, as then,
he stood listlessly in his place, seemingly a tranquil watcher of the
scene before him.

--She too wants me to catch hold of her, he thought. That's why she
came with me to the tram. I could easily catch hold of her when she
comes up to my step: nobody is looking. I could hold her and kiss her.

But he did neither: and, when he was sitting alone in the deserted
tram, he tore his ticket into shreds and stared gloomily at the
corrugated footboard.


* * * * *


The next day he sat at his table in the bare upper room for many hours.
Before him lay a new pen, a new bottle of ink and a new emerald
exercise. From force of habit he had written at the top of the
first page the initial letters of the jesuit motto: A.M.D.G. On the
first line of the page appeared the title of the verses he was trying
to write: To E-- C--. He knew it was right to begin so for he had seen
similar titles in the collected poems of Lord Byron. When he had
written this title and drawn an ornamental line underneath he fell into
a daydream and began to draw diagrams on the cover of the book. He saw
himself sitting at his table in Bray the morning after the discussion
at the Christmas dinner table, trying to write a poem about Parnell on
the back of one of his father's second moiety notices. But his brain
had then refused to grapple with the theme and, desisting, he had
covered the page with the names and addresses of certain of his
classmates:

    Roderick Kickham
    John Lawton
    Anthony MacSwiney
    Simon Moonan

Now it seemed as if he would fail again but, by dint of brooding on the
incident, he thought himself into confidence. During this process all
those elements which he deemed common and insignificant fell out of the
scene. There remained no trace of the tram itself nor of the tram-men
nor of the horses: nor did he and she appear vividly. The verses told
only of the night and the balmy breeze and the maiden lustre of the
moon. Some undefined sorrow was hidden in the hearts of the
protagonists as they stood in silence beneath the leafless trees and
when the moment of farewell had come the kiss, which had been withheld
by one, was given by both. After this the letters L. D. S. were written
at the foot of the page, and, having hidden the book, he went into his
mother's bedroom and gazed at his face for a long time in the mirror of
her dressing-table.

But his long spell of leisure and liberty was drawing to its end. One
evening his father came home full of news which kept his tongue busy
all through dinner. Stephen had been awaiting his father's return for
there had been mutton hash that day and he knew that his father would
make him dip his bread in the gravy. But he did not relish the hash for
the mention of Clongowes had coated his palate with a scum of disgust.

--I walked bang into him, said Mr Dedalus for the fourth time, just at
the corner of the square.

--Then I suppose, said Mrs Dedalus, he will be able to arrange it. I
mean about Belvedere.

--Of course he will, said Mr Dedalus. Don't I tell you he's provincial
of the order now?

--I never liked the idea of sending him to the christian brothers
myself, said Mrs Dedalus.

--Christian brothers be damned! said Mr Dedalus. Is it with Paddy
Stink and Micky Mud? No, let him stick to the jesuits in God's name
since he began with them. They'll be of service to him in after years.
Those are the fellows that can get you a position.

--And they're a very rich order, aren't they, Simon?

--Rather. They live well, I tell you. You saw their table at
Clongowes. Fed up, by God, like gamecocks.

Mr Dedalus pushed his plate over to Stephen and bade him finish what
was on it.

--Now then, Stephen, he said, you must put your shoulder to the wheel,
old chap. You've had a fine long holiday.

--O, I'm sure he'll work very hard now, said Mrs Dedalus, especially
when he has Maurice with him.

--O, Holy Paul, I forgot about Maurice, said Mr Dedalus. Here,
Maurice! Come here, you thick-headed ruffian! Do you know I'm going to
send you to a college where they'll teach you to spell c.a.t. cat. And
I'll buy you a nice little penny handkerchief to keep your nose dry.
Won't that be grand fun?

Maurice grinned at his father and then at his brother.

Mr Dedalus screwed his glass into his eye and stared hard at both his
sons. Stephen mumbled his bread without answering his father's gaze.

--By the bye, said Mr Dedalus at length, the rector, or provincial
rather, was telling me that story about you and Father Dolan. You're an
impudent thief, he said.

--O, he didn't, Simon!

--Not he! said Mr Dedalus. But he gave me a great account of the whole
affair. We were chatting, you know, and one word borrowed another. And,
by the way, who do you think he told me will get that job in the
corporation? But I'll tell you that after. Well, as I was saying, we
were chatting away quite friendly and he asked me did our friend here
wear glasses still, and then he told me the whole story.

--And was he annoyed, Simon?

--Annoyed? Not he! MANLY LITTLE CHAP! he said.

Mr Dedalus imitated the mincing nasal tone of the provincial.

Father Dolan and I, when I told them all at dinner about it, Father
Dolan and I had a great laugh over it. YOU BETTER MIND YOURSELF FATHER
DOLAN, said I, OR YOUNG DEDALUS WILL SEND YOU UP FOR TWICE NINE. We had
a famous laugh together over it. Ha! Ha! Ha!

Mr Dedalus turned to his wife and interjected in his natural voice:

--Shows you the spirit in which they take the boys there. O, a jesuit
for your life, for diplomacy!

He reassumed the provincial's voice and repeated:

--I TOLD THEM ALL AT DINNER ABOUT IT AND FATHER DOLAN AND I AND ALL OF
US WE HAD A HEARTY LAUGH TOGETHER OVER IT. HA! HA! HA!


* * * * *


The night of the Whitsuntide play had come and Stephen from the window
of the dressing-room looked out on the small grass-plot across which
lines of Chinese lanterns were stretched. He watched the visitors come
down the steps from the house and pass into the theatre. Stewards in
evening dress, old Belvedereans, loitered in groups about the entrance
to the theatre and ushered in the visitors with ceremony. Under the
sudden glow of a lantern he could recognize the smiling face of a
priest.

The Blessed Sacrament had been removed from the tabernacle and the
first benches had been driven back so as to leave the dais of the altar
and the space before it free. Against the walls stood companies of
barbells and Indian clubs; the dumbbells were piled in one corner: and
in the midst of countless hillocks of gymnasium shoes and sweaters and
singlets in untidy brown parcels there stood the stout leather-jacketed
vaulting horse waiting its turn to be carried up on the stage
and set in the middle of the winning team at the end of the gymnastic
display.

Stephen, though in deference to his reputation for essay writing he had
been elected secretary to the gymnasium, had had no part in the first
section of the programme but in the play which formed the second
section he had the chief part, that of a farcical pedagogue. He had
been cast for it on account of his stature and grave manners for he was
now at the end of his second year at Belvedere and in number two.

A score of the younger boys in white knickers and singlets came
pattering down from the stage, through the vestry and to the chapel.
The vestry and chapel were peopled with eager masters and boys. The
plump bald sergeant major was testing with his foot the springboard of
the vaulting horse. The lean young man in a long overcoat, who was to
give a special display of intricate club swinging, stood near watching
with interest, his silver-coated clubs peeping out of his deep
side-pockets. The hollow rattle of the wooden dumbbells was heard as
another team made ready to go up on the stage: and in another moment the
excited prefect was hustling the boys through the vestry like a flock of
geese, flapping the wings of his soutane nervously and crying to the
laggards to make haste. A little troop of Neapolitan peasants were
practising their steps at the end of the chapel, some circling their arms
above their heads, some swaying their baskets of paper violets and
curtsying. In a dark corner of the chapel at the gospel side of the altar
a stout old lady knelt amid her copious black skirts. When she stood up a
pink-dressed figure, wearing a curly golden wig and an old-fashioned straw
sunbonnet, with black pencilled eyebrows and cheeks delicately rouged and
powdered, was discovered. A low murmur of curiosity ran round the chapel
at the discovery of this girlish figure. One of the prefects, smiling and
nodding his head, approached the dark corner and, having bowed to the
stout old lady, said pleasantly:

--Is this a beautiful young lady or a doll that you have here, Mrs
Tallon?

Then, bending down to peer at the smiling painted face under the leaf
of the bonnet, he exclaimed:

--No! Upon my word I believe it's little Bertie Tallon after all!

Stephen at his post by the window heard the old lady and the priest
laugh together and heard the boys' murmurs of admiration behind him as
they passed forward to see the little boy who had to dance the
sunbonnet dance by himself. A movement of impatience escaped him. He
let the edge of the blind fall and, stepping down from the bench on
which he had been standing, walked out of the chapel.

He passed out of the schoolhouse and halted under the shed that flanked
the garden. From the theatre opposite came the muffled noise of the
audience and sudden brazen clashes of the soldiers' band. The light
spread upwards from the glass roof making the theatre seem a festive
ark, anchored among the hulks of houses, her frail cables of lanterns
looping her to her moorings. A side door of the theatre opened suddenly
and a shaft of light flew across the grass plots. A sudden burst of
music issued from the ark, the prelude of a waltz: and when the side
door closed again the listener could hear the faint rhythm of the
music. The sentiment of the opening bars, their languor and supple
movement, evoked the incommunicable emotion which had been the cause of
all his day's unrest and of his impatient movement of a moment before.
His unrest issued from him like a wave of sound: and on the tide of
flowing music the ark was journeying, trailing her cables of lanterns
in her wake. Then a noise like dwarf artillery broke the movement. It
was the clapping that greeted the entry of the dumbbell team on the
stage.

At the far end of the shed near the street a speck of pink light showed
in the darkness and as he walked towards it he became aware of a faint
aromatic odour. Two boys were standing in the shelter of a doorway,
smoking, and before he reached them he had recognised Heron by his
voice.

--Here comes the noble Dedalus! cried a high throaty voice. Welcome to
our trusty friend!

This welcome ended in a soft peal of mirthless laughter as Heron
salaamed and then began to poke the ground with his cane.

--Here I am, said Stephen, halting and glancing from Heron to his
friend.

The latter was a stranger to him but in the darkness, by the aid of the
glowing cigarette tips, he could make out a pale dandyish face over
which a smile was travelling slowly, a tall overcoated figure and a
hard hat. Heron did not trouble himself about an introduction but said
instead:

--I was just telling my friend Wallis what a lark it would be tonight
if you took off the rector in the part of the schoolmaster. It would be
a ripping good joke.

Heron made a poor attempt to imitate for his friend Wallis the rector's
pedantic bass and then, laughing at his failure, asked Stephen to do
it.

--Go on, Dedalus, he urged, you can take him off rippingly. HE THAT WILL
NOT HEAR THE CHURCHA LET HIM BE TO THEEA AS THE HEATHENA AND THE
PUBLICANA.

The imitation was prevented by a mild expression of anger from Wallis
in whose mouthpiece the cigarette had become too tightly wedged.

--Damn this blankety blank holder, he said, taking it from his mouth
and smiling and frowning upon it tolerantly. It's always getting stuck
like that. Do you use a holder?

--I don't smoke, answered Stephen.

--No, said Heron, Dedalus is a model youth. He doesn't smoke and he
doesn't go to bazaars and he doesn't flirt and he doesn't damn anything
or damn all.

Stephen shook his head and smiled in his rival's flushed and mobile
face, beaked like a bird's. He had often thought it strange that
Vincent Heron had a bird's face as well as a bird's name. A shock of
pale hair lay on the forehead like a ruffled crest: the forehead was
narrow and bony and a thin hooked nose stood out between the close-set
prominent eyes which were light and inexpressive. The rivals were
school friends. They sat together in class, knelt together in the
chapel, talked together after beads over their lunches. As the fellows
in number one were undistinguished dullards, Stephen and Heron had been
during the year the virtual heads of the school. It was they who went
up to the rector together to ask for a free day or to get a fellow off.

--O by the way, said Heron suddenly, I saw your governor going in.

The smile waned on Stephen's face. Any allusion made to his father by a
fellow or by a master put his calm to rout in a moment. He waited in
timorous silence to hear what Heron might say next. Heron, however,
nudged him expressively with his elbow and said:

--You're a sly dog.

--Why so? said Stephen.

--You'd think butter wouldn't melt in your mouth said Heron. But I'm
afraid you're a sly dog.

--Might I ask you what you are talking about? said Stephen urbanely.

--Indeed you might, answered Heron. We saw her, Wallis, didn't we? And
deucedly pretty she is too. And inquisitive! AND WHAT PART DOES STEPHEN
TAKE, MR DEDALUS? AND WILL STEPHEN NOT SING, MR DEDALUS? Your governor
was staring at her through that eyeglass of his for all he was worth so
that I think the old man has found you out too. I wouldn't care a bit,
by Jove. She's ripping, isn't she, Wallis?

--Not half bad, answered Wallis quietly as he placed his holder once
more in a corner of his mouth.

A shaft of momentary anger flew through Stephen's mind at these
indelicate allusions in the hearing of a stranger. For him there was
nothing amusing in a girl's interest and regard. All day he had thought
of nothing but their leave-taking on the steps of the tram at Harold's
Cross, the stream of moody emotions it had made to course through him
and the poem he had written about it. All day he had imagined a new
meeting with her for he knew that she was to come to the play. The old
restless moodiness had again filled his breast as it had done on the
night of the party, but had not found an outlet in verse. The growth
and knowledge of two years of boyhood stood between then and now,
forbidding such an outlet: and all day the stream of gloomy tenderness
within him had started forth and returned upon itself in dark courses
and eddies, wearying him in the end until the pleasantry of the prefect
and the painted little boy had drawn from him a movement of impatience.

--So you may as well admit, Heron went on, that we've fairly found you
out this time. You can't play the saint on me any more, that's one sure
five.

A soft peal of mirthless laughter escaped from his lips and, bending
down as before, he struck Stephen lightly across the calf of the leg
with his cane, as if in jesting reproof.

Stephen's moment of anger had already passed. He was neither flattered
nor confused, but simply wished the banter to end. He scarcely resented
what had seemed to him a silly indelicateness for he knew that the
adventure in his mind stood in no danger from these words: and his face
mirrored his rival's false smile.

--Admit! repeated Heron, striking him again with his cane across the
calf of the leg.

The stroke was playful but not so lightly given as the first one had
been. Stephen felt the skin tingle and glow slightly and almost
painlessly; and, bowing submissively, as if to meet his companion's
jesting mood, began to recite the CONFITEOR. The episode ended well,
for both Heron and Wallis laughed indulgently at the irreverence.

The confession came only from Stephen's lips and, while they spoke the
words, a sudden memory had carried him to another scene called up, as
if by magic, at the moment when he had noted the faint cruel dimples at
the corners of Heron's smiling lips and had felt the familiar stroke of
the cane against his calf and had heard the familiar word of
admonition:

--Admit.

It was towards the close of his first term in the college when he was
in number six. His sensitive nature was still smarting under the lashes
of an undivined and squalid way of life. His soul was still disquieted
and cast down by the dull phenomenon of Dublin. He had emerged from a
two years' spell of revery to find himself in the midst of a new scene,
every event and figure of which affected him intimately, disheartened
him or allured and, whether alluring or disheartening, filled him
always with unrest and bitter thoughts. All the leisure which his
school life left him was passed in the company of subversive writers
whose jibes and violence of speech set up a ferment in his brain before
they passed out of it into his crude writings.

The essay was for him the chief labour of his week and every Tuesday,
as he marched from home to the school, he read his fate in the
incidents of the way, pitting himself against some figure ahead of him
and quickening his pace to outstrip it before a certain goal was
reached or planting his steps scrupulously in the spaces of the
patchwork of the pathway and telling himself that he would be first and
not first in the weekly essay.

On a certain Tuesday the course of his triumphs was rudely broken. Mr
Tate, the English master, pointed his finger at him and said bluntly:

--This fellow has heresy in his essay.

A hush fell on the class. Mr Tate did not break it but dug with his
hand between his thighs while his heavily starched linen creaked about
his neck and wrists. Stephen did not look up. It was a raw spring
morning and his eyes were still smarting and weak. He was conscious of
failure and of detection, of the squalor of his own mind and home, and
felt against his neck the raw edge of his turned and jagged collar.

A short loud laugh from Mr Tate set the class more at ease.

--Perhaps you didn't know that, he said.

--Where? asked Stephen.

Mr Tate withdrew his delving hand and spread out the essay.

--Here. It's about the Creator and the soul. Rrm... rrm... rrm... Ah!
WITHOUT A POSSIBILITY OF EVER APPROACHING NEARER. That's heresy.

Stephen murmured:

--I meant WITHOUT A POSSIBILITY OF EVER REACHING.

It was a submission and Mr Tate, appeased, folded up the essay and
passed it across to him, saying:

--O...Ah! EVER REACHING. That's another story.

But the class was not so soon appeased. Though nobody spoke to him of
the affair after class he could feel about him a vague general
malignant joy.

A few nights after this public chiding he was walking with a letter
along the Drumcondra Road when he heard a voice cry:

--Halt!

He turned and saw three boys of his own class coming towards him in the
dusk. It was Heron who had called out and, as he marched forward
between his two attendants, he cleft the air before him with a thin
cane in time to their steps. Boland, his friend, marched beside him, a
large grin on his face, while Nash came on a few steps behind, blowing
from the pace and wagging his great red head.

As soon as the boys had turned into Clonliffe Road together they began
to speak about books and writers, saying what books they were reading
and how many books there were in their fathers' bookcases at home.
Stephen listened to them in some wonderment for Boland was the dunce
and Nash the idler of the class. In fact, after some talk about their
favourite writers, Nash declared for Captain Marryat who, he said, was
the greatest writer.

--Fudge! said Heron. Ask Dedalus. Who is the greatest writer, Dedalus?

Stephen noted the mockery in the question and said:

--Of prose do you mean?

--Yes.

--Newman, I think.

--Is it Cardinal Newman? asked Boland.

--Yes, answered Stephen.

The grin broadened on Nash's freckled face as he turned to Stephen and
said:

--And do you like Cardinal Newman, Dedalus?

--O, many say that Newman has the best prose style, Heron said to the
other two in explanation, of course he's not a poet.

--And who is the best poet, Heron? asked Boland.

--Lord Tennyson, of course, answered Heron.

--O, yes, Lord Tennyson, said Nash. We have all his poetry at home in a
book.

At this Stephen forgot the silent vows he had been making and burst out:

--Tennyson a poet! Why, he's only a rhymester!

--O, get out! said Heron. Everyone knows that Tennyson is the greatest
poet.

--And who do you think is the greatest poet? asked Boland, nudging his
neighbour.

--Byron, of course, answered Stephen.

Heron gave the lead and all three joined in a scornful laugh.

--What are you laughing at? asked Stephen.

--You, said Heron. Byron the greatest poet! He's only a poet for
uneducated people.

--He must be a fine poet! said Boland.

--You may keep your mouth shut, said Stephen, turning on him boldly.
All you know about poetry is what you wrote up on the slates in the
yard and were going to be sent to the loft for.

Boland, in fact, was said to have written on the slates in the yard a
couplet about a classmate of his who often rode home from the college
on a pony:


  As Tyson was riding into Jerusalem
  He fell and hurt his Alec Kafoozelum.


This thrust put the two lieutenants to silence but Heron went on:

--In any case Byron was a heretic and immoral too.

--I don't care what he was, cried Stephen hotly.

--You don't care whether he was a heretic or not? said Nash.

--What do you know about it? shouted Stephen. You never read a line of
anything in your life except a trans, or Boland either.

--I know that Byron was a bad man, said Boland.

--Here, catch hold of this heretic, Heron called out. In a moment
Stephen was a prisoner.

--Tate made you buck up the other day, Heron went on, about the heresy
in your essay.

--I'll tell him tomorrow, said Boland.

--Will you? said Stephen. You'd be afraid to open your lips.

--Afraid?

--Ay. Afraid of your life.

--Behave yourself! cried Heron, cutting at Stephen's legs with his
cane.

It was the signal for their onset. Nash pinioned his arms behind while
Boland seized a long cabbage stump which was lying in the gutter.
Struggling and kicking under the cuts of the cane and the blows of the
knotty stump Stephen was borne back against a barbed wire fence.

--Admit that Byron was no good.

--No.

--Admit.

--No.

--Admit.

--No. No.

At last after a fury of plunges he wrenched himself free. His
tormentors set off towards Jones's Road, laughing and jeering at him,
while he, half blinded with tears, stumbled on, clenching his fists
madly and sobbing.

While he was still repeating the CONFITEOR amid the indulgent laughter
of his hearers and while the scenes of that malignant episode were
still passing sharply and swiftly before his mind he wondered why he
bore no malice now to those who had tormented him. He had not forgotten
a whit of their cowardice and cruelty but the memory of it called forth
no anger from him. All the descriptions of fierce love and hatred which
he had met in books had seemed to him therefore unreal. Even that night
as he stumbled homewards along Jones's Road he had felt that some power
was divesting him of that sudden-woven anger as easily as a fruit is
divested of its soft ripe peel.

He remained standing with his two companions at the end of the shed
listening idly to their talk or to the bursts of applause in the
theatre. She was sitting there among the others perhaps waiting for him
to appear. He tried to recall her appearance but could not. He could
remember only that she had worn a shawl about her head like a cowl and
that her dark eyes had invited and unnerved him. He wondered had he
been in her thoughts as she had been in his. Then in the dark and
unseen by the other two he rested the tips of the fingers of one hand
upon the palm of the other hand, scarcely touching it lightly. But the
pressure of her fingers had been lighter and steadier: and suddenly the
memory of their touch traversed his brain and body like an invisible
wave.

A boy came towards them, running along under the shed. He was excited
and breathless.

--O, Dedalus, he cried, Doyle is in a great bake about you. You're to
go in at once and get dressed for the play. Hurry up, you better.

--He's coming now, said Heron to the messenger with a haughty drawl,
when he wants to.

The boy turned to Heron and repeated:

--But Doyle is in an awful bake.

--Will you tell Doyle with my best compliments that I damned his eyes?
answered Heron.

--Well, I must go now, said Stephen, who cared little for such points
of honour.

--I wouldn't, said Heron, damn me if I would. That's no way to send
for one of the senior boys. In a bake, indeed! I think it's quite
enough that you're taking a part in his bally old play.

This spirit of quarrelsome comradeship which he had observed lately in
his rival had not seduced Stephen from his habits of quiet obedience.
He mistrusted the turbulence and doubted the sincerity of such
comradeship which seemed to him a sorry anticipation of manhood. The
question of honour here raised was, like all such questions, trivial to
him. While his mind had been pursuing its intangible phantoms and
turning in irresolution from such pursuit he had heard about him the
constant voices of his father and of his masters, urging him to be a
gentleman above all things and urging him to be a good catholic above all
things. These voices had now come to be hollow-sounding in his ears. When
the gymnasium had been opened he had heard another voice urging him to be
strong and manly and healthy and when the movement towards national
revival had begun to be felt in the college yet another voice had bidden
him be true to his country and help to raise up her language and
tradition. In the profane world, as he foresaw, a worldly voice would bid
him raise up his father's fallen state by his labours and, meanwhile, the
voice of his school comrades urged him to be a decent fellow, to shield
others from blame or to beg them off and to do his best to get free days
for the school. And it was the din of all these hollow-sounding voices
that made him halt irresolutely in the pursuit of phantoms. He gave them
ear only for a time but he was happy only when he was far from them,
beyond their call, alone or in the company of phantasmal comrades.

In the vestry a plump fresh-faced jesuit and an elderly man, in shabby
blue clothes, were dabbling in a case of paints and chalks. The boys
who had been painted walked about or stood still awkwardly, touching
their faces in a gingerly fashion with their furtive fingertips. In the
middle of the vestry a young jesuit, who was then on a visit to the
college, stood rocking himself rhythmically from the tips of his toes
to his heels and back again, his hands thrust well forward into his
side-pockets. His small head set off with glossy red curls and his
newly shaven face agreed well with the spotless decency of his soutane
and with his spotless shoes.

As he watched this swaying form and tried to read for himself the
legend of the priest's mocking smile there came into Stephen's memory a
saying which he had heard from his father before he had been sent to
Clongowes, that you could always tell a jesuit by the style of his
clothes. At the same moment he thought he saw a likeness between his
father's mind and that of this smiling well-dressed priest: and he was
aware of some desecration of the priest's office or of the vestry
itself whose silence was now routed by loud talk and joking and its air
pungent with the smells of the gas-jets and the grease.

While his forehead was being wrinkled and his jaws painted black and
blue by the elderly man, he listened distractedly to the voice of the
plump young jesuit which bade him speak up and make his points clearly.
He could hear the band playing THE LILY OF KILLARNEY and knew that in a
few moments the curtain would go up. He felt no stage fright but the
thought of the part he had to play humiliated him. A remembrance of
some of his lines made a sudden flush rise to his painted cheeks. He
saw her serious alluring eyes watching him from among the audience and
their image at once swept away his scruples, leaving his will compact.
Another nature seemed to have been lent him: the infection of the
excitement and youth about him entered into and transformed his moody
mistrustfulness. For one rare moment he seemed to be clothed in the
real apparel of boyhood: and, as he stood in the wings among the other
players, he shared the common mirth amid which the drop scene was
hauled upwards by two able-bodied priests with violent jerks and all awry.

A few moments after he found himself on the stage amid the garish gas
and the dim scenery, acting before the innumerable faces of the void.
It surprised him to see that the play which he had known at rehearsals
for a disjointed lifeless thing had suddenly assumed a life of its own.
It seemed now to play itself, he and his fellow actors aiding it with
their parts. When the curtain fell on the last scene he heard the void
filled with applause and, through a rift in a side scene, saw the
simple body before which he had acted magically deformed, the void of
faces breaking at all points and falling asunder into busy groups.

He left the stage quickly and rid himself of his mummery and passed out
through the chapel into the college garden. Now that the play was over
his nerves cried for some further adventure. He hurried onwards as if
to overtake it. The doors of the theatre were all open and the audience
had emptied out. On the lines which he had fancied the moorings of an
ark a few lanterns swung in the night breeze, flickering cheerlessly.
He mounted the steps from the garden in haste, eager that some prey
should not elude him, and forced his way through the crowd in the hall
and past the two jesuits who stood watching the exodus and bowing and
shaking hands with the visitors. He pushed onward nervously, feigning a
still greater haste and faintly conscious of the smiles and stares and
nudges which his powdered head left in its wake.

When he came out on the steps he saw his family waiting for him at the
first lamp. In a glance he noted that every figure of the group was
familiar and ran down the steps angrily.

--I have to leave a message down in George's Street, he said to his
father quickly. I'll be home after you.

Without waiting for his father's questions he ran across the road and
began to walk at breakneck speed down the hill. He hardly knew where he
was walking. Pride and hope and desire like crushed herbs in his heart
sent up vapours of maddening incense before the eyes of his mind. He
strode down the hill amid the tumult of sudden-risen vapours of wounded
pride and fallen hope and baffled desire. They streamed upwards before
his anguished eyes in dense and maddening fumes and passed away above
him till at last the air was clear and cold again.

A film still veiled his eyes but they burned no longer. A power, akin
to that which had often made anger or resentment fall from him, brought
his steps to rest. He stood still and gazed up at the sombre porch of
the morgue and from that to the dark cobbled laneway at its side. He
saw the word LOTTS on the wall of the lane and breathed slowly the rank
heavy air.

That is horse piss and rotted straw, he thought. It is a good odour to
breathe. It will calm my heart. My heart is quite calm now. I will go
back.


* * * * *


Stephen was once again seated beside his father in the corner of a
railway carriage at Kingsbridge. He was travelling with his father by
the night mail to Cork. As the train steamed out of the station he
recalled his childish wonder of years before and every event of his
first day at Clongowes. But he felt no wonder now. He saw the darkening
lands slipping away past him, the silent telegraph-poles passing his
window swiftly every four seconds, the little glimmering stations,
manned by a few silent sentries, flung by the mail behind her and
twinkling for a moment in the darkness like fiery grains flung
backwards by a runner.

He listened without sympathy to his father's evocation of Cork and of
scenes of his youth, a tale broken by sighs or draughts from his pocket
flask whenever the image of some dead friend appeared in it or whenever
the evoker remembered suddenly the purpose of his actual visit. Stephen
heard but could feel no pity. The images of the dead were all strangers
to him save that of uncle Charles, an image which had lately been
fading out of memory. He knew, however, that his father's property was
going to be sold by auction, and in the manner of his own dispossession
he felt the world give the lie rudely to his phantasy.

At Maryborough he fell asleep. When he awoke the train had passed out
of Mallow and his father was stretched asleep on the other seat. The
cold light of the dawn lay over the country, over the unpeopled fields
and the closed cottages. The terror of sleep fascinated his mind as he
watched the silent country or heard from time to time his father's deep
breath or sudden sleepy movement. The neighbourhood of unseen sleepers
filled him with strange dread, as though they could harm him, and he
prayed that the day might come quickly. His prayer, addressed neither
to God nor saint, began with a shiver, as the chilly morning breeze
crept through the chink of the carriage door to his feet, and ended in
a trail of foolish words which he made to fit the insistent rhythm of
the train; and silently, at intervals of four seconds, the
telegraph-poles held the galloping notes of the music between punctual
bars. This furious music allayed his dread and, leaning against the
windowledge, he let his eyelids close again.

They drove in a jingle across Cork while it was still early morning and
Stephen finished his sleep in a bedroom of the Victoria Hotel. The
bright warm sunlight was streaming through the window and he could hear
the din of traffic. His father was standing before the dressing-table,
examining his hair and face and moustache with great care, craning his
neck across the water-jug and drawing it back sideways to see the better.
While he did so he sang softly to himself with quaint accent and phrasing:


    'Tis youth and folly
    Makes young men marry,
    So here, my love, I'll
    No longer stay.
    What can't be cured, sure,
    Must be injured, sure,
    So I'll go to
    Amerikay.

    My love she's handsome,
    My love she's bony:
    She's like good whisky
    When it is new;
    But when 'tis old
    And growing cold
    It fades and dies like
    The mountain dew.


The consciousness of the warm sunny city outside his window and the
tender tremors with which his father's voice festooned the strange sad
happy air, drove off all the mists of the night's ill humour from
Stephen's brain. He got up quickly to dress and, when the song had
ended, said:

--That's much prettier than any of your other COME-ALL-YOUS.

--Do you think so? asked Mr Dedalus.

--I like it, said Stephen.

--It's a pretty old air, said Mr Dedalus, twirling the points of his
moustache. Ah, but you should have heard Mick Lacy sing it! Poor Mick
Lacy! He had little turns for it, grace notes that he used to put in
that I haven't got. That was the boy who could sing a COME-ALL-YOU, if
you like.

Mr Dedalus had ordered drisheens for breakfast and during the meal he
cross-examined the waiter for local news. For the most part they spoke
at cross purposes when a name was mentioned, the waiter having in mind
the present holder and Mr Dedalus his father or perhaps his
grandfather.

--Well, I hope they haven't moved the Queen's College anyhow, said Mr
Dedalus, for I want to show it to this youngster of mine.

Along the Mardyke the trees were in bloom. They entered the grounds of
the college and were led by the garrulous porter across the quadrangle.
But their progress across the gravel was brought to a halt after every
dozen or so paces by some reply of the porter's.

--Ah, do you tell me so? And is poor Pottlebelly dead?

--Yes, sir. Dead, sir.

During these halts Stephen stood awkwardly behind the two men, weary of
the subject and waiting restlessly for the slow march to begin again.
By the time they had crossed the quadrangle his restlessness had risen
to fever. He wondered how his father, whom he knew for a shrewd
suspicious man, could be duped by the servile manners of the porter;
and the lively southern speech which had entertained him all the
morning now irritated his ears.

They passed into the anatomy theatre where Mr Dedalus, the porter
aiding him, searched the desks for his initials. Stephen remained in
the background, depressed more than ever by the darkness and silence of
the theatre and by the air it wore of jaded and formal study. On the
desk he read the word FOETUS cut several times in the dark stained
wood. The sudden legend startled his blood: he seemed to feel the
absent students of the college about him and to shrink from their
company. A vision of their life, which his father's words had been
powerless to evoke, sprang up before him out of the word cut in the
desk. A broad-shouldered student with a moustache was cutting in the
letters with a jack-knife, seriously. Other students stood or sat near
him laughing at his handiwork. One jogged his elbow. The big student
turned on him, frowning. He was dressed in loose grey clothes and had
tan boots.

Stephen's name was called. He hurried down the steps of the theatre so
as to be as far away from the vision as he could be and, peering
closely at his father's initials, hid his flushed face.

But the word and the vision capered before his eyes as he walked back
across the quadrangle and towards the college gate. It shocked him to
find in the outer world a trace of what he had deemed till then a
brutish and individual malady of his own mind. His monstrous reveries
came thronging into his memory. They too had sprung up before him,
suddenly and furiously, out of mere words. He had soon given in to them
and allowed them to sweep across and abase his intellect, wondering
always where they came from, from what den of monstrous images, and
always weak and humble towards others, restless and sickened of himself
when they had swept over him.

--Ay, bedad! And there's the Groceries sure enough! cried Mr Dedalus.
You often heard me speak of the Groceries, didn't you, Stephen. Many's
the time we went down there when our names had been marked, a crowd of
us, Harry Peard and little Jack Mountain and Bob Dyas and Maurice
Moriarty, the Frenchman, and Tom O'Grady and Mick Lacy that I told you
of this morning and Joey Corbet and poor little good-hearted Johnny
Keevers of the Tantiles.

The leaves of the trees along the Mardyke were astir and whispering in
the sunlight. A team of cricketers passed, agile young men in flannels
and blazers, one of them carrying the long green wicket-bag. In a quiet
bystreet a German band of five players in faded uniforms and with
battered brass instruments was playing to an audience of street arabs
and leisurely messenger boys. A maid in a white cap and apron was
watering a box of plants on a sill which shone like a slab of limestone
in the warm glare. From another window open to the air came the sound
of a piano, scale after scale rising into the treble.

Stephen walked on at his father's side, listening to stories he had
heard before, hearing again the names of the scattered and dead
revellers who had been the companions of his father's youth. And a
faint sickness sighed in his heart.

He recalled his own equivocal position in Belvedere, a free boy, a
leader afraid of his own authority, proud and sensitive and suspicious,
battling against the squalor of his life and against the riot of his
mind. The letters cut in the stained wood of the desk stared upon him,
mocking his bodily weakness and futile enthusiasms and making him
loathe himself for his own mad and filthy orgies. The spittle in his
throat grew bitter and foul to swallow and the faint sickness climbed
to his brain so that for a moment he closed his eyes and walked on in
darkness.

He could still hear his father's voice--

--When you kick out for yourself, Stephen--as I daresay you will one
of these days--remember, whatever you do, to mix with gentlemen. When
I was a young fellow I tell you I enjoyed myself. I mixed with fine
decent fellows. Everyone of us could do something. One fellow had a
good voice, another fellow was a good actor, another could sing a good
comic song, another was a good oarsman or a good racket player, another
could tell a good story and so on. We kept the ball rolling anyhow and
enjoyed ourselves and saw a bit of life and we were none the worse of
it either. But we were all gentlemen, Stephen--at least I hope we were--and
bloody good honest Irishmen too. That's the kind of fellows I want
you to associate with, fellows of the right kidney. I'm talking to
you as a friend, Stephen. I don't believe a son should be afraid of his
father. No, I treat you as your grandfather treated me when I was a
young chap. We were more like brothers than father and son. I'll never
forget the first day he caught me smoking. I was standing at the end of
the South Terrace one day with some maneens like myself and sure we
thought we were grand fellows because we had pipes stuck in the corners
of our mouths. Suddenly the governor passed. He didn't say a word, or
stop even. But the next day, Sunday, we were out for a walk together
and when we were coming home he took out his cigar case and said:--By
the by, Simon, I didn't know you smoked, or something like that.--Of
course I tried to carry it off as best I could.--If you want a good
smoke, he said, try one of these cigars. An American captain made me a
present of them last night in Queenstown.

Stephen heard his father's voice break into a laugh which was almost a
sob.

--He was the handsomest man in Cork at that time, by God he was! The
women used to stand to look after him in the street.

He heard the sob passing loudly down his father's throat and opened his
eyes with a nervous impulse. The sunlight breaking suddenly on his
sight turned the sky and clouds into a fantastic world of sombre masses
with lakelike spaces of dark rosy light. His very brain was sick and
powerless. He could scarcely interpret the letters of the signboards of
the shops. By his monstrous way of life he seemed to have put himself
beyond the limits of reality. Nothing moved him or spoke to him from
the real world unless he heard in it an echo of the infuriated cries
within him. He could respond to no earthly or human appeal, dumb and
insensible to the call of summer and gladness and companionship,
wearied and dejected by his father's voice. He could scarcely recognize
as his own thoughts, and repeated slowly to himself:

--I am Stephen Dedalus. I am walking beside my father whose name is
Simon Dedalus. We are in Cork, in Ireland. Cork is a city. Our room is
in the Victoria Hotel. Victoria and Stephen and Simon. Simon and
Stephen and Victoria. Names.

The memory of his childhood suddenly grew dim. He tried to call forth
some of its vivid moments but could not. He recalled only names. Dante,
Parnell, Clane, Clongowes. A little boy had been taught geography by an
old woman who kept two brushes in her wardrobe. Then he had been sent
away from home to a college, he had made his first communion and eaten
slim jim out of his cricket cap and watched the firelight leaping and
dancing on the wall of a little bedroom in the infirmary and dreamed of
being dead, of mass being said for him by the rector in a black and
gold cope, of being buried then in the little graveyard of the
community off the main avenue of limes. But he had not died then.
Parnell had died. There had been no mass for the dead in the chapel and
no procession. He had not died but he had faded out like a film in the
sun. He had been lost or had wandered out of existence for he no longer
existed. How strange to think of him passing out of existence in such a
way, not by death but by fading out in the sun or by being lost and
forgotten somewhere in the universe! It was strange to see his small
body appear again for a moment: a little boy in a grey belted suit. His
hands were in his side-pockets and his trousers were tucked in at the
knees by elastic bands.

On the evening of the day on which the property was sold Stephen
followed his father meekly about the city from bar to bar. To the
sellers in the market, to the barmen and barmaids, to the beggars who
importuned him for a lob Mr Dedalus told the same tale--that he was an
old Corkonian, that he had been trying for thirty years to get rid of
his Cork accent up in Dublin and that Peter Pickackafax beside him was
his eldest son but that he was only a Dublin jackeen.

They had set out early in the morning from Newcombe's coffee-house,
where Mr Dedalus's cup had rattled noisily against its saucer, and
Stephen had tried to cover that shameful sign of his father's drinking
bout of the night before by moving his chair and coughing. One
humiliation had succeeded another--the false smiles of the market
sellers, the curvetings and oglings of the barmaids with whom his
father flirted, the compliments and encouraging words of his father's
friends. They had told him that he had a great look of his grandfather
and Mr Dedalus had agreed that he was an ugly likeness. They had
unearthed traces of a Cork accent in his speech and made him admit that
the Lee was a much finer river than the Liffey. One of them, in order
to put his Latin to the proof, had made him translate short passages
from Dilectus and asked him whether it was correct to say: TEMPORA
MUTANTUR NOS ET MUTAMUR IN ILLIS or TEMPORA MUTANTUR ET NOS MUTAMUR IN
ILLIS. Another, a brisk old man, whom Mr Dedalus called Johnny Cashman,
had covered him with confusion by asking him to say which were
prettier, the Dublin girls or the Cork girls.

--He's not that way built, said Mr Dedalus. Leave him alone. He's a
level-headed thinking boy who doesn't bother his head about that kind
of nonsense.

--Then he's not his father's son, said the little old man.

--I don't know, I'm sure, said Mr Dedalus, smiling complacently.

--Your father, said the little old man to Stephen, was the boldest flirt
in the City of Cork in his day. Do you know that?

Stephen looked down and studied the tiled floor of the bar into which
they had drifted.

--Now don't be putting ideas into his head, said Mr Dedalus. Leave him
to his Maker.

--Yerra, sure I wouldn't put any ideas into his head. I'm old enough
to be his grandfather. And I am a grandfather, said the little old man
to Stephen. Do you know that?

--Are you? asked Stephen.

--Bedad I am, said the little old man. I have two bouncing
grandchildren out at Sunday's Well. Now, then! What age do you think I
am? And I remember seeing your grandfather in his red coat riding out
to hounds. That was before you were born.

--Ay, or thought of, said Mr Dedalus.

--Bedad I did, repeated the little old man. And, more than that, I can
remember even your great-grandfather, old John Stephen Dedalus, and a
fierce old fire-eater he was. Now, then! There's a memory for you!

--That's three generations--four generations, said another of the
company. Why, Johnny Cashman, you must be nearing the century.

--Well, I'll tell you the truth, said the little old man. I'm just
twenty-seven years of age.

--We're as old as we feel, Johnny, said Mr Dedalus. And just finish
what you have there and we'll have another. Here, Tim or Tom or
whatever your name is, give us the same again here. By God, I don't
feel more than eighteen myself. There's that son of mine there not half
my age and I'm a better man than he is any day of the week.

--Draw it mild now, Dedalus. I think it's time for you to take a back
seat, said the gentleman who had spoken before.

--No, by God! asserted Mr Dedalus. I'll sing a tenor song against him
or I'll vault a five-barred gate against him or I'll run with him after
the hounds across the country as I did thirty years ago along with the
Kerry Boy and the best man for it.

--But he'll beat you here, said the little old man, tapping his
forehead and raising his glass to drain it.

--Well, I hope he'll be as good a man as his father. That's all I can
say, said Mr Dedalus.

--If he is, he'll do, said the little old man.

--And thanks be to God, Johnny, said Mr Dedalus, that we lived so long
and did so little harm.

--But did so much good, Simon, said the little old man gravely. Thanks
be to God we lived so long and did so much good.

Stephen watched the three glasses being raised from the counter as his
father and his two cronies drank to the memory of their past. An abyss
of fortune or of temperament sundered him from them. His mind seemed
older than theirs: it shone coldly on their strifes and happiness and
regrets like a moon upon a younger earth. No life or youth stirred in
him as it had stirred in them. He had known neither the pleasure of
companionship with others nor the vigour of rude male health nor filial
piety. Nothing stirred within his soul but a cold and cruel and
loveless lust. His childhood was dead or lost and with it his soul
capable of simple joys and he was drifting amid life like the barren
shell of the moon.


  Art thou pale for weariness
  Of climbing heaven and gazing on the earth,
  Wandering companionless...?


He repeated to himself the lines of Shelley's fragment. Its alternation
of sad human ineffectiveness with vast inhuman cycles of activity
chilled him and he forgot his own human and ineffectual grieving.


* * * * *


Stephen's mother and his brother and one of his cousins waited at the
corner of quiet Foster Place while he and his father went up the steps
and along the colonnade where the Highland sentry was parading. When
they had passed into the great hall and stood at the counter Stephen
drew forth his orders on the governor of the bank of Ireland for thirty
and three pounds; and these sums, the moneys of his exhibition and
essay prize, were paid over to him rapidly by the teller in notes and
in coin respectively. He bestowed them in his pockets with feigned
composure and suffered the friendly teller, to whom his father chatted,
to take his hand across the broad counter and wish him a brilliant
career in after life. He was impatient of their voices and could not
keep his feet at rest. But the teller still deferred the serving of
others to say he was living in changed times and that there was nothing
like giving a boy the best education that money could buy. Mr Dedalus
lingered in the hall gazing about him and up at the roof and telling
Stephen, who urged him to come out, that they were standing in the
house of commons of the old Irish parliament.

--God help us! he said piously, to think of the men of those times,
Stephen, Hely Hutchinson and Flood and Henry Grattan and Charles Kendal
Bushe, and the noblemen we have now, leaders of the Irish people at
home and abroad. Why, by God, they wouldn't be seen dead in a ten-acre
field with them. No, Stephen, old chap, I'm sorry to say that they are
only as I roved out one fine May morning in the merry month of sweet
July.

A keen October wind was blowing round the bank. The three figures
standing at the edge of the muddy path had pinched cheeks and watery
eyes. Stephen looked at his thinly clad mother and remembered that a
few days before he had seen a mantle priced at twenty guineas in the
windows of Barnardo's.

--Well that's done, said Mr Dedalus.

--We had better go to dinner, said Stephen. Where?

--Dinner? said Mr Dedalus. Well, I suppose we had better, what?

--Some place that's not too dear, said Mrs Dedalus.

--Underdone's?

--Yes. Some quiet place.

--Come along, said Stephen quickly. It doesn't matter about the
dearness.

He walked on before them with short nervous steps, smiling. They tried
to keep up with him, smiling also at his eagerness.

--Take it easy like a good young fellow, said his father. We're not
out for the half mile, are we?

For a swift season of merrymaking the money of his prizes ran through
Stephen's fingers. Great parcels of groceries and delicacies and dried
fruits arrived from the city. Every day he drew up a bill of fare for
the family and every night led a party of three or four to the theatre
to see INGOMAR or THE LADY OF LYONS. In his coat pockets he carried
squares of Vienna chocolate for his guests while his trousers' pocket
bulged with masses of silver and copper coins. He bought presents for
everyone, overhauled his room, wrote out resolutions, marshalled his
books up and down their shelves, pored upon all kinds of price lists,
drew up a form of commonwealth for the household by which every member
of it held some office, opened a loan bank for his family and pressed
loans on willing borrowers so that he might have the pleasure of making
out receipts and reckoning the interests on the sums lent. When he
could do no more he drove up and down the city in trams. Then the
season of pleasure came to an end. The pot of pink enamel paint gave out
and the wainscot of his bedroom remained with its unfinished and
ill-plastered coat.

His household returned to its usual way of life. His mother had no
further occasion to upbraid him for squandering his money. He too
returned to his old life at school and all his novel enterprises fell
to pieces. The commonwealth fell, the loan bank closed its coffers and
its books on a sensible loss, the rules of life which he had drawn
about himself fell into desuetude.

How foolish his aim had been! He had tried to build a break-water of
order and elegance against the sordid tide of life without him and to
dam up, by rules of conduct and active interest and new filial
relations, the powerful recurrence of the tides within him. Useless.
From without as from within the waters had flowed over his barriers:
their tides began once more to jostle fiercely above the crumbled mole.

He saw clearly too his own futile isolation. He had not gone one step
nearer the lives he had sought to approach nor bridged the restless
shame and rancour that had divided him from mother and brother and
sister. He felt that he was hardly of the one blood with them but stood
to them rather in the mystical kinship of fosterage, fosterchild and
fosterbrother.

He turned to appease the fierce longings of his heart before which
everything else was idle and alien. He cared little that he was in
mortal sin, that his life had grown to be a tissue of subterfuge and
falsehood. Beside the savage desire within him to realize the
enormities which he brooded on nothing was sacred. He bore cynically
with the shameful details of his secret riots in which he exulted to
defile with patience whatever image had attracted his eyes. By day and
by night he moved among distorted images of the outer world. A figure
that had seemed to him by day demure and innocent came towards him by
night through the winding darkness of sleep, her face transfigured by a
lecherous cunning, her eyes bright with brutish joy. Only the morning
pained him with its dim memory of dark orgiastic riot, its keen and
humiliating sense of transgression.

He returned to his wanderings. The veiled autumnal evenings led him
from street to street as they had led him years before along the quiet
avenues of Blackrock. But no vision of trim front gardens or of kindly
lights in the windows poured a tender influence upon him now. Only at
times, in the pauses of his desire, when the luxury that was wasting
him gave room to a softer languor, the image of Mercedes traversed the
background of his memory. He saw again the small white house and the
garden of rose-bushes on the road that led to the mountains and he
remembered the sadly proud gesture of refusal which he was to make
there, standing with her in the moonlit garden after years of
estrangement and adventure. At those moments the soft speeches of
Claude Melnotte rose to his lips and eased his unrest. A tender
premonition touched him of the tryst he had then looked forward to and,
in spite of the horrible reality which lay between his hope of then and
now, of the holy encounter he had then imagined at which weakness and
timidity and inexperience were to fall from him.

Such moments passed and the wasting fires of lust sprang up again. The
verses passed from his lips and the inarticulate cries and the unspoken
brutal words rushed forth from his brain to force a passage. His blood
was in revolt. He wandered up and down the dark slimy streets peering
into the gloom of lanes and doorways, listening eagerly for any sound.
He moaned to himself like some baffled prowling beast. He wanted to sin
with another of his kind, to force another being to sin with him and to
exult with her in sin. He felt some dark presence moving irresistibly
upon him from the darkness, a presence subtle and murmurous as a flood
filling him wholly with itself. Its murmur besieged his ears like the
murmur of some multitude in sleep; its subtle streams penetrated his
being. His hands clenched convulsively and his teeth set together as he
suffered the agony of its penetration. He stretched out his arms in the
street to hold fast the frail swooning form that eluded him and incited
him: and the cry that he had strangled for so long in his throat issued
from his lips. It broke from him like a wail of despair from a hell of
sufferers and died in a wail of furious entreaty, a cry for an
iniquitous abandonment, a cry which was but the echo of an obscene
scrawl which he had read on the oozing wall of a urinal.

He had wandered into a maze of narrow and dirty streets. From the foul
laneways he heard bursts of hoarse riot and wrangling and the drawling
of drunken singers. He walked onward, dismayed, wondering whether he
had strayed into the quarter of the Jews. Women and girls dressed in
long vivid gowns traversed the street from house to house. They were
leisurely and perfumed. A trembling seized him and his eyes grew dim.
The yellow gas-flames arose before his troubled vision against the
vapoury sky, burning as if before an altar. Before the doors and in the
lighted halls groups were gathered arrayed as for some rite. He was in
another world: he had awakened from a slumber of centuries.

He stood still in the middle of the roadway, his heart clamouring
against his bosom in a tumult. A young woman dressed in a long pink
gown laid her hand on his arm to detain him and gazed into his face.
She said gaily:

--Good night, Willie dear!

Her room was warm and lightsome. A huge doll sat with her legs apart in
the copious easy-chair beside the bed. He tried to bid his tongue speak
that he might seem at ease, watching her as she undid her gown, noting
the proud conscious movements of her perfumed head.

As he stood silent in the middle of the room she came over to him and
embraced him gaily and gravely. Her round arms held him firmly to her
and he, seeing her face lifted to him in serious calm and feeling the
warm calm rise and fall of her breast, all but burst into hysterical
weeping. Tears of joy and relief shone in his delighted eyes and his
lips parted though they would not speak.

She passed her tinkling hand through his hair, calling him a little
rascal.

--Give me a kiss, she said.

His lips would not bend to kiss her. He wanted to be held firmly in her
arms, to be caressed slowly, slowly, slowly. In her arms he felt that
he had suddenly become strong and fearless and sure of himself. But his
lips would not bend to kiss her.

With a sudden movement she bowed his head and joined her lips to his
and he read the meaning of her movements in her frank uplifted eyes. It
was too much for him. He closed his eyes, surrendering himself to her,
body and mind, conscious of nothing in the world but the dark pressure
of her softly parting lips. They pressed upon his brain as upon his
lips as though they were the vehicle of a vague speech; and between
them he felt an unknown and timid pressure, darker than the swoon of
sin, softer than sound or odour.




Chapter 3


The swift December dusk had come tumbling clownishly after its dull day
and, as he stared through the dull square of the window of the
schoolroom, he felt his belly crave for its food. He hoped there would
be stew for dinner, turnips and carrots and bruised potatoes and fat
mutton pieces to be ladled out in thick peppered flour-fattened sauce.
Stuff it into you, his belly counselled him.

It would be a gloomy secret night. After early nightfall the yellow
lamps would light up, here and there, the squalid quarter of the
brothels. He would follow a devious course up and down the streets,
circling always nearer and nearer in a tremor of fear and joy, until
his feet led him suddenly round a dark corner. The whores would be just
coming out of their houses making ready for the night, yawning lazily
after their sleep and settling the hairpins in their clusters of hair.
He would pass by them calmly waiting for a sudden movement of his own
will or a sudden call to his sin-loving soul from their soft perfumed
flesh. Yet as he prowled in quest of that call, his senses, stultified
only by his desire, would note keenly all that wounded or shamed them;
his eyes, a ring of porter froth on a clothless table or a photograph
of two soldiers standing to attention or a gaudy playbill; his ears,
the drawling jargon of greeting:

--Hello, Bertie, any good in your mind?

--Is that you, pigeon?

--Number ten. Fresh Nelly is waiting on you.

--Good night, husband! Coming in to have a short time?

The equation on the page of his scribbler began to spread out a
widening tail, eyed and starred like a peacock's; and, when the eyes
and stars of its indices had been eliminated, began slowly to fold
itself together again. The indices appearing and disappearing were eyes
opening and closing; the eyes opening and closing were stars being born
and being quenched. The vast cycle of starry life bore his weary mind
outward to its verge and inward to its centre, a distant music
accompanying him outward and inward. What music? The music came nearer
and he recalled the words, the words of Shelley's fragment upon the
moon wandering companionless, pale for weariness. The stars began to
crumble and a cloud of fine stardust fell through space.

The dull light fell more faintly upon the page whereon another equation
began to unfold itself slowly and to spread abroad its widening tail.
It was his own soul going forth to experience, unfolding itself sin by
sin, spreading abroad the bale-fire of its burning stars and folding
back upon itself, fading slowly, quenching its own lights and fires.
They were quenched: and the cold darkness filled chaos.

A cold lucid indifference reigned in his soul. At his first violent sin
he had felt a wave of vitality pass out of him and had feared to find
his body or his soul maimed by the excess. Instead the vital wave had
carried him on its bosom out of himself and back again when it receded:
and no part of body or soul had been maimed but a dark peace had been
established between them. The chaos in which his ardour extinguished
itself was a cold indifferent knowledge of himself. He had sinned
mortally not once but many times and he knew that, while he stood in
danger of eternal damnation for the first sin alone, by every
succeeding sin he multiplied his guilt and his punishment. His days and
works and thoughts could make no atonement for him, the fountains of
sanctifying grace having ceased to refresh his soul. At most, by an
alms given to a beggar whose blessing he fled from, he might hope
wearily to win for himself some measure of actual grace. Devotion had
gone by the board. What did it avail to pray when he knew that his soul
lusted after its own destruction? A certain pride, a certain awe,
withheld him from offering to God even one prayer at night, though he
knew it was in God's power to take away his life while he slept and
hurl his soul hellward ere he could beg for mercy. His pride in his own
sin, his loveless awe of God, told him that his offence was too
grievous to be atoned for in whole or in part by a false homage to the
All-seeing and All-knowing.

--Well now, Ennis, I declare you have a head and so has my stick! Do
you mean to say that you are not able to tell me what a surd is?

The blundering answer stirred the embers of his contempt of his
fellows. Towards others he felt neither shame nor fear. On Sunday
mornings as he passed the church door he glanced coldly at the
worshippers who stood bareheaded, four deep, outside the church,
morally present at the mass which they could neither see nor hear.
Their dull piety and the sickly smell of the cheap hair-oil with which
they had anointed their heads repelled him from the altar they prayed
at. He stooped to the evil of hypocrisy with others, sceptical of their
innocence which he could cajole so easily.

On the wall of his bedroom hung an illuminated scroll, the certificate
of his prefecture in the college of the sodality of the Blessed Virgin
Mary. On Saturday mornings when the sodality met in the chapel to
recite the little office his place was a cushioned kneeling-desk at the
right of the altar from which he led his wing of boys through the
responses. The falsehood of his position did not pain him. If at
moments he felt an impulse to rise from his post of honour and,
confessing before them all his unworthiness, to leave the chapel, a
glance at their faces restrained him. The imagery of the psalms of
prophecy soothed his barren pride. The glories of Mary held his soul
captive: spikenard and myrrh and frankincense, symbolizing her royal
lineage, her emblems, the late-flowering plant and late-blossoming
tree, symbolizing the age-long gradual growth of her cultus among men.
When it fell to him to read the lesson towards the close of the office
he read it in a veiled voice, lulling his conscience to its music.


QUASI CEDRUS EXALTATA SUM IN LIBANON ET QUASI CUPRESSUS IN MONTE SION.
QUASI PALMA EXALTATA SUM IN GADES ET QUASI PLANTATIO ROSAE IN JERICHO.
QUASI ULIVA SPECIOSA IN CAMPIS ET QUASI PLATANUS EXALTATA SUM JUXTA
AQUAM IN PLATEIS. SICUT CINNAMOMUM ET BALSAMUM AROMATIZANS ODOREM DEDI
ET QUASI MYRRHA ELECTA DEDI SUAVITATEM ODORIS.


His sin, which had covered him from the sight of God, had led him
nearer to the refuge of sinners. Her eyes seemed to regard him with
mild pity; her holiness, a strange light glowing faintly upon her frail
flesh, did not humiliate the sinner who approached her. If ever he was
impelled to cast sin from him and to repent the impulse that moved him
was the wish to be her knight. If ever his soul, re-entering her
dwelling shyly after the frenzy of his body's lust had spent itself,
was turned towards her whose emblem is the morning star, BRIGHT AND
MUSICAL, TELLING OF HEAVEN AND INFUSING PEACE, it was when her names
were murmured softly by lips whereon there still lingered foul and
shameful words, the savour itself of a lewd kiss.

That was strange. He tried to think how it could be. But the dusk,
deepening in the schoolroom, covered over his thoughts. The bell rang.
The master marked the sums and cuts to be done for the next lesson and
went out. Heron, beside Stephen, began to hum tunelessly.


MY EXCELLENT FRIEND BOMBADOS.


Ennis, who had gone to the yard, came back, saying:

--The boy from the house is coming up for the rector.

A tall boy behind Stephen rubbed his hands and said:

--That's game ball. We can scut the whole hour. He won't be in till
after half two. Then you can ask him questions on the catechism,
Dedalus.

Stephen, leaning back and drawing idly on his scribbler, listened to
the talk about him which Heron checked from time to time by saying:

--Shut up, will you. Don't make such a bally racket!

It was strange too that he found an arid pleasure in following up to
the end the rigid lines of the doctrines of the church and penetrating
into obscure silences only to hear and feel the more deeply his own
condemnation. The sentence of saint James which says that he who
offends against one commandment becomes guilty of all, had seemed to him
first a swollen phrase until he had begun to grope in the darkness
of his own state. From the evil seed of lust all other deadly
sins had sprung forth: pride in himself and contempt of others,
covetousness in using money for the purchase of unlawful pleasures,
envy of those whose vices he could not reach to and calumnious
murmuring against the pious, gluttonous enjoyment of food,
the dull glowering anger amid which he brooded upon his longing, the
swamp of spiritual and bodily sloth in which his whole being had sunk.

As he sat in his bench gazing calmly at the rector's shrewd harsh face,
his mind wound itself in and out of the curious questions proposed to
it. If a man had stolen a pound in his youth and had used that pound to
amass a huge fortune how much was he obliged to give back, the pound he
had stolen only or the pound together with the compound interest
accruing upon it or all his huge fortune? If a layman in giving baptism
pour the water before saying the words is the child baptized? Is
baptism with a mineral water valid? How comes it that while the first
beatitude promises the kingdom of heaven to the poor of heart the
second beatitude promises also to the meek that they shall possess the
land? Why was the sacrament of the eucharist instituted under the two
species of bread and wine if Jesus Christ be present body and blood,
soul and divinity, in the bread alone and in the wine alone? Does a
tiny particle of the consecrated bread contain all the body and blood
of Jesus Christ or a part only of the body and blood? If the wine
change into vinegar and the host crumble into corruption after they
have been consecrated, is Jesus Christ still present under their
species as God and as man?

--Here he is! Here he is!

A boy from his post at the window had seen the rector come from the
house. All the catechisms were opened and all heads bent upon them
silently. The rector entered and took his seat on the dais. A gentle
kick from the tall boy in the bench behind urged Stephen to ask a
difficult question.

The rector did not ask for a catechism to hear the lesson from. He
clasped his hands on the desk and said:

--The retreat will begin on Wednesday afternoon in honour of saint
Francis Xavier whose feast day is Saturday. The retreat will go on from
Wednesday to Friday. On Friday confession will be heard all the
afternoon after beads. If any boys have special confessors perhaps it
will be better for them not to change. Mass will be on Saturday morning
at nine o'clock and general communion for the whole college. Saturday
will be a free day. But Saturday and Sunday being free days some boys
might be inclined to think that Monday is a free day also. Beware of
making that mistake. I think you, Lawless, are likely to make that
mistake.

--I sir? Why, sir?

A little wave of quiet mirth broke forth over the class of boys from
the rector's grim smile. Stephen's heart began slowly to fold and fade
with fear like a withering flower.

The rector went on gravely:

--You are all familiar with the story of the life of saint Francis
Xavier, I suppose, the patron of your college. He came of an old and
illustrious Spanish family and you remember that he was one of the
first followers of saint Ignatius. They met in Paris where Francis
Xavier was professor of philosophy at the university. This young and
brilliant nobleman and man of letters entered heart and soul into the
ideas of our glorious founder and you know that he, at his own desire,
was sent by saint Ignatius to preach to the Indians. He is called, as
you know, the apostle of the Indies. He went from country to country in
the east, from Africa to India, from India to Japan, baptizing the
people. He is said to have baptized as many as ten thousand idolaters
in one month. It is said that his right arm had grown powerless from
having been raised so often over the heads of those whom he baptized.
He wished then to go to China to win still more souls for God but he
died of fever on the island of Sancian. A great saint, saint Francis
Xavier! A great soldier of God!

The rector paused and then, shaking his clasped hands before him, went
on:

--He had the faith in him that moves mountains. Ten thousand souls won
for God in a single month! That is a true conqueror, true to the motto
of our order: AD MAJOREM DEI GLORIAM! A saint who has great power in
heaven, remember: power to intercede for us in our grief; power to
obtain whatever we pray for if it be for the good of our souls; power
above all to obtain for us the grace to repent if we be in sin. A great
saint, saint Francis Xavier! A great fisher of souls!

He ceased to shake his clasped hands and, resting them against his
forehead, looked right and left of them keenly at his listeners out of
his dark stern eyes.

In the silence their dark fire kindled the dusk into a tawny glow.
Stephen's heart had withered up like a flower of the desert that feels
the simoom coming from afar.


* * * * *


--REMEMBER ONLY THY LAST THINGS AND THOU SHALT NOT SIN FOR EVER--words
taken, my dear little brothers in Christ, from the book of
Ecclesiastes, seventh chapter, fortieth verse. In the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Stephen sat in the front bench of the chapel. Father Arnall sat at a
table to the left of the altar. He wore about his shoulders a heavy
cloak; his pale face was drawn and his voice broken with rheum. The
figure of his old master, so strangely re-arisen, brought back to
Stephen's mind his life at Clongowes: the wide playgrounds, swarming
with boys; the square ditch; the little cemetery off the main avenue of
limes where he had dreamed of being buried; the firelight on the wall
of the infirmary where he lay sick; the sorrowful face of Brother
Michael. His soul, as these memories came back to him, became again a
child's soul.

--We are assembled here today, my dear little brothers in Christ, for
one brief moment far away from the busy bustle of the outer world to
celebrate and to honour one of the greatest of saints, the apostle of
the Indies, the patron saint also of your college, saint Francis
Xavier. Year after year, for much longer than any of you, my dear
little boys, can remember or than I can remember, the boys of this
college have met in this very chapel to make their annual retreat
before the feast day of their patron saint. Time has gone on and
brought with it its changes. Even in the last few years what changes
can most of you not remember? Many of the boys who sat in those front
benches a few years ago are perhaps now in distant lands, in the
burning tropics, or immersed in professional duties or in seminaries,
or voyaging over the vast expanse of the deep or, it may be, already
called by the great God to another life and to the rendering up of
their stewardship. And still as the years roll by, bringing with them
changes for good and bad, the memory of the great saint is honoured by
the boys of this college who make every year their annual retreat on
the days preceding the feast day set apart by our Holy Mother the
Church to transmit to all the ages the name and fame of one of the
greatest sons of catholic Spain.

--Now what is the meaning of this word RETREAT and why is it allowed
on all hands to be a most salutary practice for all who desire to lead
before God and in the eyes of men a truly christian life? A retreat, my
dear boys, signifies a withdrawal for awhile from the cares of our
life, the cares of this workaday world, in order to examine the state
of our conscience, to reflect on the mysteries of holy religion and to
understand better why we are here in this world. During these few days
I intend to put before you some thoughts concerning the four last
things. They are, as you know from your catechism, death, judgement,
hell, and heaven. We shall try to understand them fully during these
few days so that we may derive from the understanding of them a lasting
benefit to our souls. And remember, my dear boys, that we have been
sent into this world for one thing and for one thing alone: to do God's
holy will and to save our immortal souls. All else is worthless. One
thing alone is needful, the salvation of one's soul. What doth it
profit a man to gain the whole world if he suffer the loss of his
immortal soul? Ah, my dear boys, believe me there is nothing in this
wretched world that can make up for such a loss.

--I will ask you, therefore, my dear boys, to put away from your minds
during these few days all worldly thoughts, whether of study or
pleasure or ambition, and to give all your attention to the state of
your souls. I need hardly remind you that during the days of the
retreat all boys are expected to preserve a quiet and pious demeanour
and to shun all loud unseemly pleasure. The elder boys, of course, will
see that this custom is not infringed and I look especially to the
prefects and officers of the sodality of Our Blessed Lady and of the
sodality of the holy angels to set a good example to their
fellow-students.

--Let us try, therefore, to make this retreat in honour of saint
Francis with our whole heart and our whole mind. God's blessing will
then be upon all your year's studies. But, above and beyond all, let
this retreat be one to which you can look back in after years when
maybe you are far from this college and among very different
surroundings, to which you can look back with joy and thankfulness and
give thanks to God for having granted you this occasion of laying the
first foundation of a pious honourable zealous christian life. And if,
as may so happen, there be at this moment in these benches any poor
soul who has had the unutterable misfortune to lose God's holy grace
and to fall into grievous sin, I fervently trust and pray that this
retreat may be the turning point in the life of that soul. I pray to
God through the merits of His zealous servant Francis Xavier, that such
a soul may be led to sincere repentance and that the holy communion on
saint Francis's day of this year may be a lasting covenant between God
and that soul. For just and unjust, for saint and sinner alike, may
this retreat be a memorable one.

--Help me, my dear little brothers in Christ. Help me by your pious
attention, by your own devotion, by your outward demeanour. Banish from
your minds all worldly thoughts and think only of the last things,
death, judgement, hell, and heaven. He who remembers these things, says
Ecclesiastes, shall not sin for ever. He who remembers the last things
will act and think with them always before his eyes. He will live a
good life and die a good death, believing and knowing that, if he has
sacrificed much in this earthly life, it will be given to him a
hundredfold and a thousandfold more in the life to come, in the kingdom
without end--a blessing, my dear boys, which I wish you from my heart,
one and all, in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen!

As he walked home with silent companions, a thick fog seemed to compass
his mind. He waited in stupor of mind till it should lift and reveal
what it had hidden. He ate his dinner with surly appetite and when the
meal was over and the grease-strewn plates lay abandoned on the table,
he rose and went to the window, clearing the thick scum from his mouth
with his tongue and licking it from his lips. So he had sunk to the
state of a beast that licks his chaps after meat. This was the end; and
a faint glimmer of fear began to pierce the fog of his mind. He pressed
his face against the pane of the window and gazed out into the
darkening street. Forms passed this way and that through the dull
light. And that was life. The letters of the name of Dublin lay heavily
upon his mind, pushing one another surlily hither and thither with slow
boorish insistence. His soul was fattening and congealing into a gross
grease, plunging ever deeper in its dull fear into a sombre threatening
dusk while the body that was his stood, listless and dishonoured,
gazing out of darkened eyes, helpless, perturbed, and human for a
bovine god to stare upon.

The next day brought death and judgement, stirring his soul slowly from
its listless despair. The faint glimmer of fear became a terror of
spirit as the hoarse voice of the preacher blew death into his soul. He
suffered its agony. He felt the death chill touch the extremities and
creep onward towards the heart, the film of death veiling the eyes, the
bright centres of the brain extinguished one by one like lamps, the
last sweat oozing upon the skin, the powerlessness of the dying limbs,
the speech thickening and wandering and failing, the heart throbbing
faintly and more faintly, all but vanquished, the breath, the poor
breath, the poor helpless human spirit, sobbing and sighing, gurgling
and rattling in the throat. No help! No help! He--he himself--his
body to which he had yielded was dying. Into the grave with it. Nail it
down into a wooden box, the corpse. Carry it out of the house on the
shoulders of hirelings. Thrust it out of men's sight into a long hole
in the ground, into the grave, to rot, to feed the mass of its creeping
worms and to be devoured by scuttling plump-bellied rats.

And while the friends were still standing in tears by the bedside the
soul of the sinner was judged. At the last moment of consciousness the
whole earthly life passed before the vision of the soul and, ere it had
time to reflect, the body had died and the soul stood terrified before
the judgement seat. God, who had long been merciful, would then be
just. He had long been patient, pleading with the sinful soul,
giving it time to repent, sparing it yet awhile. But that time had
gone. Time was to sin and to enjoy, time was to scoff at God and at the
warnings of His holy church, time was to defy His majesty, to disobey
His commands, to hoodwink one's fellow men, to commit sin after sin and
to hide one's corruption from the sight of men. But that time was over.
Now it was God's turn: and He was not to be hoodwinked or deceived.
Every sin would then come forth from its lurking place, the most
rebellious against the divine will and the most degrading to our poor
corrupt nature, the tiniest imperfection and the most heinous atrocity.
What did it avail then to have been a great emperor, a great general, a
marvellous inventor, the most learned of the learned? All were as one
before the judgement seat of God. He would reward the good and punish
the wicked. One single instant was enough for the trial of a man's
soul. One single instant after the body's death, the soul had been
weighed in the balance. The particular judgement was over and the soul
had passed to the abode of bliss or to the prison of purgatory or had
been hurled howling into hell.

Nor was that all. God's justice had still to be vindicated before men:
after the particular there still remained the general judgement. The
last day had come. The doomsday was at hand. The stars of heaven were
falling upon the earth like the figs cast by the fig-tree which the
wind has shaken. The sun, the great luminary of the universe, had
become as sackcloth of hair. The moon was blood-red. The firmament was
as a scroll rolled away. The archangel Michael, the prince of the
heavenly host, appeared glorious and terrible against the sky. With one
foot on the sea and one foot on the land he blew from the arch-angelical
trumpet the brazen death of time. The three blasts of the
angel filled all the universe. Time is, time was, but time shall be no
more. At the last blast the souls of universal humanity throng towards
the valley of Jehoshaphat, rich and poor, gentle and simple, wise and
foolish, good and wicked. The soul of every human being that has ever
existed, the souls of all those who shall yet be born, all the sons and
daughters of Adam, all are assembled on that supreme day. And lo, the
supreme judge is coming! No longer the lowly Lamb of God, no longer the
meek Jesus of Nazareth, no longer the Man of Sorrows, no longer the
Good Shepherd, He is seen now coming upon the clouds, in great power
and majesty, attended by nine choirs of angels, angels and archangels,
principalities, powers and virtues, thrones and dominations, cherubim
and seraphim, God Omnipotent, God Everlasting. He speaks: and His voice
is heard even at the farthest limits of space, even in the bottomless
abyss. Supreme Judge, from His sentence there will be and can be no
appeal. He calls the just to His side, bidding them enter into the
kingdom, the eternity of bliss prepared for them. The unjust He casts
from Him, crying in His offended majesty: DEPART FROM ME, YE CURSED,
INTO EVERLASTING FIRE WHICH WAS PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND HIS ANGELS.
O, what agony then for the miserable sinners! Friend is torn apart from
friend, children are torn from their parents, husbands from their
wives. The poor sinner holds out his arms to those who were dear to him
in this earthly world, to those whose simple piety perhaps he made a
mock of, to those who counselled him and tried to lead him on the right
path, to a kind brother, to a loving sister, to the mother and father
who loved him so dearly. But it is too late: the just turn away from
the wretched damned souls which now appear before the eyes of all in
their hideous and evil character. O you hypocrites, O, you whited
sepulchres, O you who present a smooth smiling face to the world while
your soul within is a foul swamp of sin, how will it fare with you in
that terrible day?

And this day will come, shall come, must come: the day of death and the
day of judgement. It is appointed unto man to die and after death the
judgement. Death is certain. The time and manner are uncertain, whether
from long disease or from some unexpected accident: the Son of God
cometh at an hour when you little expect Him. Be therefore ready every
moment, seeing that you may die at any moment. Death is the end of us
all. Death and judgement, brought into the world by the sin of our
first parents, are the dark portals that close our earthly existence,
the portals that open into the unknown and the unseen, portals through
which every soul must pass, alone, unaided save by its good works,
without friend or brother or parent or master to help it, alone and
trembling. Let that thought be ever before our minds and then we cannot
sin. Death, a cause of terror to the sinner, is a blessed moment for
him who has walked in the right path, fulfilling the duties of his
station in life, attending to his morning and evening prayers,
approaching the holy sacrament frequently and performing good and
merciful works. For the pious and believing catholic, for the just man,
death is no cause of terror. Was it not Addison, the great English
writer, who, when on his deathbed, sent for the wicked young earl of
Warwick to let him see how a christian can meet his end? He it is and he
alone, the pious and believing christian, who can say in his heart:

    O grave, where is thy victory?
    O death, where is thy sting?

Every word of it was for him. Against his sin, foul and secret, the
whole wrath of God was aimed. The preacher's knife had probed deeply
into his disclosed conscience and he felt now that his soul was
festering in sin. Yes, the preacher was right. God's turn had come.
Like a beast in its lair his soul had lain down in its own filth but
the blasts of the angel's trumpet had driven him forth from the
darkness of sin into the light. The words of doom cried by the angel
shattered in an instant his presumptuous peace. The wind of the last
day blew through his mind, his sins, the jewel-eyed harlots of his
imagination, fled before the hurricane, squeaking like mice in their
terror and huddled under a mane of hair.

As he crossed the square, walking homeward, the light laughter of a
girl reached his burning ear. The frail gay sound smote his heart more
strongly than a trumpet blast, and, not daring to lift his eyes, he
turned aside and gazed, as he walked, into the shadow of the tangled
shrubs. Shame rose from his smitten heart and flooded his whole being.
The image of Emma appeared before him, and under her eyes the flood of
shame rushed forth anew from his heart. If she knew to what his mind
had subjected her or how his brute-like lust had torn and trampled upon
her innocence! Was that boyish love? Was that chivalry? Was that
poetry? The sordid details of his orgies stank under his very nostrils.
The soot-coated packet of pictures which he had hidden in the flue of
the fireplace and in the presence of whose shameless or bashful
wantonness he lay for hours sinning in thought and deed; his monstrous
dreams, peopled by ape-like creatures and by harlots with gleaming
jewel eyes; the foul long letters he had written in the joy of guilty
confession and carried secretly for days and days only to throw them
under cover of night among the grass in the corner of a field or
beneath some hingeless door in some niche in the hedges where a girl
might come upon them as she walked by and read them secretly. Mad! Mad!
Was it possible he had done these things? A cold sweat broke out upon
his forehead as the foul memories condensed within his brain.

When the agony of shame had passed from him he tried to raise his soul
from its abject powerlessness. God and the Blessed Virgin were too far
from him: God was too great and stern and the Blessed Virgin too pure
and holy. But he imagined that he stood near Emma in a wide land and,
humbly and in tears, bent and kissed the elbow of her sleeve.

In the wide land under a tender lucid evening sky, a cloud drifting
westward amid a pale green sea of heaven, they stood together, children
that had erred. Their error had offended deeply God's majesty though it
was the error of two children; but it had not offended her whose beauty
IS NOT LIKE EARTHLY BEAUTY, DANGEROUS TO LOOK UPON, BUT LIKE THE
MORNING STAR WHICH IS ITS EMBLEM, BRIGHT AND MUSICAL. The eyes were
not offended which she turned upon him nor reproachful. She placed
their hands together, hand in hand, and said, speaking to their hearts:

--Take hands, Stephen and Emma. It is a beautiful evening now in
heaven. You have erred but you are always my children. It is one heart
that loves another heart. Take hands together, my dear children, and
you will be happy together and your hearts will love each other.

The chapel was flooded by the dull scarlet light that filtered through
the lowered blinds; and through the fissure between the last blind and
the sash a shaft of wan light entered like a spear and touched the
embossed brasses of the candlesticks upon the altar that gleamed like
the battle-worn mail armour of angels.

Rain was falling on the chapel, on the garden, on the college. It would
rain for ever, noiselessly. The water would rise inch by inch, covering
the grass and shrubs, covering the trees and houses, covering the
monuments and the mountain tops. All life would be choked off,
noiselessly: birds, men, elephants, pigs, children: noiselessly
floating corpses amid the litter of the wreckage of the world. Forty
days and forty nights the rain would fall till the waters covered the
face of the earth.

It might be. Why not?

--HELL HAS ENLARGED ITS SOUL AND OPENED ITS MOUTH WITHOUT ANY
LIMITS--words  taken, my dear little brothers in Christ Jesus, from the
book of Isaias, fifth chapter, fourteenth verse. In the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

The preacher took a chainless watch from a pocket within his soutane
and, having considered its dial for a moment in silence, placed it
silently before him on the table.

He began to speak in a quiet tone.

--Adam and Eve, my dear boys, were, as you know, our first parents,
and you will remember that they were created by God in order that the
seats in heaven left vacant by the fall of Lucifer and his rebellious
angels might be filled again. Lucifer, we are told, was a son of the
morning, a radiant and mighty angel; yet he fell: he fell and there
fell with him a third part of the host of heaven: he fell and was
hurled with his rebellious angels into hell. What his sin was we cannot
say. Theologians consider that it was the sin of pride, the sinful
thought conceived in an instant: NON SERVIAM: I WILL NOT SERVE. That
instant was his ruin.

He offended the majesty of God by the sinful thought of one instant and
God cast him out of heaven into hell for ever.

--Adam and Eve were then created by God and placed in Eden, in the
plain of Damascus, that lovely garden resplendent with sunlight and
colour, teeming with luxuriant vegetation. The fruitful earth gave them
her bounty: beasts and birds were their willing servants: they knew not
the ills our flesh is heir to, disease and poverty and death: all that
a great and generous God could do for them was done. But there was one
condition imposed on them by God: obedience to His word. They were not
to eat of the fruit of the forbidden tree.

--Alas, my dear little boys, they too fell. The devil, once a shining
angel, a son of the morning, now a foul fiend came in the shape of a
serpent, the subtlest of all the beasts of the field. He envied them.
He, the fallen great one, could not bear to think that man, a being of
clay, should possess the inheritance which he by his sin had forfeited
for ever. He came to the woman, the weaker vessel, and poured the
poison of his eloquence into her ear, promising her--O, the blasphemy
of that promise!--that if she and Adam ate of the forbidden fruit they
would become as gods, nay as God Himself. Eve yielded to the wiles of
the archtempter. She ate the apple and gave it also to Adam who had not
the moral courage to resist her. The poison tongue of Satan had done
its work. They fell.

--And then the voice of God was heard in that garden, calling His
creature man to account: and Michael, prince of the heavenly host, with
a sword of flame in his hand, appeared before the guilty pair and drove
them forth from Eden into the world, the world of sickness and
striving, of cruelty and disappointment, of labour and hardship, to
earn their bread in the sweat of their brow. But even then how merciful
was God! He took pity on our poor degraded parents and promised that in
the fullness of time He would send down from heaven One who would
redeem them, make them once more children of God and heirs to the
kingdom of heaven: and that One, that Redeemer of fallen man, was to be
God's only begotten Son, the Second Person of the Most Blessed Trinity,
the Eternal Word.

--He came. He was born of a virgin pure, Mary the virgin mother. He
was born in a poor cowhouse in Judea and lived as a humble carpenter
for thirty years until the hour of His mission had come. And then,
filled with love for men, He went forth and called to men to hear the
new gospel.

--Did they listen? Yes, they listened but would not hear. He was
seized and bound like a common criminal, mocked at as a fool, set aside
to give place to a public robber, scourged with five thousand lashes,
crowned with a crown of thorns, hustled through the streets by the
jewish rabble and the Roman soldiery, stripped of his garments and
hanged upon a gibbet and His side was pierced with a lance and from the
wounded body of our Lord water and blood issued continually.

--Yet even then, in that hour of supreme agony, Our Merciful Redeemer had
pity for mankind. Yet even there, on the hill of Calvary, He founded
the holy catholic church against which, it is promised, the gates of
hell shall not prevail. He founded it upon the rock of ages, and
endowed it with His grace, with sacraments and sacrifice, and promised
that if men would obey the word of His church they would still enter
into eternal life; but if, after all that had been done for them, they
still persisted in their wickedness, there remained for them an
eternity of torment: hell.

The preacher's voice sank. He paused, joined his palms for an instant,
parted them. Then he resumed:

--Now let us try for a moment to realize, as far as we can, the nature
of that abode of the damned which the justice of an offended God has
called into existence for the eternal punishment of sinners. Hell is a
strait and dark and foul-smelling prison, an abode of demons and lost
souls, filled with fire and smoke. The straitness of this prison house
is expressly designed by God to punish those who refused to be bound by
His laws. In earthly prisons the poor captive has at least some liberty
of movement, were it only within the four walls of his cell or in the
gloomy yard of his prison. Not so in hell. There, by reason of the
great number of the damned, the prisoners are heaped together in their
awful prison, the walls of which are said to be four thousand miles
thick: and the damned are so utterly bound and helpless that, as a
blessed saint, saint Anselm, writes in his book on similitudes, they
are not even able to remove from the eye a worm that gnaws it.

--They lie in exterior darkness. For, remember, the fire of hell gives
forth no light. As, at the command of God, the fire of the Babylonian
furnace lost its heat but not its light, so, at the command of God, the
fire of hell, while retaining the intensity of its heat, burns
eternally in darkness. It is a never ending storm of darkness, dark
flames and dark smoke of burning brimstone, amid which the bodies are
heaped one upon another without even a glimpse of air. Of all the
plagues with which the land of the Pharaohs were smitten one plague
alone, that of darkness, was called horrible. What name, then, shall we
give to the darkness of hell which is to last not for three days alone
but for all eternity?

--The horror of this strait and dark prison is increased by its awful
stench. All the filth of the world, all the offal and scum of the
world, we are told, shall run there as to a vast reeking sewer when the
terrible conflagration of the last day has purged the world. The
brimstone, too, which burns there in such prodigious quantity fills all
hell with its intolerable stench; and the bodies of the damned
themselves exhale such a pestilential odour that, as saint Bonaventure
says, one of them alone would suffice to infect the whole world. The
very air of this world, that pure element, becomes foul and
unbreathable when it has been long enclosed. Consider then what must be
the foulness of the air of hell. Imagine some foul and putrid corpse
that has lain rotting and decomposing in the grave, a jelly-like mass
of liquid corruption. Imagine such a corpse a prey to flames, devoured
by the fire of burning brimstone and giving off dense choking fumes of
nauseous loathsome decomposition. And then imagine this sickening
stench, multiplied a millionfold and a millionfold again from the
millions upon millions of fetid carcasses massed together in the
reeking darkness, a huge and rotting human fungus. Imagine all this,
and you will have some idea of the horror of the stench of hell.

--But this stench is not, horrible though it is, the greatest physical
torment to which the damned are subjected. The torment of fire is the
greatest torment to which the tyrant has ever subjected his fellow
creatures. Place your finger for a moment in the flame of a candle and
you will feel the pain of fire. But our earthly fire was created by God
for the benefit of man, to maintain in him the spark of life and to
help him in the useful arts, whereas the fire of hell is of another
quality and was created by God to torture and punish the unrepentant
sinner. Our earthly fire also consumes more or less rapidly according
as the object which it attacks is more or less combustible, so that
human ingenuity has even succeeded in inventing chemical preparations
to check or frustrate its action. But the sulphurous brimstone which
burns in hell is a substance which is specially designed to burn for
ever and for ever with unspeakable fury. Moreover, our earthly fire
destroys at the same time as it burns, so that the more intense it is
the shorter is its duration; but the fire of hell has this property,
that it preserves that which it burns, and, though it rages with
incredible intensity, it rages for ever.

--Our earthly fire again, no matter how fierce or widespread it may be,
is always of a limited extent; but the lake of fire in hell is
boundless, shoreless and bottomless. It is on record that the devil
himself, when asked the question by a certain soldier, was obliged to
confess that if a whole mountain were thrown into the burning ocean of
hell it would be burned up in an instant like a piece of wax. And this
terrible fire will not afflict the bodies of the damned only from
without, but each lost soul will be a hell unto itself, the boundless
fire raging in its very vitals. O, how terrible is the lot of those
wretched beings! The blood seethes and boils in the veins, the brains
are boiling in the skull, the heart in the breast glowing and bursting,
the bowels a red-hot mass of burning pulp, the tender eyes flaming like
molten balls.

--And yet what I have said as to the strength and quality and
boundlessness of this fire is as nothing when compared to its
intensity, an intensity which it has as being the instrument chosen by
divine design for the punishment of soul and body alike. It is a fire
which proceeds directly from the ire of God, working not of its own
activity but as an instrument of Divine vengeance. As the waters of
baptism cleanse the soul with the body, so do the fires of punishment
torture the spirit with the flesh. Every sense of the flesh is tortured
and every faculty of the soul therewith: the eyes with impenetrable
utter darkness, the nose with noisome odours, the ears with yells and
howls and execrations, the taste with foul matter, leprous corruption,
nameless suffocating filth, the touch with redhot goads and spikes,
with cruel tongues of flame. And through the several torments of the
senses the immortal soul is tortured eternally in its very essence amid
the leagues upon leagues of glowing fires kindled in the abyss by the
offended majesty of the Omnipotent God and fanned into everlasting and
ever-increasing fury by the breath of the anger of the God-head.

--Consider finally that the torment of this infernal prison is
increased by the company of the damned themselves. Evil company on
earth is so noxious that the plants, as if by instinct, withdraw from
the company of whatsoever is deadly or hurtful to them. In hell all
laws are overturned--there is no thought of family or country, of
ties, of relationships. The damned howl and scream at one another,
their torture and rage intensified by the presence of beings tortured
and raging like themselves. All sense of humanity is forgotten. The
yells of the suffering sinners fill the remotest corners of the vast
abyss. The mouths of the damned are full of blasphemies against God and
of hatred for their fellow sufferers and of curses against those souls
which were their accomplices in sin. In olden times it was the custom
to punish the parricide, the man who had raised his murderous hand
against his father, by casting him into the depths of the sea in a sack
in which were placed a cock, a monkey, and a serpent. The intention of
those law-givers who framed such a law, which seems cruel in our times,
was to punish the criminal by the company of hurtful and hateful
beasts. But what is the fury of those dumb beasts compared with the
fury of execration which bursts from the parched lips and aching
throats of the damned in hell when they behold in their companions in
misery those who aided and abetted them in sin, those whose words sowed
the first seeds of evil thinking and evil living in their minds, those
whose immodest suggestions led them on to sin, those whose eyes tempted
and allured them from the path of virtue. They turn upon those
accomplices and upbraid them and curse them. But they are helpless and
hopeless: it is too late now for repentance.

--Last of all consider the frightful torment to those damned souls,
tempters and tempted alike, of the company of the devils. These devils
will afflict the damned in two ways, by their presence and by their
reproaches. We can have no idea of how horrible these devils are. Saint
Catherine of Siena once saw a devil and she has written that, rather
than look again for one single instant on such a frightful monster, she
would prefer to walk until the end of her life along a track of red
coals. These devils, who were once beautiful angels, have become as
hideous and ugly as they once were beautiful. They mock and jeer at the
lost souls whom they dragged down to ruin. It is they, the foul demons,
who are made in hell the voices of conscience. Why did you sin? Why did
you lend an ear to the temptings of friends? Why did you turn aside
from your pious practices and good works? Why did you not shun the
occasions of sin? Why did you not leave that evil companion? Why did
you not give up that lewd habit, that impure habit? Why did you not
listen to the counsels of your confessor? Why did you not, even after
you had fallen the first or the second or the third or the fourth or
the hundredth time, repent of your evil ways and turn to God who only
waited for your repentance to absolve you of your sins? Now the time
for repentance has gone by. Time is, time was, but time shall be no more!
Time was to sin in secrecy, to indulge in that sloth and pride, to
covet the unlawful, to yield to the promptings of your lower nature, to
live like the beasts of the field, nay worse than the beasts of the
field, for they, at least, are but brutes and have no reason to guide
them: time was, but time shall be no more. God spoke to you by so many
voices, but you would not hear. You would not crush out that pride and
anger in your heart, you would not restore those ill-gotten goods, you
would not obey the precepts of your holy church nor attend to your
religious duties, you would not abandon those wicked companions, you
would not avoid those dangerous temptations. Such is the language of
those fiendish tormentors, words of taunting and of reproach, of hatred
and of disgust. Of disgust, yes! For even they, the very devils, when
they sinned, sinned by such a sin as alone was compatible with such
angelical natures, a rebellion of the intellect: and they, even they,
the foul devils must turn away, revolted and disgusted, from the
contemplation of those unspeakable sins by which degraded man outrages
and defiles the temple of the Holy Ghost, defiles and pollutes himself.

--O, my dear little brothers in Christ, may it never be our lot to
hear that language! May it never be our lot, I say! In the last day of
terrible reckoning I pray fervently to God that not a single soul of
those who are in this chapel today may be found among those miserable
beings whom the Great Judge shall command to depart for ever from His
sight, that not one of us may ever hear ringing in his ears the awful
sentence of rejection: DEPART FROM ME, YE CURSED, INTO EVERLASTING FIRE
WHICH WAS PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND HIS ANGELS!

He came down the aisle of the chapel, his legs shaking and the scalp of
his head trembling as though it had been touched by ghostly fingers. He
passed up the staircase and into the corridor along the walls of which
the overcoats and waterproofs hung like gibbeted malefactors, headless
and dripping and shapeless. And at every step he feared that he had
already died, that his soul had been wrenched forth of the sheath of
his body, that he was plunging headlong through space.

He could not grip the floor with his feet and sat heavily at his desk,
opening one of his books at random and poring over it. Every word for
him. It was true. God was almighty. God could call him now, call him as
he sat at his desk, before he had time to be conscious of the summons.
God had called him. Yes? What? Yes? His flesh shrank together as it
felt the approach of the ravenous tongues of flames, dried up as it
felt about it the swirl of stifling air. He had died. Yes. He was
judged. A wave of fire swept through his body: the first. Again a wave.
His brain began to glow. Another. His brain was simmering and bubbling
within the cracking tenement of the skull. Flames burst forth from his
skull like a corolla, shrieking like voices:

--Hell! Hell! Hell! Hell! Hell!

Voices spoke near him:

--On hell.

--I suppose he rubbed it into you well.

--You bet he did. He put us all into a blue funk.

--That's what you fellows want: and plenty of it to make you work.

He leaned back weakly in his desk. He had not died. God had spared him
still. He was still in the familiar world of the school. Mr Tate and
Vincent Heron stood at the window, talking, jesting, gazing out at the
bleak rain, moving their heads.

--I wish it would clear up. I had arranged to go for a spin on the
bike with some fellows out by Malahide. But the roads must be
knee-deep.

--It might clear up, sir.

The voices that he knew so well, the common words, the quiet of the
classroom when the voices paused and the silence was filled by the
sound of softly browsing cattle as the other boys munched their lunches
tranquilly, lulled his aching soul.

There was still time. O Mary, refuge of sinners, intercede for him! O
Virgin Undefiled, save him from the gulf of death!

The English lesson began with the hearing of the history. Royal
persons, favourites, intriguers, bishops, passed like mute phantoms
behind their veil of names. All had died: all had been judged. What did
it profit a man to gain the whole world if he lost his soul? At last he
had understood: and human life lay around him, a plain of peace whereon
ant-like men laboured in brotherhood, their dead sleeping under quiet
mounds. The elbow of his companion touched him and his heart was
touched: and when he spoke to answer a question of his master he heard
his own voice full of the quietude of humility and contrition.

His soul sank back deeper into depths of contrite peace, no longer able
to suffer the pain of dread, and sending forth, as he sank, a faint
prayer. Ah yes, he would still be spared; he would repent in his heart
and be forgiven; and then those above, those in heaven, would see what
he would do to make up for the past: a whole life, every hour of life.
Only wait.

--All, God! All, all!

A messenger came to the door to say that confessions were being heard
in the chapel. Four boys left the room; and he heard others passing
down the corridor. A tremulous chill blew round his heart, no stronger
than a little wind, and yet, listening and suffering silently, he
seemed to have laid an ear against the muscle of his own heart, feeling
it close and quail, listening to the flutter of its ventricles.

No escape. He had to confess, to speak out in words what he had done
and thought, sin after sin. How? How?

--Father, I...

The thought slid like a cold shining rapier into his tender flesh:
confession. But not there in the chapel of the college. He would
confess all, every sin of deed and thought, sincerely; but not there
among his school companions. Far away from there in some dark place he
would murmur out his own shame; and he besought God humbly not to be
offended with him if he did not dare to confess in the college chapel
and in utter abjection of spirit he craved forgiveness mutely of the
boyish hearts about him.

Time passed.

He sat again in the front bench of the chapel. The daylight without was
already failing and, as it fell slowly through the dull red blinds, it
seemed that the sun of the last day was going down and that all souls
were being gathered for the judgement.

--I AM CAST AWAY FROM THE SIGHT OF THINE EYES: words taken, my dear
little brothers in Christ, from the Book of Psalms, thirtieth chapter,
twenty-third verse. In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen.

The preacher began to speak in a quiet friendly tone. His face was kind
and he joined gently the fingers of each hand, forming a frail cage by
the union of their tips.

--This morning we endeavoured, in our reflection upon hell, to make
what our holy founder calls in his book of spiritual exercises, the
composition of place. We endeavoured, that is, to imagine with the
senses of the mind, in our imagination, the material character of that
awful place and of the physical torments which all who are in hell endure.
This evening we shall consider for a few moments the nature of the
spiritual torments of hell.

--Sin, remember, is a twofold enormity. It is a base consent to the
promptings of our corrupt nature to the lower instincts, to that which
is gross and beast-like; and it is also a turning away from the counsel
of our higher nature, from all that is pure and holy, from the Holy God
Himself. For this reason mortal sin is punished in hell by two
different forms of punishment, physical and spiritual.

Now of all these spiritual pains by far the greatest is the pain of
loss, so great, in fact, that in itself it is a torment greater than
all the others. Saint Thomas, the greatest doctor of the church, the
angelic doctor, as he is called, says that the worst damnation consists
in this, that the understanding of man is totally deprived of divine
light and his affection obstinately turned away from the goodness of
God. God, remember, is a being infinitely good, and therefore the loss
of such a being must be a loss infinitely painful. In this life we have
not a very clear idea of what such a loss must be, but the damned in
hell, for their greater torment, have a full understanding of that
which they have lost, and understand that they have lost it through
their own sins and have lost it for ever. At the very instant of death
the bonds of the flesh are broken asunder and the soul at once flies
towards God as towards the centre of her existence. Remember, my dear
little boys, our souls long to be with God. We come from God, we live
by God, we belong to God: we are His, inalienably His. God loves with a
divine love every human soul, and every human soul lives in that love.
How could it be otherwise? Every breath that we draw, every thought of
our brain, every instant of life proceeds from God's inexhaustible
goodness. And if it be pain for a mother to be parted from her child,
for a man to be exiled from hearth and home, for friend to be sundered
from friend, O think what pain, what anguish it must be for the poor
soul to be spurned from the presence of the supremely good and loving
Creator Who has called that soul into existence from nothingness and
sustained it in life and loved it with an immeasurable love. This,
then, to be separated for ever from its greatest good, from God, and to
feel the anguish of that separation, knowing full well that it is
unchangeable: this is the greatest torment which the created soul is
capable of bearing, POENA DAMNI, the pain of loss.

The second pain which will afflict the souls of the damned in hell is
the pain of conscience. Just as in dead bodies worms are engendered by
putrefaction, so in the souls of the lost there arises a perpetual
remorse from the putrefaction of sin, the sting of conscience, the
worm, as Pope Innocent the Third calls it, of the triple sting. The
first sting inflicted by this cruel worm will be the memory of past
pleasures. O what a dreadful memory will that be! In the lake of
all-devouring flame the proud king will remember the pomps of his
court, the wise but wicked man his libraries and instruments of
research, the lover of artistic pleasures his marbles and pictures and
other art treasures, he who delighted in the pleasures of the table his
gorgeous feasts, his dishes prepared with such delicacy, his choice
wines; the miser will remember his hoard of gold, the robber his
ill-gotten wealth, the angry and revengeful and merciless murderers
their deeds of blood and violence in which they revelled, the impure
and adulterous the unspeakable and filthy pleasures in which they
delighted. They will remember all this and loathe themselves and their
sins. For how miserable will all those pleasures seem to the soul
condemned to suffer in hellfire for ages and ages. How they will rage
and fume to think that they have lost the bliss of heaven for the dross
of earth, for a few pieces of metal, for vain honours, for bodily
comforts, for a tingling of the nerves. They will repent indeed: and
this is the second sting of the worm of conscience, a late and
fruitless sorrow for sins committed. Divine justice insists that the
understanding of those miserable wretches be fixed continually on the
sins of which they were guilty, and moreover, as saint Augustine points
out, God will impart to them His own knowledge of sin, so that sin will
appear to them in all its hideous malice as it appears to the eyes of
God Himself. They will behold their sins in all their foulness and
repent but it will be too late and then they will bewail the good
occasions which they neglected. This is the last and deepest and most
cruel sting of the worm of conscience. The conscience will say: You had
time and opportunity to repent and would not. You were brought up
religiously by your parents. You had the sacraments and grace and
indulgences of the church to aid you. You had the minister of God to
preach to you, to call you back when you had strayed, to forgive you
your sins, no matter how many, how abominable, if only you had
confessed and repented. No. You would not. You flouted the ministers
of holy religion, you turned your back on the confessional, you
wallowed deeper and deeper in the mire of sin. God appealed to you,
threatened you, entreated you to return to Him. O, what shame, what
misery! The Ruler of the universe entreated you, a creature of clay, to
love Him Who made you and to keep His law. No. You would not. And now,
though you were to flood all hell with your tears if you could still
weep, all that sea of repentance would not gain for you what a single
tear of true repentance shed during your mortal life would have gained
for you. You implore now a moment of earthly life wherein to repent: in
vain. That time is gone: gone for ever.

--Such is the threefold sting of conscience, the viper which gnaws the
very heart's core of the wretches in hell, so that filled with hellish
fury they curse themselves for their folly and curse the evil
companions who have brought them to such ruin and curse the devils who
tempted them in life and now mock them in eternity and even revile and
curse the Supreme Being Whose goodness and patience they scorned and
slighted but Whose justice and power they cannot evade.

--The next spiritual pain to which the damned are subjected is the
pain of extension. Man, in this earthly life, though he be capable of
many evils, is not capable of them all at once, inasmuch as one evil
corrects and counteracts another just as one poison frequently corrects
another. In hell, on the contrary, one torment, instead of
counteracting another, lends it still greater force: and, moreover, as
the internal faculties are more perfect than the external senses, so
are they more capable of suffering. Just as every sense is afflicted
with a fitting torment, so is every spiritual faculty; the fancy with
horrible images, the sensitive faculty with alternate longing and rage,
the mind and understanding with an interior darkness more terrible even
than the exterior darkness which reigns in that dreadful prison. The
malice, impotent though it be, which possesses these demon souls is an
evil of boundless extension, of limitless duration, a frightful state
of wickedness which we can scarcely realize unless we bear in mind the
enormity of sin and the hatred God bears to it.

--Opposed to this pain of extension and yet coexistent with it we have
the pain of intensity. Hell is the centre of evils and, as you know,
things are more intense at their centres than at their remotest points.
There are no contraries or admixtures of any kind to temper or soften
in the least the pains of hell. Nay, things which are good in
themselves become evil in hell. Company, elsewhere a source of comfort
to the afflicted, will be there a continual torment: knowledge, so much
longed for as the chief good of the intellect, will there be hated
worse than ignorance: light, so much coveted by all creatures from the
lord of creation down to the humblest plant in the forest, will be
loathed intensely. In this life our sorrows are either not very long or
not very great because nature either overcomes them by habits or puts
an end to them by sinking under their weight. But in hell the torments
cannot be overcome by habit, for while they are of terrible intensity
they are at the same time of continual variety, each pain, so to speak,
taking fire from another and re-endowing that which has enkindled it
with a still fiercer flame. Nor can nature escape from these intense
and various tortures by succumbing to them for the soul is sustained
and maintained in evil so that its suffering may be the greater.
Boundless extension of torment, incredible intensity of suffering,
unceasing variety of torture--this is what the divine majesty, so
outraged by sinners, demands; this is what the holiness of heaven,
slighted and set aside for the lustful and low pleasures of the corrupt
flesh, requires; this is what the blood of the innocent Lamb of God,
shed for the redemption of sinners, trampled upon by the vilest of the
vile, insists upon.

--Last and crowning torture of all the tortures of that awful place is
the eternity of hell. Eternity! O, dread and dire word. Eternity! What
mind of man can understand it? And remember, it is an eternity of pain.
Even though the pains of hell were not so terrible as they are, yet
they would become infinite, as they are destined to last for ever. But
while they are everlasting they are at the same time, as you know,
intolerably intense, unbearably extensive. To bear even the sting of an
insect for all eternity would be a dreadful torment. What must it be,
then, to bear the manifold tortures of hell for ever? For ever! For all
eternity! Not for a year or for an age but for ever. Try to imagine the
awful meaning of this. You have often seen the sand on the seashore.
How fine are its tiny grains! And how many of those tiny little grains
go to make up the small handful which a child grasps in its play. Now
imagine a mountain of that sand, a million miles high, reaching from
the earth to the farthest heavens, and a million miles broad,
extending to remotest space, and a million miles in thickness;
and imagine such an enormous mass of countless particles of sand
multiplied as often as there are leaves in the forest, drops of water
in the mighty ocean, feathers on birds, scales on fish, hairs on
animals, atoms in the vast expanse of the air: and imagine that at the
end of every million years a little bird came to that mountain and
carried away in its beak a tiny grain of that sand. How many millions
upon millions of centuries would pass before that bird had carried away
even a square foot of that mountain, how many eons upon eons of ages
before it had carried away all? Yet at the end of that immense stretch
of time not even one instant of eternity could be said to have ended.
At the end of all those billions and trillions of years eternity would
have scarcely begun. And if that mountain rose again after it had been
all carried away, and if the bird came again and carried it all away
again grain by grain, and if it so rose and sank as many times as there
are stars in the sky, atoms in the air, drops of water in the sea,
leaves on the trees, feathers upon birds, scales upon fish, hairs upon
animals, at the end of all those innumerable risings and sinkings of
that immeasurably vast mountain not one single instant of eternity
could be said to have ended; even then, at the end of such a period,
after that eon of time the mere thought of which makes our very brain
reel dizzily, eternity would scarcely have begun.

--A holy saint (one of our own fathers I believe it was) was once
vouchsafed a vision of hell. It seemed to him that he stood in the
midst of a great hall, dark and silent save for the ticking of a great
clock. The ticking went on unceasingly; and it seemed to this saint
that the sound of the ticking was the ceaseless repetition of the
words--ever, never; ever, never. Ever to be in hell, never to be in heaven;
ever to be shut off from the presence of God, never to enjoy the
beatific vision; ever to be eaten with flames, gnawed by vermin, goaded
with burning spikes, never to be free from those pains; ever to have
the conscience upbraid one, the memory enrage, the mind filled with
darkness and despair, never to escape; ever to curse and revile the
foul demons who gloat fiendishly over the misery of their dupes, never
to behold the shining raiment of the blessed spirits; ever to cry out
of the abyss of fire to God for an instant, a single instant, of
respite from such awful agony, never to receive, even for an instant,
God's pardon; ever to suffer, never to enjoy; ever to be damned, never
to be saved; ever, never; ever, never. O, what a dreadful punishment!
An eternity of endless agony, of endless bodily and spiritual torment,
without one ray of hope, without one moment of cessation, of agony
limitless in intensity, of torment infinitely varied, of torture that
sustains eternally that which it eternally devours, of anguish that
everlastingly preys upon the spirit while it racks the flesh, an
eternity, every instant of which is itself an eternity of woe. Such is
the terrible punishment decreed for those who die in mortal sin by an
almighty and a just God.

--Yes, a just God! Men, reasoning always as men, are astonished that
God should mete out an everlasting and infinite punishment in the fires
of hell for a single grievous sin. They reason thus because, blinded by
the gross illusion of the flesh and the darkness of human
understanding, they are unable to comprehend the hideous malice of
mortal sin. They reason thus because they are unable to comprehend that
even venial sin is of such a foul and hideous nature that even if the
omnipotent Creator could end all the evil and misery in the world, the
wars, the diseases, the robberies, the crimes, the deaths, the murders,
on condition that he allowed a single venial sin to pass unpunished, a
single venial sin, a lie, an angry look, a moment of wilful sloth, He,
the great omnipotent God could not do so because sin, be it in thought
or deed, is a transgression of His law and God would not be God if He
did not punish the transgressor.

--A sin, an instant of rebellious pride of the intellect, made Lucifer
and a third part of the cohort of angels fall from their glory. A sin,
an instant of folly and weakness, drove Adam and Eve out of Eden and
brought death and suffering into the world. To retrieve the
consequences of that sin the Only Begotten Son of God came down to
earth, lived and suffered and died a most painful death, hanging for
three hours on the cross.

--O, my dear little brethren in Christ Jesus, will we then offend that
good Redeemer and provoke His anger? Will we trample again upon that
torn and mangled corpse? Will we spit upon that face so full of sorrow
and love? Will we too, like the cruel jews and the brutal soldiers,
mock that gentle and compassionate Saviour Who trod alone for our sake
the awful wine-press of sorrow? Every word of sin is a wound in His
tender side. Every sinful act is a thorn piercing His head. Every
impure thought, deliberately yielded to, is a keen lance transfixing that
sacred and loving heart. No, no. It is impossible for any human being to
do that which offends so deeply the divine majesty, that which is punished
by an eternity of agony, that which crucifies again the Son of God and
makes a mockery of Him.

--I pray to God that my poor words may have availed today to confirm
in holiness those who are in a state of grace, to strengthen the
wavering, to lead back to the state of grace the poor soul that has
strayed if any such be among you. I pray to God, and do you pray with
me, that we may repent of our sins. I will ask you now, all of you, to
repeat after me the act of contrition, kneeling here in this humble
chapel in the presence of God. He is there in the tabernacle burning
with love for mankind, ready to comfort the afflicted. Be not afraid.
No matter how many or how foul the sins if you only repent of them they
will be forgiven you. Let no worldly shame hold you back. God is still
the merciful Lord who wishes not the eternal death of the sinner but
rather that he be converted and live.

--He calls you to Him. You are His. He made you out of nothing. He
loved you as only a God can love. His arms are open to receive you even
though you have sinned against Him. Come to Him, poor sinner, poor vain
and erring sinner. Now is the acceptable time. Now is the hour.

The priest rose and, turning towards the altar, knelt upon the step
before the tabernacle in the fallen gloom. He waited till all in the
chapel had knelt and every least noise was still. Then, raising his
head, he repeated the act of contrition, phrase by phrase, with
fervour. The boys answered him phrase by phrase. Stephen, his tongue
cleaving to his palate, bowed his head, praying with his heart.


  --O my God!--
  --O my God!--
  --I am heartily sorry--
  --I am heartily sorry--
  --for having offended Thee--
  --for having offended Thee--
  --and I detest my sins--
  --and I detest my sins--
  --above every other evil--
  --above every other evil--
  --because they displease Thee, my God--
  --because they displease Thee, my God--
  --Who art so deserving--
  --Who art so deserving--
  --of all my love--
  --of all my love--
  --and I firmly purpose--
  --and I firmly purpose--
  --by Thy holy grace--
  --by Thy holy grace--
  --never more to offend Thee--
  --never more to offend Thee--
  --and to amend my life--
  --and to amend my life--


* * * * *


He went up to his room after dinner in order to be alone with his soul,
and at every step his soul seemed to sigh; at every step his soul
mounted with his feet, sighing in the ascent, through a region of
viscid gloom.

He halted on the landing before the door and then, grasping the
porcelain knob, opened the door quickly. He waited in fear, his soul
pining within him, praying silently that death might not touch his brow
as he passed over the threshold, that the fiends that inhabit darkness
might not be given power over him. He waited still at the threshold as
at the entrance to some dark cave. Faces were there; eyes: they waited
and watched.

--We knew perfectly well of course that though it was bound to come to
the light he would find considerable difficulty in endeavouring to try
to induce himself to try to endeavour to ascertain the spiritual
plenipotentiary and so we knew of course perfectly well--

Murmuring faces waited and watched; murmurous voices filled the dark
shell of the cave. He feared intensely in spirit and in flesh but,
raising his head bravely, he strode into the room firmly. A doorway, a
room, the same room, same window. He told himself calmly that those
words had absolutely no sense which had seemed to rise murmurously from
the dark. He told himself that it was simply his room with the door
open.

He closed the door and, walking swiftly to the bed, knelt beside it and
covered his face with his hands. His hands were cold and damp and his
limbs ached with chill. Bodily unrest and chill and weariness beset
him, routing his thoughts. Why was he kneeling there like a child
saying his evening prayers? To be alone with his soul, to examine his
conscience, to meet his sins face to face, to recall their times and
manners and circumstances, to weep over them. He could not weep. He
could not summon them to his memory. He felt only an ache of soul and
body, his whole being, memory, will, understanding, flesh, benumbed
and weary.

That was the work of devils, to scatter his thoughts and over-cloud his
conscience, assailing him at the gates of the cowardly and
sin-corrupted flesh: and, praying God timidly to forgive him his
weakness, he crawled up on to the bed and, wrapping the blankets
closely about him, covered his face again with his hands. He had
sinned. He had sinned so deeply against heaven and before God that he
was not worthy to be called God's child.

Could it be that he, Stephen Dedalus, had done those things? His
conscience sighed in answer. Yes, he had done them, secretly, filthily,
time after time, and, hardened in sinful impenitence, he had dared to
wear the mask of holiness before the tabernacle itself while his soul
within was a living mass of corruption. How came it that God had not
struck him dead? The leprous company of his sins closed about him,
breathing upon him, bending over him from all sides. He strove to
forget them in an act of prayer, huddling his limbs closer together and
binding down his eyelids: but the senses of his soul would not be bound
and, though his eyes were shut fast, he saw the places where he had
sinned and, though his ears were tightly covered, he heard. He desired
with all his will not to hear or see. He desired till his frame shook
under the strain of his desire and until the senses of his soul closed.
They closed for an instant and then opened. He saw.

A field of stiff weeds and thistles and tufted nettle-bunches. Thick
among the tufts of rank stiff growth lay battered canisters and clots
and coils of solid excrement. A faint marshlight struggling upwards
from all the ordure through the bristling grey-green weeds. An evil
smell, faint and foul as the light, curled upwards sluggishly out of
the canisters and from the stale crusted dung.

Creatures were in the field: one, three, six: creatures were moving in
the field, hither and thither. Goatish creatures with human faces,
hornybrowed, lightly bearded and grey as india-rubber. The malice of
evil glittered in their hard eyes, as they moved hither and thither,
trailing their long tails behind them. A rictus of cruel malignity lit
up greyly their old bony faces. One was clasping about his ribs a torn
flannel waistcoat, another complained monotonously as his beard stuck
in the tufted weeds. Soft language issued from their spittleless lips
as they swished in slow circles round and round the field, winding
hither and thither through the weeds, dragging their long tails amid
the rattling canisters. They moved in slow circles, circling closer and
closer to enclose, to enclose, soft language issuing from their lips,
their long swishing tails besmeared with stale shite, thrusting upwards
their terrific faces...

Help!

He flung the blankets from him madly to free his face and neck. That
was his hell. God had allowed him to see the hell reserved for his
sins: stinking, bestial, malignant, a hell of lecherous goatish fiends.
For him! For him!

He sprang from the bed, the reeking odour pouring down his throat,
clogging and revolting his entrails. Air! The air of heaven! He
stumbled towards the window, groaning and almost fainting with
sickness. At the washstand a convulsion seized him within; and,
clasping his cold forehead wildly, he vomited profusely in agony.

When the fit had spent itself he walked weakly to the window and,
lifting the sash, sat in a corner of the embrasure and leaned his elbow
upon the sill. The rain had drawn off; and amid the moving vapours from
point to point of light the city was spinning about herself a soft
cocoon of yellowish haze. Heaven was still and faintly luminous and the
air sweet to breathe, as in a thicket drenched with showers; and amid
peace and shimmering lights and quiet fragrance he made a covenant with
his heart.

He prayed:


--HE ONCE HAD MEANT TO COME ON EARTH IN HEAVENLY GLORY BUT WE SINNED; AND
THEN HE COULD NOT SAFELY VISIT US BUT WITH A SHROUDED MAJESTY AND A
BEDIMMED RADIANCE FOR HE WAS GOD. SO HE CAME HIMSELF IN WEAKNESS NOT IN
POWER AND HE SENT THEE, A CREATURE IN HIS STEAD, WITH A CREATURE'S
COMELINESS AND LUSTRE SUITED TO OUR STATE. AND NOW THY VERY FACE AND
FORM, DEAR MOTHER SPEAK TO US OF THE ETERNAL NOT LIKE EARTHLY BEAUTY,
DANGEROUS TO LOOK UPON, BUT LIKE THE MORNING STAR WHICH IS THY EMBLEM,
BRIGHT AND MUSICAL, BREATHING PURITY, TELLING OF HEAVEN AND INFUSING
PEACE. O HARBINGER OF DAY! O LIGHT OF THE PILGRIM! LEAD US STILL AS
THOU HAST LED. IN THE DARK NIGHT, ACROSS THE BLEAK WILDERNESS GUIDE US
ON TO OUR LORD JESUS, GUIDE US HOME.


His eyes were dimmed with tears and, looking humbly up to heaven, he
wept for the innocence he had lost.

When evening had fallen he left the house, and the first touch of the
damp dark air and the noise of the door as it closed behind him made
ache again his conscience, lulled by prayer and tears. Confess!
Confess! It was not enough to lull the conscience with a tear and a
prayer. He had to kneel before the minister of the Holy Ghost and tell
over his hidden sins truly and repentantly. Before he heard again the
footboard of the housedoor trail over the threshold as it opened to let
him in, before he saw again the table in the kitchen set for supper he
would have knelt and confessed. It was quite simple.

The ache of conscience ceased and he walked onward swiftly through the
dark streets. There were so many flagstones on the footpath of that
street and so many streets in that city and so many cities in the
world. Yet eternity had no end. He was in mortal sin. Even once was a
mortal sin. It could happen in an instant. But how so quickly? By
seeing or by thinking of seeing. The eyes see the thing, without having
wished first to see. Then in an instant it happens. But does that part
of the body understand or what? The serpent, the most subtle beast of
the field. It must understand when it desires in one instant and then
prolongs its own desire instant after instant, sinfully. It feels and
understands and desires. What a horrible thing! Who made it to be like
that, a bestial part of the body able to understand bestially and
desire bestially? Was that then he or an inhuman thing moved by a lower
soul? His soul sickened at the thought of a torpid snaky life feeding
itself out of the tender marrow of his life and fattening upon the
slime of lust. O why was that so? O why?

He cowered in the shadow of the thought, abasing himself in the awe of
God Who had made all things and all men. Madness. Who could think such
a thought? And, cowering in darkness and abject, he prayed mutely to
his guardian angel to drive away with his sword the demon that was
whispering to his brain.

The whisper ceased and he knew then clearly that his own soul had
sinned in thought and word and deed wilfully through his own body.
Confess! He had to confess every sin. How could he utter in words to
the priest what he had done? Must, must. Or how could he explain
without dying of shame? Or how could he have done such things without
shame? A madman! Confess! O he would indeed to be free and sinless
again! Perhaps the priest would know. O dear God!

He walked on and on through ill-lit streets, fearing to stand still for
a moment lest it might seem that he held back from what awaited him,
fearing to arrive at that towards which he still turned with longing.
How beautiful must be a soul in the state of grace when God looked upon
it with love!

Frowsy girls sat along the curbstones before their baskets. Their dank
hair hung trailed over their brows. They were not beautiful to see as
they crouched in the mire. But their souls were seen by God; and if
their souls were in a state of grace they were radiant to see: and God
loved them, seeing them.

A wasting breath of humiliation blew bleakly over his soul to think of
how he had fallen, to feel that those souls were dearer to God than
his. The wind blew over him and passed on to the myriads and myriads of
other souls on whom God's favour shone now more and now less, stars now
brighter and now dimmer sustained and failing. And the glimmering souls
passed away, sustained and failing, merged in a moving breath.
One soul was lost; a tiny soul: his. It flickered once and went
out, forgotten, lost. The end: black, cold, void waste.

Consciousness of place came ebbing back to him slowly over a vast tract
of time unlit, unfelt, unlived. The squalid scene composed itself
around him; the common accents, the burning gas-jets in the shops,
odours of fish and spirits and wet sawdust, moving men and women. An
old woman was about to cross the street, an oilcan in her hand. He bent
down and asked her was there a chapel near.

--A chapel, sir? Yes, sir. Church Street chapel.

--Church?

She shifted the can to her other hand and directed him; and, as she
held out her reeking withered right hand under its fringe of shawl, he
bent lower towards her, saddened and soothed by her voice.

--Thank you.

--You are quite welcome, sir.

The candles on the high altar had been extinguished but the fragrance
of incense still floated down the dim nave. Bearded workmen with pious
faces were guiding a canopy out through a side door, the sacristan
aiding them with quiet gestures and words. A few of the faithful still
lingered praying before one of the side-altars or kneeling in the
benches near the confessionals. He approached timidly and knelt at the
last bench in the body, thankful for the peace and silence and fragrant
shadow of the church. The board on which he knelt was narrow and worn
and those who knelt near him were humble followers of Jesus. Jesus too
had been born in poverty and had worked in the shop of a carpenter,
cutting boards and planing them, and had first spoken of the kingdom of
God to poor fishermen, teaching all men to be meek and humble of heart.

He bowed his head upon his hands, bidding his heart be meek and humble
that he might be like those who knelt beside him and his prayer as
acceptable as theirs. He prayed beside them but it was hard. His soul
was foul with sin and he dared not ask forgiveness with the simple
trust of those whom Jesus, in the mysterious ways of God, had called
first to His side, the carpenters, the fishermen, poor and simple
people following a lowly trade, handling and shaping the wood of trees,
mending their nets with patience.

A tall figure came down the aisle and the penitents stirred; and at the
last moment, glancing up swiftly, he saw a long grey beard and the
brown habit of a capuchin. The priest entered the box and was hidden.
Two penitents rose and entered the confessional at either side. The
wooden slide was drawn back and the faint murmur of a voice troubled
the silence.

His blood began to murmur in his veins, murmuring like a sinful city
summoned from its sleep to hear its doom. Little flakes of fire fell
and powdery ashes fell softly, alighting on the houses of men. They
stirred, waking from sleep, troubled by the heated air.

The slide was shot back. The penitent emerged from the side of the box.
The farther side was drawn. A woman entered quietly and deftly where
the first penitent had knelt. The faint murmur began again.

He could still leave the chapel. He could stand up, put one foot before
the other and walk out softly and then run, run, run swiftly through
the dark streets. He could still escape from the shame. Had it been any
terrible crime but that one sin! Had it been murder! Little fiery
flakes fell and touched him at all points, shameful thoughts, shameful
words, shameful acts. Shame covered him wholly like fine glowing ashes
falling continually. To say it in words! His soul, stifling and
helpless, would cease to be.

The slide was shot back. A penitent emerged from the farther side of
the box. The near slide was drawn. A penitent entered where the other
penitent had come out. A soft whispering noise floated in vaporous
cloudlets out of the box. It was the woman: soft whispering cloudlets,
soft whispering vapour, whispering and vanishing.

He beat his breast with his fist humbly, secretly under cover of the
wooden armrest. He would be at one with others and with God. He would
love his neighbour. He would love God who had made and loved him. He
would kneel and pray with others and be happy. God would look down on
him and on them and would love them all.

It was easy to be good. God's yoke was sweet and light. It was better
never to have sinned, to have remained always a child, for God loved
little children and suffered them to come to Him. It was a terrible and
a sad thing to sin. But God was merciful to poor sinners who were truly
sorry. How true that was! That was indeed goodness.

The slide was shot to suddenly. The penitent came out. He was next. He
stood up in terror and walked blindly into the box.

At last it had come. He knelt in the silent gloom and raised his eyes
to the white crucifix suspended above him. God could see that he was
sorry. He would tell all his sins. His confession would be long, long.
Everybody in the chapel would know then what a sinner he had been. Let
them know. It was true. But God had promised to forgive him if he was
sorry. He was sorry. He clasped his hands and raised them towards the
white form, praying with his darkened eyes, praying with all his
trembling body, swaying his head to and fro like a lost creature,
praying with whimpering lips.

--Sorry! Sorry! O sorry!

The slide clicked back and his heart bounded in his breast. The face of
an old priest was at the grating, averted from him, leaning upon a
hand. He made the sign of the cross and prayed of the priest to bless
him for he had sinned. Then, bowing his head, he repeated the CONFITEOR
in fright. At the words MY MOST GRIEVOUS FAULT he ceased, breathless.

--How long is it since your last confession, my child?

--A long time, father.

--A month, my child?

--Longer, father.

--Three months, my child?

--Longer, father.

--Six months?

--Eight months, father.

He had begun. The priest asked:

--And what do you remember since that time?

He began to confess his sins: masses missed, prayers not said, lies.

--Anything else, my child?

Sins of anger, envy of others, gluttony, vanity, disobedience.

--Anything else, my child?

There was no help. He murmured:

--I... committed sins of impurity, father.

The priest did not turn his head.

--With yourself, my child?

--And... with others.

--With women, my child?

--Yes, father.

--Were they married women, my child?

He did not know. His sins trickled from his lips, one by one, trickled
in shameful drops from his soul, festering and oozing like a sore, a
squalid stream of vice. The last sins oozed forth, sluggish, filthy.
There was no more to tell. He bowed his head, overcome.

The Priest was silent. Then he asked:

--How old are you, my child?

--Sixteen, father.

The priest passed his hand several times over his face. Then, resting
his forehead against his hand, he leaned towards the grating and, with
eyes still averted, spoke slowly. His voice was weary and old.

--You are very young, my child, he said, and let me implore of you to
give up that sin. It is a terrible sin. It kills the body and it kills
the soul. It is the cause of many crimes and misfortunes. Give it up,
my child, for God's sake. It is dishonourable and unmanly. You cannot
know where that wretched habit will lead you or where it will come
against you. As long as you commit that sin, my poor child, you will
never be worth one farthing to God. Pray to our mother Mary to help
you. She will help you, my child. Pray to Our Blessed Lady when that
sin comes into your mind. I am sure you will do that, will you not? You
repent of all those sins. I am sure you do. And you will promise God
now that by His holy grace you will never offend Him any more by that
wicked sin. You will make that solemn promise to God, will you not?

--Yes, father.

The old and weary voice fell like sweet rain upon his quaking parching
heart. How sweet and sad!

--Do so my poor child. The devil has led you astray. Drive him back to
hell when he tempts you to dishonour your body in that way--the foul
spirit who hates our Lord. Promise God now that you will give up that
sin, that wretched wretched sin.

Blinded by his tears and by the light of God's mercifulness he bent his
head and heard the grave words of absolution spoken and saw the
priest's hand raised above him in token of forgiveness.

--God bless you, my child. Pray for me.

He knelt to say his penance, praying in a corner of the dark nave; and
his prayers ascended to heaven from his purified heart like perfume
streaming upwards from a heart of white rose.

The muddy streets were gay. He strode homeward, conscious of an
invisible grace pervading and making light his limbs. In spite of all
he had done it. He had confessed and God had pardoned him. His soul was
made fair and holy once more, holy and happy.

It would be beautiful to die if God so willed. It was beautiful to live
in grace a life of peace and virtue and forbearance with others.

He sat by the fire in the kitchen, not daring to speak for happiness.
Till that moment he had not known how beautiful and peaceful life could
be. The green square of paper pinned round the lamp cast down a tender
shade. On the dresser was a plate of sausages and white pudding and on
the shelf there were eggs. They would be for the breakfast in the
morning after the communion in the college chapel. White pudding and
eggs and sausages and cups of tea. How simple and beautiful was life
after all! And life lay all before him.

In a dream he fell asleep. In a dream he rose and saw that it was
morning. In a waking dream he went through the quiet morning towards
the college.

The boys were all there, kneeling in their places. He knelt among them,
happy and shy. The altar was heaped with fragrant masses of white
flowers; and in the morning light the pale flames of the candles among
the white flowers were clear and silent as his own soul.

He knelt before the altar with his classmates, holding the altar cloth
with them over a living rail of hands. His hands were trembling and his
soul trembled as he heard the priest pass with the ciborium from
communicant to communicant.

--CORPUS DOMINI NOSTRI.

Could it be? He knelt there sinless and timid; and he would hold upon
his tongue the host and God would enter his purified body.

--IN VITAM ETERNAM. AMEN.

Another life! A life of grace and virtue and happiness! It was true. It
was not a dream from which he would wake. The past was past.

--CORPUS DOMINI NOSTRI.

The ciborium had come to him.




Chapter 4


Sunday was dedicated to the mystery of the Holy Trinity, Monday to the
Holy Ghost, Tuesday to the Guardian Angels, Wednesday to saint Joseph,
Thursday to the Most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, Friday to the
Suffering Jesus, Saturday to the Blessed Virgin Mary.

Every morning he hallowed himself anew in the presence of some holy
image or mystery. His day began with an heroic offering of its every
moment of thought or action for the intentions of the sovereign pontiff
and with an early mass. The raw morning air whetted his resolute piety;
and often as he knelt among the few worshippers at the side-altar,
following with his interleaved prayer-book the murmur of the priest, he
glanced up for an instant towards the vested figure standing in the
gloom between the two candles, which were the old and the new
testaments, and imagined that he was kneeling at mass in the catacombs.

His daily life was laid out in devotional areas. By means of
ejaculations and prayers he stored up ungrudgingly for the souls in
purgatory centuries of days and quarantines and years; yet the
spiritual triumph which he felt in achieving with ease so many fabulous
ages of canonical penances did not wholly reward his zeal of prayer,
since he could never know how much temporal punishment he had remitted
by way of suffrage for the agonizing souls; and fearful lest in the
midst of the purgatorial fire, which differed from the infernal only in
that it was not everlasting, his penance might avail no more than a
drop of moisture, he drove his soul daily through an increasing circle
of works of supererogation.

Every part of his day, divided by what he regarded now as the duties of
his station in life, circled about its own centre of spiritual energy.
His life seemed to have drawn near to eternity; every thought, word,
and deed, every instance of consciousness could be made to revibrate
radiantly in heaven; and at times his sense of such immediate
repercussion was so lively that he seemed to feel his soul in devotion
pressing like fingers the keyboard of a great cash register and to see
the amount of his purchase start forth immediately in heaven, not as a
number but as a frail column of incense or as a slender flower.

The rosaries, too, which he said constantly--for he carried his beads
loose in his trousers' pockets that he might tell them as he walked the
streets--transformed themselves into coronals of flowers of such vague
unearthly texture that they seemed to him as hueless and odourless as
they were nameless. He offered up each of his three daily chaplets that
his soul might grow strong in each of the three theological virtues, in
faith in the Father Who had created him, in hope in the Son Who had
redeemed him and in love of the Holy Ghost Who had sanctified him; and
this thrice triple prayer he offered to the Three Persons through Mary
in the name of her joyful and sorrowful and glorious mysteries.

On each of the seven days of the week he further prayed that one of the
seven gifts of the Holy Ghost might descend upon his soul and drive out
of it day by day the seven deadly sins which had defiled it in the
past; and he prayed for each gift on its appointed day, confident that
it would descend upon him, though it seemed strange to him at times
that wisdom and understanding and knowledge were so distinct in their
nature that each should be prayed for apart from the others. Yet he
believed that at some future stage of his spiritual progress this
difficulty would be removed when his sinful soul had been raised up
from its weakness and enlightened by the Third Person of the Most
Blessed Trinity. He believed this all the more, and with trepidation,
because of the divine gloom and silence wherein dwelt the unseen
Paraclete, Whose symbols were a dove and a mighty wind, to sin against
Whom was a sin beyond forgiveness, the eternal mysterious secret Being
to Whom, as God, the priests offered up mass once a year, robed in the
scarlet of the tongues of fire.

The imagery through which the nature and kinship of the Three Persons
of the Trinity were darkly shadowed forth in the books of devotion
which he read--the Father contemplating from all eternity as in a
mirror His Divine Perfections and thereby begetting eternally the
Eternal Son and the Holy Spirit proceeding out of Father and Son from
all eternity--were easier of acceptance by his mind by reason of their
august incomprehensibility than was the simple fact that God had loved
his soul from all eternity, for ages before he had been born into the
world, for ages before the world itself had existed.

He had heard the names of the passions of love and hate pronounced
solemnly on the stage and in the pulpit, had found them set forth
solemnly in books and had wondered why his soul was unable to harbour
them for any time or to force his lips to utter their names with
conviction. A brief anger had often invested him but he had never been
able to make it an abiding passion and had always felt himself passing
out of it as if his very body were being divested with ease of some
outer skin or peel. He had felt a subtle, dark, and murmurous presence
penetrate his being and fire him with a brief iniquitous lust: it, too,
had slipped beyond his grasp leaving his mind lucid and indifferent.
This, it seemed, was the only love and that the only hate his soul
would harbour.

But he could no longer disbelieve in the reality of love, since God
Himself had loved his individual soul with divine love from all
eternity. Gradually, as his soul was enriched with spiritual knowledge,
he saw the whole world forming one vast symmetrical expression of God's
power and love. Life became a divine gift for every moment and
sensation of which, were it even the sight of a single leaf hanging on
the twig of a tree, his soul should praise and thank the Giver. The
world for all its solid substance and complexity no longer existed for
his soul save as a theorem of divine power and love and universality.
So entire and unquestionable was this sense of the divine meaning in
all nature granted to his soul that he could scarcely understand why it
was in any way necessary that he should continue to live. Yet that was
part of the divine purpose and he dared not question its use, he above
all others who had sinned so deeply and so foully against the divine
purpose. Meek and abased by this consciousness of the one eternal
omnipresent perfect reality his soul took up again her burden of
pieties, masses and prayers and sacraments and mortifications, and only
then for the first time since he had brooded on the great mystery of
love did he feel within him a warm movement like that of some newly
born life or virtue of the soul itself. The attitude of rapture in
sacred art, the raised and parted hands, the parted lips and eyes as of
one about to swoon, became for him an image of the soul in prayer,
humiliated and faint before her Creator.

But he had been forewarned of the dangers of spiritual exaltation and
did not allow himself to desist from even the least or lowliest
devotion, striving also by constant mortification to undo the sinful
past rather than to achieve a saintliness fraught with peril. Each of
his senses was brought under a rigorous discipline. In order to mortify
the sense of sight he made it his rule to walk in the street with
downcast eyes, glancing neither to right nor left and never behind him.
His eyes shunned every encounter with the eyes of women. From time to
time also he balked them by a sudden effort of the will, as by lifting
them suddenly in the middle of an unfinished sentence and closing the
book. To mortify his hearing he exerted no control over his voice which
was then breaking, neither sang nor whistled, and made no attempt to
flee from noises which caused him painful nervous irritation such as
the sharpening of knives on the knife board, the gathering of cinders
on the fire-shovel and the twigging of the carpet. To mortify his smell
was more difficult as he found in himself no instinctive repugnance to
bad odours whether they were the odours of the outdoor world, such as
those of dung or tar, or the odours of his own person among which he
had made many curious comparisons and experiments. He found in the end
that the only odour against which his sense of smell revolted was a
certain stale fishy stink like that of long-standing urine; and
whenever it was possible he subjected himself to this unpleasant odour.
To mortify the taste he practised strict habits at table, observed to
the letter all the fasts of the church and sought by distraction to
divert his mind from the savours of different foods. But it was to the
mortification of touch he brought the most assiduous ingenuity of
inventiveness. He never consciously changed his position in bed, sat in
the most uncomfortable positions, suffered patiently every itch and
pain, kept away from the fire, remained on his knees all through the
mass except at the gospels, left part of his neck and face undried so
that air might sting them and, whenever he was not saying his beads,
carried his arms stiffly at his sides like a runner and never in his
pockets or clasped behind him.

He had no temptations to sin mortally. It surprised him however to find
that at the end of his course of intricate piety and self-restraint he
was so easily at the mercy of childish and unworthy imperfections. His
prayers and fasts availed him little for the suppression of anger at
hearing his mother sneeze or at being disturbed in his devotions. It
needed an immense effort of his will to master the impulse which urged
him to give outlet to such irritation. Images of the outbursts of
trivial anger which he had often noted among his masters, their
twitching mouths, close-shut lips and flushed cheeks, recurred to his
memory, discouraging him, for all his practice of humility, by the
comparison. To merge his life in the common tide of other lives was
harder for him than any fasting or prayer and it was his constant
failure to do this to his own satisfaction which caused in his soul at
last a sensation of spiritual dryness together with a growth of doubts
and scruples. His soul traversed a period of desolation in which the
sacraments themselves seemed to have turned into dried-up sources. His
confession became a channel for the escape of scrupulous and unrepented
imperfections. His actual reception of the eucharist did not bring him
the same dissolving moments of virginal self-surrender as did those
spiritual communions made by him sometimes at the close of some visit
to the Blessed Sacrament. The book which he used for these visits was
an old neglected book written by saint Alphonsus Liguori, with fading
characters and sere foxpapered leaves. A faded world of fervent love
and virginal responses seemed to be evoked for his soul by the reading
of its pages in which the imagery of the canticles was interwoven with
the communicant's prayers. An inaudible voice seemed to caress the
soul, telling her names and glories, bidding her arise as for espousal
and come away, bidding her look forth, a spouse, from Amana and from
the mountains of the leopards; and the soul seemed to answer with the
same inaudible voice, surrendering herself: INTER UBERA MEA
COMMORABITUR.

This idea of surrender had a perilous attraction for his mind now that
he felt his soul beset once again by the insistent voices of the flesh
which began to murmur to him again during his prayers and meditations.
It gave him an intense sense of power to know that he could, by a
single act of consent, in a moment of thought, undo all that he had
done. He seemed to feel a flood slowly advancing towards his naked feet
and to be waiting for the first faint timid noiseless wavelet to touch
his fevered skin. Then, almost at the instant of that touch, almost at
the verge of sinful consent, he found himself standing far away from
the flood upon a dry shore, saved by a sudden act of the will or a
sudden ejaculation; and, seeing the silver line of the flood far away
and beginning again its slow advance towards his feet, a new thrill of
power and satisfaction shook his soul to know that he had not yielded
nor undone all.

When he had eluded the flood of temptation many times in this way he
grew troubled and wondered whether the grace which he had refused to
lose was not being filched from him little by little. The clear
certitude of his own immunity grew dim and to it succeeded a vague fear
that his soul had really fallen unawares. It was with difficulty that
he won back his old consciousness of his state of grace by telling
himself that he had prayed to God at every temptation and that the
grace which he had prayed for must have been given to him inasmuch as
God was obliged to give it. The very frequency and violence of
temptations showed him at last the truth of what he had heard about the
trials of the saints. Frequent and violent temptations were a proof
that the citadel of the soul had not fallen and that the devil raged to
make it fall.

Often when he had confessed his doubts and scruples--some momentary
inattention at prayer, a movement of trivial anger in his soul, or a
subtle wilfulness in speech or act--he was bidden by his confessor to
name some sin of his past life before absolution was given him. He
named it with humility and shame and repented of it once more. It
humiliated and shamed him to think that he would never be freed from it
wholly, however holily he might live or whatever virtues or perfections
he might attain. A restless feeling of guilt would always be present
with him: he would confess and repent and be absolved, confess and
repent again and be absolved again, fruitlessly. Perhaps that first
hasty confession wrung from him by the fear of hell had not been good?
Perhaps, concerned only for his imminent doom, he had not had sincere
sorrow for his sin? But the surest sign that his confession had been
good and that he had had sincere sorrow for his sin was, he knew, the
amendment of his life.

--I have amended my life, have I not? he asked himself.


* * * * *


The director stood in the embrasure of the window, his back to the
light, leaning an elbow on the brown crossblind, and, as he spoke and
smiled, slowly dangling and looping the cord of the other blind,
Stephen stood before him, following for a moment with his eyes the
waning of the long summer daylight above the roofs or the slow deft
movements of the priestly fingers. The priest's face was in total
shadow, but the waning daylight from behind him touched the deeply
grooved temples and the curves of the skull.

Stephen followed also with his ears the accents and intervals of the
priest's voice as he spoke gravely and cordially of indifferent themes,
the vacation which had just ended, the colleges of the order abroad,
the transference of masters. The grave and cordial voice went on easily
with its tale and in the pauses Stephen felt bound to set it on again
with respectful questions. He knew that the tale was a prelude and his
mind waited for the sequel. Ever since the message of summons had come
for him from the director his mind had struggled to find the meaning of
the message; and, during the long restless time he had sat in the
college parlour waiting for the director to come in, his eyes had
wandered from one sober picture to another around the walls and his
mind wandered from one guess to another until the meaning of the
summons had almost become clear. Then, just as he was wishing that some
unforeseen cause might prevent the director from coming, he had heard
the handle of the door turning and the swish of a soutane.

The director had begun to speak of the dominican and franciscan orders
and of the friendship between saint Thomas and saint Bonaventure. The
capuchin dress, he thought, was rather too...

Stephen's face gave back the priest's indulgent smile and, not being
anxious to give an opinion, he made a slight dubitative movement with
his lips.

--I believe, continued the director, that there is some talk now among
the capuchins themselves of doing away with it and following the
example of the other franciscans.

--I suppose they would retain it in the cloisters? said Stephen.

--O certainly, said the director. For the cloister it is all right but
for the street I really think it would be better to do away with it,
don't you?

--It must be troublesome, I imagine.

--Of course it is, of course. Just imagine when I was in Belgium I
used to see them out cycling in all kinds of weather with this thing up
about their knees! It was really ridiculous. LES JUPES, they call them
in Belgium.

The vowel was so modified as to be indistinct.

--What do they call them?

--LES JUPES.

--O!

Stephen smiled again in answer to the smile which he could not see on
the priest's shadowed face, its image or spectre only passing rapidly
across his mind as the low discreet accent fell upon his ear. He gazed
calmly before him at the waning sky, glad of the cool of the evening
and of the faint yellow glow which hid the tiny flame kindling upon his
cheek.

The names of articles of dress worn by women or of certain soft and
delicate stuffs used in their making brought always to his mind a
delicate and sinful perfume. As a boy he had imagined the reins by
which horses are driven as slender silken bands and it shocked him to
feel at Stradbrooke the greasy leather of harness. It had shocked him,
too, when he had felt for the first time beneath his tremulous fingers
the brittle texture of a woman's stocking for, retaining nothing of all
he read save that which seemed to him an echo or a prophecy of his own
state, it was only amid soft-worded phrases or within rose-soft stuffs
that he dared to conceive of the soul or body of a woman moving with
tender life.

But the phrase on the priest's lips was disingenuous for he knew that a
priest should not speak lightly on that theme. The phrase had been
spoken lightly with design and he felt that his face was being searched
by the eyes in the shadow. Whatever he had heard or read of the craft
of jesuits he had put aside frankly as not borne out by his own
experience. His masters, even when they had not attracted him,
had seemed to him always intelligent and serious priests,
athletic and high-spirited prefects. He thought of them as men
who washed their bodies briskly with cold water and wore clean cold
linen. During all the years he had lived among them in Clongowes and in
Belvedere he had received only two pandies and, though these had been
dealt him in the wrong, he knew that he had often escaped punishment.
During all those years he had never heard from any of his masters a
flippant word: it was they who had taught him christian doctrine and
urged him to live a good life and, when he had fallen into grievous
sin, it was they who had led him back to grace. Their presence had made
him diffident of himself when he was a muff in Clongowes and it had made
him diffident of himself also while he had held his equivocal position
in Belvedere. A constant sense of this had remained with him up to the
last year of his school life. He had never once disobeyed or allowed
turbulent companions to seduce him from his habit of quiet obedience;
and, even when he doubted some statement of a master, he had never
presumed to doubt openly. Lately some of their judgements had sounded a
little childish in his ears and had made him feel a regret and pity as
though he were slowly passing out of an accustomed world and were
hearing its language for the last time. One day when some boys had
gathered round a priest under the shed near the chapel, he had heard
the priest say:

--I believe that Lord Macaulay was a man who probably never committed
a mortal sin in his life, that is to say, a deliberate mortal sin.

Some of the boys had then asked the priest if Victor Hugo were not the
greatest French writer. The priest had answered that Victor Hugo had
never written half so well when he had turned against the church as he
had written when he was a catholic.

--But there are many eminent French critics, said the priest, who
consider that even Victor Hugo, great as he certainly was, had not so
pure a French style as Louis Veuillot.

The tiny flame which the priest's allusion had kindled upon Stephen's
cheek had sunk down again and his eyes were still fixed calmly on the
colourless sky. But an unresting doubt flew hither and thither before
his mind. Masked memories passed quickly before him: he recognized
scenes and persons yet he was conscious that he had failed to perceive
some vital circumstance in them. He saw himself walking about the
grounds watching the sports in Clongowes and eating slim jim out of his
cricket cap. Some jesuits were walking round the cycle-track in the
company of ladies. The echoes of certain expressions used in Clongowes
sounded in remote caves of his mind.

His ears were listening to these distant echoes amid the silence of the
parlour when he became aware that the priest was addressing him in a
different voice.

--I sent for you today, Stephen, because I wished to speak to you on a
very important subject.

--Yes, sir.

--Have you ever felt that you had a vocation?

Stephen parted his lips to answer yes and then withheld the word
suddenly. The priest waited for the answer and added:

--I mean, have you ever felt within yourself, in your soul, a desire
to join the order? Think.

--I have sometimes thought of it, said Stephen.

The priest let the blindcord fall to one side and, uniting his hands,
leaned his chin gravely upon them, communing with himself.

--In a college like this, he said at length, there is one boy or perhaps
two or three boys whom God calls to the religious life. Such a boy is
marked off from his companions by his piety, by the good example he
shows to others. He is looked up to by them; he is chosen perhaps as
prefect by his fellow sodalists. And you, Stephen, have been such a boy
in this college, prefect of Our Blessed Lady's sodality. Perhaps you
are the boy in this college whom God designs to call to Himself.

A strong note of pride reinforcing the gravity of the priest's voice
made Stephen's heart quicken in response.

To receive that call, Stephen, said the priest, is the greatest honour
that the Almighty God can bestow upon a man. No king or emperor on this
earth has the power of the priest of God. No angel or archangel in
heaven, no saint, not even the Blessed Virgin herself, has the power of
a priest of God: the power of the keys, the power to bind and to loose
from sin, the power of exorcism, the power to cast out from the
creatures of God the evil spirits that have power over them; the power,
the authority, to make the great God of Heaven come down upon the altar
and take the form of bread and wine. What an awful power, Stephen!

A flame began to flutter again on Stephen's cheek as he heard in this
proud address an echo of his own proud musings. How often had he seen
himself as a priest wielding calmly and humbly the awful power
of which angels and saints stood in reverence! His soul had loved
to muse in secret on this desire. He had seen himself, a young
and silent-mannered priest, entering a confessional swiftly,
ascending the altarsteps, incensing, genuflecting, accomplishing
the vague acts of the priesthood which pleased him by reason of
their semblance of reality and of their distance from it. In that
dim life which he had lived through in his musings he had
assumed the voices and gestures which he had noted with various
priests. He had bent his knee sideways like such a one, he had
shaken the thurible only slightly like such a one, his chasuble had
swung open like that of such another as he turned to the altar again
after having blessed the people. And above all it had pleased him to
fill the second place in those dim scenes of his imagining. He shrank
from the dignity of celebrant because it displeased him to imagine that
all the vague pomp should end in his own person or that the ritual
should assign to him so clear and final an office. He longed for the
minor sacred offices, to be vested with the tunicle of subdeacon at
high mass, to stand aloof from the altar, forgotten by the people, his
shoulders covered with a humeral veil, holding the paten within its
folds or, when the sacrifice had been accomplished, to stand as deacon
in a dalmatic of cloth of gold on the step below the celebrant, his
hands joined and his face towards the people, and sing the chant ITE
MISSA EST. If ever he had seen himself celebrant it was as in the
pictures of the mass in his child's massbook, in a church without
worshippers, save for the angel of the sacrifice, at a bare altar, and
served by an acolyte scarcely more boyish than himself. In vague
sacrificial or sacramental acts alone his will seemed drawn to go forth
to encounter reality; and it was partly the absence of an appointed
rite which had always constrained him to inaction whether he had
allowed silence to cover his anger or pride or had suffered only an
embrace he longed to give.

He listened in reverent silence now to the priest's appeal and through
the words he heard even more distinctly a voice bidding him approach,
offering him secret knowledge and secret power. He would know then what
was the sin of Simon Magus and what the sin against the Holy Ghost for
which there was no forgiveness. He would know obscure things, hidden
from others, from those who were conceived and born children of wrath.
He would know the sins, the sinful longings and sinful thoughts and
sinful acts, of others, hearing them murmured into his ears in the
confessional under the shame of a darkened chapel by the lips of women
and of girls; but rendered immune mysteriously at his ordination by the
imposition of hands, his soul would pass again uncontaminated to the
white peace of the altar. No touch of sin would linger upon the hands
with which he would elevate and break the host; no touch of sin would
linger on his lips in prayer to make him eat and drink damnation to
himself not discerning the body of the Lord. He would hold his secret
knowledge and secret power, being as sinless as the innocent, and he
would be a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedec.

--I will offer up my mass tomorrow morning, said the director, that
Almighty God may reveal to you His holy will. And let you, Stephen,
make a novena to your holy patron saint, the first martyr, who is very
powerful with God, that God may enlighten your mind. But you must be
quite sure, Stephen, that you have a vocation because it would be
terrible if you found afterwards that you had none. Once a priest
always a priest, remember. Your catechism tells you that the sacrament
of Holy Orders is one of those which can be received only once because
it imprints on the soul an indelible spiritual mark which can never be
effaced. It is before you must weigh well, not after. It is a solemn
question, Stephen, because on it may depend the salvation of your
eternal soul. But we will pray to God together.

He held open the heavy hall door and gave his hand as if already to a
companion in the spiritual life. Stephen passed out on to the wide
platform above the steps and was conscious of the caress of mild
evening air. Towards Findlater's church a quartet of young men were
striding along with linked arms, swaying their heads and stepping to
the agile melody of their leader's concertina. The music passed in an
instant, as the first bars of sudden music always did, over the
fantastic fabrics of his mind, dissolving them painlessly and
noiselessly as a sudden wave dissolves the sand-built turrets of
children. Smiling at the trivial air he raised his eyes to the priest's
face and, seeing in it a mirthless reflection of the sunken day,
detached his hand slowly which had acquiesced faintly in the
companionship.

As he descended the steps the impression which effaced his troubled
self-communion was that of a mirthless mask reflecting a sunken day
from the threshold of the college. The shadow, then, of the life of the
college passed gravely over his consciousness. It was a grave and
ordered and passionless life that awaited him, a life without material
cares. He wondered how he would pass the first night in the novitiate
and with what dismay he would wake the first morning in the dormitory.
The troubling odour of the long corridors of Clongowes came back to him
and he heard the discreet murmur of the burning gasflames. At once from
every part of his being unrest began to irradiate. A feverish
quickening of his pulses followed, and a din of meaningless words drove
his reasoned thoughts hither and thither confusedly. His lungs dilated
and sank as if he were inhaling a warm moist unsustaining air and he
smelt again the moist warm air which hung in the bath in Clongowes
above the sluggish turf-coloured water.

Some instinct, waking at these memories, stronger than education or
piety, quickened within him at every near approach to that life, an
instinct subtle and hostile, and armed him against acquiescence. The
chill and order of the life repelled him. He saw himself rising in the
cold of the morning and filing down with the others to early mass and
trying vainly to struggle with his prayers against the fainting
sickness of his stomach. He saw himself sitting at dinner with the
community of a college. What, then, had become of that deep-rooted
shyness of his which had made him loth to eat or drink under a strange
roof? What had come of the pride of his spirit which had always made
him conceive himself as a being apart in every order?

The Reverend Stephen Dedalus, S.J.

His name in that new life leaped into characters before his eyes and to
it there followed a mental sensation of an undefined face or colour of
a face. The colour faded and became strong like a changing glow of
pallid brick red. Was it the raw reddish glow he had so often seen on
wintry mornings on the shaven gills of the priests? The face was
eyeless and sour-favoured and devout, shot with pink tinges of
suffocated anger. Was it not a mental spectre of the face of one of the
jesuits whom some of the boys called Lantern Jaws and others Foxy
Campbell?

He was passing at that moment before the jesuit house in Gardiner
Street and wondered vaguely which window would be his if he ever joined
the order. Then he wondered at the vagueness of his wonder, at the
remoteness of his own soul from what he had hitherto imagined her
sanctuary, at the frail hold which so many years of order and obedience
had of him when once a definite and irrevocable act of his threatened
to end for ever, in time and in eternity, his freedom. The voice of the
director urging upon him the proud claims of the church and the mystery
and power of the priestly office repeated itself idly in his memory.
His soul was not there to hear and greet it and he knew now that the
exhortation he had listened to had already fallen into an idle formal
tale. He would never swing the thurible before the tabernacle as priest.
His destiny was to be elusive of social or religious orders. The wisdom of
the priest's appeal did not touch him to the quick. He was destined to
learn his own wisdom apart from others or to learn the wisdom of others
himself wandering among the snares of the world.

The snares of the world were its ways of sin. He would fall. He had not
yet fallen but he would fall silently, in an instant. Not to fall was
too hard, too hard; and he felt the silent lapse of his soul, as it
would be at some instant to come, falling, falling, but not yet fallen,
still unfallen, but about to fall.

He crossed the bridge over the stream of the Tolka and turned his eyes
coldly for an instant towards the faded blue shrine of the Blessed
Virgin which stood fowl-wise on a pole in the middle of a ham-shaped
encampment of poor cottages. Then, bending to the left, he followed the
lane which led up to his house. The faint sour stink of rotted cabbages
came towards him from the kitchen gardens on the rising ground above
the river. He smiled to think that it was this disorder, the misrule
and confusion of his father's house and the stagnation of vegetable
life, which was to win the day in his soul. Then a short laugh broke
from his lips as he thought of that solitary farmhand in the kitchen
gardens behind their house whom they had nicknamed the man with the
hat. A second laugh, taking rise from the first after a pause, broke
from him involuntarily as he thought of how the man with the hat
worked, considering in turn the four points of the sky and then
regretfully plunging his spade in the earth.

He pushed open the latchless door of the porch and passed through the
naked hallway into the kitchen. A group of his brothers and sisters was
sitting round the table. Tea was nearly over and only the last of the
second watered tea remained in the bottoms of the small glass jars and
jampots which did service for teacups. Discarded crusts and lumps of
sugared bread, turned brown by the tea which had been poured over them,
lay scattered on the table. Little wells of tea lay here and there on
the board, and a knife with a broken ivory handle was stuck through the
pith of a ravaged turnover.

The sad quiet grey-blue glow of the dying day came through the window
and the open door, covering over and allaying quietly a sudden instinct
of remorse in Stephen's heart. All that had been denied them had been
freely given to him, the eldest; but the quiet glow of evening showed
him in their faces no sign of rancour.

He sat near them at the table and asked where his father and mother
were. One answered:

--Goneboro toboro lookboro atboro aboro houseboro.

Still another removal! A boy named Fallon in Belvedere had often asked
him with a silly laugh why they moved so often. A frown of scorn
darkened quickly his forehead as he heard again the silly laugh of the
questioner.

He asked:

--Why are we on the move again if it's a fair question?

--Becauseboro theboro landboro lordboro willboro putboro usboro outboro.

The voice of his youngest brother from the farther side of the
fireplace began to sing the air OFT IN THE STILLY NIGHT. One by one the
others took up the air until a full choir of voices was singing. They
would sing so for hours, melody after melody, glee after glee, till the
last pale light died down on the horizon, till the first dark night
clouds came forth and night fell.

He waited for some moments, listening, before he too took up the air
with them. He was listening with pain of spirit to the overtone of
weariness behind their frail fresh innocent voices. Even before they
set out on life's journey they seemed weary already of the way.

He heard the choir of voices in the kitchen echoed and multiplied
through an endless reverberation of the choirs of endless generations
of children and heard in all the echoes an echo also of the recurring
note of weariness and pain. All seemed weary of life even before
entering upon it. And he remembered that Newman had heard this note
also in the broken lines of Virgil, GIVING UTTERANCE, LIKE THE VOICE OF
NATURE HERSELF, TO THAT PAIN AND WEARINESS YET HOPE OF BETTER THINGS
WHICH HAS BEEN THE EXPERIENCE OF HER CHILDREN IN EVERY TIME.


* * * * *


He could wait no longer.

From the door of Byron's public-house to the gate of Clontarf Chapel,
from the gate of Clontail Chapel to the door of Byron's public-house
and then back again to the chapel and then back again to the public-house
he had paced slowly at first, planting his steps scrupulously in
the spaces of the patchwork of the footpath, then timing their fall to
the fall of verses. A full hour had passed since his father had gone in
with Dan Crosby, the tutor, to find out for him something about the
university. For a full hour he had paced up and down, waiting: but he
could wait no longer.

He set off abruptly for the Bull, walking rapidly lest his father's
shrill whistle might call him back; and in a few moments he had rounded
the curve at the police barrack and was safe.

Yes, his mother was hostile to the idea, as he had read from her
listless silence. Yet her mistrust pricked him more keenly than his
father's pride and he thought coldly how he had watched the faith which
was fading down in his soul ageing and strengthening in her eyes. A dim
antagonism gathered force within him and darkened his mind as a cloud
against her disloyalty and when it passed, cloud-like, leaving his mind
serene and dutiful towards her again, he was made aware dimly and
without regret of a first noiseless sundering of their lives.

The university! So he had passed beyond the challenge of the sentries
who had stood as guardians of his boyhood and had sought to keep him
among them that he might be subject to them and serve their ends. Pride
after satisfaction uplifted him like long slow waves. The end he had
been born to serve yet did not see had led him to escape by an unseen
path and now it beckoned to him once more and a new adventure was about
to be opened to him. It seemed to him that he heard notes of fitful
music leaping upwards a tone and downwards a diminished fourth, upwards
a tone and downwards a major third, like triple-branching flames
leaping fitfully, flame after flame, out of a midnight wood. It was an
elfin prelude, endless and formless; and, as it grew wilder and faster,
the flames leaping out of time, he seemed to hear from under the boughs
and grasses wild creatures racing, their feet pattering like rain upon
the leaves. Their feet passed in pattering tumult over his mind, the
feet of hares and rabbits, the feet of harts and hinds and antelopes,
until he heard them no more and remembered only a proud cadence from
Newman:

--Whose feet are as the feet of harts and underneath the everlasting arms.

The pride of that dim image brought back to his mind the dignity of the
office he had refused. All through his boyhood he had mused upon that
which he had so often thought to be his destiny and when the moment had
come for him to obey the call he had turned aside, obeying a wayward
instinct. Now time lay between: the oils of ordination would never
anoint his body. He had refused. Why?

He turned seaward from the road at Dollymount and as he passed on to
the thin wooden bridge he felt the planks shaking with the tramp of
heavily shod feet. A squad of christian brothers was on its way back
from the Bull and had begun to pass, two by two, across the bridge.
Soon the whole bridge was trembling and resounding. The uncouth faces
passed him two by two, stained yellow or red or livid by the sea, and,
as he strove to look at them with ease and indifference, a faint stain
of personal shame and commiseration rose to his own face. Angry with
himself he tried to hide his face from their eyes by gazing down
sideways into the shallow swirling water under the bridge but he still
saw a reflection therein of their top-heavy silk hats and humble
tape-like collars and loosely-hanging clerical clothes.

    --Brother Hickey.
    Brother Quaid.
    Brother MacArdle.
    Brother Keogh.--

Their piety would be like their names, like their faces, like their
clothes, and it was idle for him to tell himself that their humble and
contrite hearts, it might be, paid a far richer tribute of devotion
than his had ever been, a gift tenfold more acceptable than his
elaborate adoration. It was idle for him to move himself to be generous
towards them, to tell himself that if he ever came to their gates,
stripped of his pride, beaten and in beggar's weeds, that they would be
generous towards him, loving him as themselves. Idle and embittering,
finally, to argue, against his own dispassionate certitude, that the
commandment of love bade us not to love our neighbour as ourselves with
the same amount and intensity of love but to love him as ourselves with
the same kind of love.

He drew forth a phrase from his treasure and spoke it softly to
himself:

--A day of dappled seaborne clouds.

The phrase and the day and the scene harmonized in a chord. Words. Was
it their colours? He allowed them to glow and fade, hue after hue:
sunrise gold, the russet and green of apple orchards, azure of waves,
the grey-fringed fleece of clouds. No, it was not their colours: it was
the poise and balance of the period itself. Did he then love the
rhythmic rise and fall of words better than their associations of
legend and colour? Or was it that, being as weak of sight as he was shy
of mind, he drew less pleasure from the reflection of the glowing
sensible world through the prism of a language many-coloured and richly
storied than from the contemplation of an inner world of individual
emotions mirrored perfectly in a lucid supple periodic prose?

He passed from the trembling bridge on to firm land again. At that
instant, as it seemed to him, the air was chilled and, looking askance
towards the water, he saw a flying squall darkening and crisping
suddenly the tide. A faint click at his heart, a faint throb in his
throat told him once more of how his flesh dreaded the cold infrahuman
odour of the sea; yet he did not strike across the downs on his left
but held straight on along the spine of rocks that pointed against the
river's mouth.

A veiled sunlight lit up faintly the grey sheet of water where the
river was embayed. In the distance along the course of the slow-flowing
Liffey slender masts flecked the sky and, more distant still, the dim
fabric of the city lay prone in haze. Like a scene on some vague arras,
old as man's weariness, the image of the seventh city of christendom
was visible to him across the timeless air, no older nor more weary nor
less patient of subjection than in the days of the thingmote.

Disheartened, he raised his eyes towards the slow-drifting clouds,
dappled and seaborne. They were voyaging across the deserts of the sky,
a host of nomads on the march, voyaging high over Ireland, westward
bound. The Europe they had come from lay out there beyond the Irish
Sea, Europe of strange tongues and valleyed and woodbegirt and
citadelled and of entrenched and marshalled races. He heard a confused
music within him as of memories and names which he was almost conscious
of but could not capture even for an instant; then the music seemed to
recede, to recede, to recede, and from each receding trail of nebulous
music there fell always one longdrawn calling note, piercing like a
star the dusk of silence. Again! Again! Again! A voice from beyond the
world was calling.

--Hello, Stephanos!

--Here comes The Dedalus!

--Ao!... Eh, give it over, Dwyer, I'm telling you, or I'll give you a stuff
in the kisser for yourself... Ao!

--Good man, Towser! Duck him!

--Come along, Dedalus! Bous Stephanoumenos! Bous Stephaneforos!

--Duck him! Guzzle him now, Towser!

--Help! Help!... Ao!

He recognized their speech collectively before he distinguished their
faces. The mere sight of that medley of wet nakedness chilled him to
the bone. Their bodies, corpse-white or suffused with a pallid golden
light or rawly tanned by the sun, gleamed with the wet of the sea.
Their diving-stone, poised on its rude supports and rocking under their
plunges, and the rough-hewn stones of the sloping breakwater over which
they scrambled in their horseplay gleamed with cold wet lustre. The
towels with which they smacked their bodies were heavy with cold
seawater; and drenched with cold brine was their matted hair.

He stood still in deference to their calls and parried their banter
with easy words. How characterless they looked: Shuley without his deep
unbuttoned collar, Ennis without his scarlet belt with the snaky clasp,
and Connolly without his Norfolk coat with the flapless side-pockets!
It was a pain to see them, and a sword-like pain to see the signs of
adolescence that made repellent their pitiable nakedness. Perhaps they
had taken refuge in number and noise from the secret dread in their
souls. But he, apart from them and in silence, remembered in what dread
he stood of the mystery of his own body.

--Stephanos Dedalos! Bous Stephanoumenos! Bous Stephaneforos!

Their banter was not new to him and now it flattered his mild proud
sovereignty. Now, as never before, his strange name seemed to him a
prophecy. So timeless seemed the grey warm air, so fluid and impersonal
his own mood, that all ages were as one to him. A moment before the
ghost of the ancient kingdom of the Danes had looked forth through the
vesture of the hazewrapped City. Now, at the name of the fabulous
artificer, he seemed to hear the noise of dim waves and to see a winged
form flying above the waves and slowly climbing the air. What did it
mean? Was it a quaint device opening a page of some medieval book of
prophecies and symbols, a hawk-like man flying sunward above the sea, a
prophecy of the end he had been born to serve and had been following
through the mists of childhood and boyhood, a symbol of the artist
forging anew in his workshop out of the sluggish matter of the earth a
new soaring impalpable imperishable being?

His heart trembled; his breath came faster and a wild spirit passed
over his limbs as though he was soaring sunward. His heart trembled in
an ecstasy of fear and his soul was in flight. His soul was soaring in
an air beyond the world and the body he knew was purified in a breath
and delivered of incertitude and made radiant and commingled with the
element of the spirit. An ecstasy of flight made radiant his eyes and
wild his breath and tremulous and wild and radiant his windswept limbs.

--One! Two!... Look out!

--Oh, Cripes, I'm drownded!

--One! Two! Three and away!

--The next! The next!

--One!... UK!

--Stephaneforos!

His throat ached with a desire to cry aloud, the cry of a hawk or eagle
on high, to cry piercingly of his deliverance to the winds. This was
the call of life to his soul not the dull gross voice of the world of
duties and despair, not the inhuman voice that had called him to the
pale service of the altar. An instant of wild flight had delivered him
and the cry of triumph which his lips withheld cleft his brain.

--Stephaneforos!

What were they now but cerements shaken from the body of death--the
fear he had walked in night and day, the incertitude that had ringed
him round, the shame that had abased him within and without--cerements,
the linens of the grave?

His soul had arisen from the grave of boyhood, spurning her
grave-clothes. Yes! Yes! Yes! He would create proudly out of the
freedom and power of his soul, as the great artificer whose name he
bore, a living thing, new and soaring and beautiful, impalpable,
imperishable.

He started up nervously from the stone-block for he could no longer
quench the flame in his blood. He felt his cheeks aflame and his throat
throbbing with song. There was a lust of wandering in his feet that
burned to set out for the ends of the earth. On! On! his heart seemed
to cry. Evening would deepen above the sea, night fall upon the plains,
dawn glimmer before the wanderer and show him strange fields and hills
and faces. Where?

He looked northward towards Howth. The sea had fallen below the line of
seawrack on the shallow side of the breakwater and already the tide was
running out fast along the foreshore. Already one long oval bank of
sand lay warm and dry amid the wavelets. Here and there warm isles of
sand gleamed above the shallow tide and about the isles and around the
long bank and amid the shallow currents of the beach were lightclad
figures, wading and delving.

In a few moments he was barefoot, his stockings folded in his pockets
and his canvas shoes dangling by their knotted laces over his shoulders
and, picking a pointed salt-eaten stick out of the jetsam among the
rocks, he clambered down the slope of the breakwater.

There was a long rivulet in the strand and, as he waded slowly up its
course, he wondered at the endless drift of seaweed. Emerald and black
and russet and olive, it moved beneath the current, swaying and
turning. The water of the rivulet was dark with endless drift and
mirrored the high-drifting clouds. The clouds were drifting above him
silently and silently the seatangle was drifting below him and the grey
warm air was still and a new wild life was singing in his veins.

Where was his boyhood now? Where was the soul that had hung back from
her destiny, to brood alone upon the shame of her wounds and in her
house of squalor and subterfuge to queen it in faded cerements and in
wreaths that withered at the touch? Or where was he?

He was alone. He was unheeded, happy and near to the wild heart of
life. He was alone and young and wilful and wildhearted, alone amid a
waste of wild air and brackish waters and the sea-harvest of shells and
tangle and veiled grey sunlight and gayclad lightclad figures of
children and girls and voices childish and girlish in the air.

A girl stood before him in midstream, alone and still, gazing out to
sea. She seemed like one whom magic had changed into the likeness of a
strange and beautiful seabird. Her long slender bare legs were delicate
as a crane's and pure save where an emerald trail of seaweed had
fashioned itself as a sign upon the flesh. Her thighs, fuller and
soft-hued as ivory, were bared almost to the hips, where the white
fringes of her drawers were like feathering of soft white down. Her
slate-blue skirts were kilted boldly about her waist and dovetailed
behind her. Her bosom was as a bird's, soft and slight, slight and soft
as the breast of some dark-plumaged dove. But her long fair hair was
girlish: and girlish, and touched with the wonder of mortal beauty, her
face.

She was alone and still, gazing out to sea; and when she felt his
presence and the worship of his eyes her eyes turned to him in quiet
sufferance of his gaze, without shame or wantonness. Long, long she
suffered his gaze and then quietly withdrew her eyes from his and bent
them towards the stream, gently stirring the water with her foot hither
and thither. The first faint noise of gently moving water broke the
silence, low and faint and whispering, faint as the bells of sleep;
hither and thither, hither and thither; and a faint flame trembled on
her cheek.

--Heavenly God! cried Stephen's soul, in an outburst of profane joy.

He turned away from her suddenly and set off across the strand. His
cheeks were aflame; his body was aglow; his limbs were trembling. On
and on and on and on he strode, far out over the sands, singing wildly
to the sea, crying to greet the advent of the life that had cried to him.

Her image had passed into his soul for ever and no word had broken the
holy silence of his ecstasy. Her eyes had called him and his soul had
leaped at the call. To live, to err, to fall, to triumph, to recreate
life out of life! A wild angel had appeared to him, the angel of mortal
youth and beauty, an envoy from the fair courts of life, to throw open
before him in an instant of ecstasy the gates of all the ways of error
and glory. On and on and on and on!

He halted suddenly and heard his heart in the silence. How far had he
walked? What hour was it?

There was no human figure near him nor any sound borne to him over the
air. But the tide was near the turn and already the day was on the
wane. He turned landward and ran towards the shore and, running up the
sloping beach, reckless of the sharp shingle, found a sandy nook amid a
ring of tufted sandknolls and lay down there that the peace and silence
of the evening might still the riot of his blood.

He felt above him the vast indifferent dome and the calm processes of
the heavenly bodies; and the earth beneath him, the earth that had
borne him, had taken him to her breast.

He closed his eyes in the languor of sleep. His eyelids trembled as if
they felt the vast cyclic movement of the earth and her watchers,
trembled as if they felt the strange light of some new world. His soul
was swooning into some new world, fantastic, dim, uncertain as under
sea, traversed by cloudy shapes and beings. A world, a glimmer or a
flower? Glimmering and trembling, trembling and unfolding, a breaking
light, an opening flower, it spread in endless succession to itself,
breaking in full crimson and unfolding and fading to palest rose, leaf
by leaf and wave of light by wave of light, flooding all the heavens
with its soft flushes, every flush deeper than the other.

Evening had fallen when he woke and the sand and arid grasses of his
bed glowed no longer. He rose slowly and, recalling the rapture of his
sleep, sighed at its joy.

He climbed to the crest of the sandhill and gazed about him. Evening
had fallen. A rim of the young moon cleft the pale waste of skyline,
the rim of a silver hoop embedded in grey sand; and the tide was
flowing in fast to the land with a low whisper of her waves, islanding
a few last figures in distant pools.




Chapter 5


He drained his third cup of watery tea to the dregs and set to chewing
the crusts of fried bread that were scattered near him, staring into
the dark pool of the jar. The yellow dripping had been scooped out like
a boghole and the pool under it brought back to his memory the dark
turf-coloured water of the bath in Clongowes. The box of pawn tickets
at his elbow had just been rifled and he took up idly one after another
in his greasy fingers the blue and white dockets, scrawled and sanded
and creased and bearing the name of the pledger as Daly or MacEvoy.

  1 Pair Buskins.
  1 D. Coat.
  3 Articles and White.
  1 Man's Pants.

Then he put them aside and gazed thoughtfully at the lid of the box,
speckled with louse marks, and asked vaguely:

--How much is the clock fast now?

His mother straightened the battered alarm clock that was lying on its
side in the middle of the mantelpiece until its dial showed a quarter
to twelve and then laid it once more on its side.

--An hour and twenty-five minutes, she said. The right time now is
twenty past ten. The dear knows you might try to be in time for your
lectures.

--Fill out the place for me to wash, said Stephen.

--Katey, fill out the place for Stephen to wash.

--Boody, fill out the place for Stephen to wash.

--I can't, I'm going for blue. Fill it out, you, Maggy.

When the enamelled basin had been fitted into the well of the sink and
the old washing glove flung on the side of it he allowed his mother to
scrub his neck and root into the folds of his ears and into the
interstices at the wings of his nose.

--Well, it's a poor case, she said, when a university student is so
dirty that his mother has to wash him.

--But it gives you pleasure, said Stephen calmly.

An ear-splitting whistle was heard from upstairs and his mother thrust
a damp overall into his hands, saying:

--Dry yourself and hurry out for the love of goodness.

A second shrill whistle, prolonged angrily, brought one of the girls to
the foot of the staircase.

--Yes, father?

--Is your lazy bitch of a brother gone out yet?

--Yes, father.

--Sure?

--Yes, father.

--Hm!

The girl came back, making signs to him to be quick and go out quietly
by the back. Stephen laughed and said:

--He has a curious idea of genders if he thinks a bitch is masculine.

--Ah, it's a scandalous shame for you, Stephen, said his mother, and
you'll live to rue the day you set your foot in that place. I know how
it has changed you.

--Good morning, everybody, said Stephen, smiling and kissing the tips
of his fingers in adieu.

The lane behind the terrace was waterlogged and as he went down it
slowly, choosing his steps amid heaps of wet rubbish, he heard a mad
nun screeching in the nuns' madhouse beyond the wall.

--Jesus! O Jesus! Jesus!

He shook the sound out of his ears by an angry toss of his head and
hurried on, stumbling through the mouldering offal, his heart already
bitten by an ache of loathing and bitterness. His father's whistle, his
mother's mutterings, the screech of an unseen maniac were to him now so
many voices offending and threatening to humble the pride of his youth.
He drove their echoes even out of his heart with an execration; but, as
he walked down the avenue and felt the grey morning light falling about
him through the dripping trees and smelt the strange wild smell of the
wet leaves and bark, his soul was loosed of her miseries.

The rain-laden trees of the avenue evoked in him, as always, memories
of the girls and women in the plays of Gerhart Hauptmann; and the
memory of their pale sorrows and the fragrance falling from the wet
branches mingled in a mood of quiet joy. His morning walk across the
city had begun, and he foreknew that as he passed the sloblands of
Fairview he would think of the cloistral silver-veined prose of Newman;
that as he walked along the North Strand Road, glancing idly at the
windows of the provision shops, he would recall the dark humour of
Guido Cavalcanti and smile; that as he went by Baird's stonecutting
works in Talbot Place the spirit of Ibsen would blow through him like a
keen wind, a spirit of wayward boyish beauty; and that passing a grimy
marine dealer's shop beyond the Liffey he would repeat the song by Ben
Jonson which begins:

    I was not wearier where I lay.

His mind when wearied of its search for the essence of beauty amid the
spectral words of Aristotle or Aquinas turned often for its pleasure to
the dainty songs of the Elizabethans. His mind, in the vesture of a
doubting monk, stood often in shadow under the windows of that age, to
hear the grave and mocking music of the lutenists or the frank laughter
of waist-coateers until a laugh too low, a phrase, tarnished by time,
of chambering and false honour stung his monkish pride and drove him on
from his lurking-place.

The lore which he was believed to pass his days brooding upon so that
it had rapt him from the companionship of youth was only a garner of
slender sentences from Aristotle's poetics and psychology and a
SYNOPSIS PHILOSOPHIAE SCHOLASTICAE AD MENTEM DIVI THOMAE. His thinking
was a dusk of doubt and self-mistrust, lit up at moments by the
lightnings of intuition, but lightnings of so clear a splendour that in
those moments the world perished about his feet as if it had been
fire-consumed; and thereafter his tongue grew heavy and he met the eyes
of others with unanswering eyes, for he felt that the spirit of beauty
had folded him round like a mantle and that in revery at least he had
been acquainted with nobility. But when this brief pride of
silence upheld him no longer he was glad to find himself
still in the midst of common lives, passing on his way amid the squalor
and noise and sloth of the city fearlessly and with a light heart.

Near the hoardings on the canal he met the consumptive man with the
doll's face and the brimless hat coming towards him down the slope of
the bridge with little steps, tightly buttoned into his chocolate
overcoat, and holding his furled umbrella a span or two from him like a
divining rod. It must be eleven, he thought, and peered into a dairy to
see the time. The clock in the dairy told him that it was five minutes
to five but, as he turned away, he heard a clock somewhere near him,
but unseen, beating eleven strokes in swift precision. He laughed as he
heard it for it made him think of McCann, and he saw him a squat figure
in a shooting jacket and breeches and with a fair goatee, standing in
the wind at Hopkins' corner, and heard him say:

--Dedalus, you're an antisocial being, wrapped up in yourself. I'm
not. I'm a democrat and I'll work and act for social liberty and
equality among all classes and sexes in the United States of the Europe
of the future.

Eleven! Then he was late for that lecture too. What day of the week was
it? He stopped at a newsagent's to read the headline of a placard.
Thursday. Ten to eleven, English; eleven to twelve, French; twelve to
one, physics. He fancied to himself the English lecture and felt, even
at that distance, restless and helpless. He saw the heads of his
classmates meekly bent as they wrote in their notebooks the points they
were bidden to note, nominal definitions, essential definitions and
examples or dates of birth or death, chief works, a favourable and an
unfavourable criticism side by side. His own head was unbent for his
thoughts wandered abroad and whether he looked around the little class
of students or out of the window across the desolate gardens of the
green an odour assailed him of cheerless cellar-damp and decay. Another
head than his, right before him in the first benches, was poised
squarely above its bending fellows like the head of a priest appealing
without humility to the tabernacle for the humble worshippers about
him. Why was it that when he thought of Cranly he could never raise
before his mind the entire image of his body but only the image of the
head and face? Even now against the grey curtain of the morning he saw
it before him like the phantom of a dream, the face of a severed head
or death-mask, crowned on the brows by its stiff black upright hair as
by an iron crown. It was a priest-like face, priest-like in its palor,
in the wide winged nose, in the shadowings below the eyes and along the
jaws, priest-like in the lips that were long and bloodless and faintly
smiling; and Stephen, remembering swiftly how he had told Cranly of all
the tumults and unrest and longings in his soul, day after day and
night by night, only to be answered by his friend's listening silence,
would have told himself that it was the face of a guilty priest who
heard confessions of those whom he had not power to absolve but that he
felt again in memory the gaze of its dark womanish eyes.

Through this image he had a glimpse of a strange dark cavern of
speculation but at once turned away from it, feeling that it was not
yet the hour to enter it. But the nightshade of his friend's
listlessness seemed to be diffusing in the air around him a tenuous and
deadly exhalation and he found himself glancing from one casual word to
another on his right or left in stolid wonder that they had been so
silently emptied of instantaneous sense until every mean shop legend
bound his mind like the words of a spell and his soul shrivelled up
sighing with age as he walked on in a lane among heaps of dead
language. His own consciousness of language was ebbing from his brain
and trickling into the very words themselves which set to band and
disband themselves in wayward rhythms:

    The ivy whines upon the wall,
    And whines and twines upon the wall,
    The yellow ivy upon the wall,
    Ivy, ivy up the wall.

Did anyone ever hear such drivel? Lord Almighty! Who ever heard of ivy
whining on a wall? Yellow ivy; that was all right. Yellow ivory also.
And what about ivory ivy?

The word now shone in his brain, clearer and brighter than any ivory
sawn from the mottled tusks of elephants. IVORY, IVOIRE, AVORIO, EBUR.
One of the first examples that he had learnt in Latin had run:
INDIA MITTIT EBUR; and he recalled the shrewd northern face of the
rector who had taught him to construe the Metamorphoses of Ovid in a
courtly English, made whimsical by the mention of porkers and potsherds
and chines of bacon. He had learnt what little he knew of the laws of
Latin verse from a ragged book written by a Portuguese priest.

    Contrahit orator, variant in carmine vates.

The crises and victories and secessions in Roman history were handed on
to him in the trite words IN TANTO DISCRIMINE and he had tried to peer
into the social life of the city of cities through the words IMPLERE
OLLAM DENARIORUM which the rector had rendered sonorously as the
filling of a pot with denaries. The pages of his time-worn Horace never
felt cold to the touch even when his own fingers were cold; they were
human pages and fifty years before they had been turned by the human
fingers of John Duncan Inverarity and by his brother, William Malcolm
Inverarity. Yes, those were noble names on the dusky flyleaf and, even
for so poor a Latinist as he, the dusky verses were as fragrant as
though they had lain all those years in myrtle and lavender and
vervain; but yet it wounded him to think that he would never be but a
shy guest at the feast of the world's culture and that the monkish
learning, in terms of which he was striving to forge out an esthetic
philosophy, was held no higher by the age he lived in than the subtle
and curious jargons of heraldry and falconry.

The grey block of Trinity on his left, set heavily in the city's
ignorance like a dull stone set in a cumbrous ring, pulled his mind
downward and while he was striving this way and that to free his feet
from the fetters of the reformed conscience he came upon the droll
statue of the national poet of Ireland.

He looked at it without anger; for, though sloth of the body and of the
soul crept over it like unseen vermin, over the shuffling feet and up
the folds of the cloak and around the servile head, it seemed humbly
conscious of its indignity. It was a Firbolg in the borrowed cloak of a
Milesian; and he thought of his friend Davin, the peasant student. It
was a jesting name between them, but the young peasant bore with it
lightly:

--Go on, Stevie, I have a hard head, you tell me. Call me what you
will.

The homely version of his christian name on the lips of his friend had
touched Stephen pleasantly when first heard for he was as formal in
speech with others as they were with him. Often, as he sat in Davin's
rooms in Grantham Street, wondering at his friend's well-made boots
that flanked the wall pair by pair and repeating for his friend's
simple ear the verses and cadences of others which were the veils of
his own longing and dejection, the rude Firbolg mind of his listener
had drawn his mind towards it and flung it back again, drawing it by a
quiet inbred courtesy of attention or by a quaint turn of old English
speech or by the force of its delight in rude bodily skill--for Davin
had sat at the feet of Michael Cusack, the Gael--repelling swiftly and
suddenly by a grossness of intelligence or by a bluntness of feeling or
by a dull stare of terror in the eyes, the terror of soul of a starving
Irish village in which the curfew was still a nightly fear.

Side by side with his memory of the deeds of prowess of his uncle Mat
Davin, the athlete, the young peasant worshipped the sorrowful legend
of Ireland. The gossip of his fellow-students which strove to render
the flat life of the college significant at any cost loved to think of
him as a young fenian. His nurse had taught him Irish and shaped his
rude imagination by the broken lights of Irish myth. He stood towards
the myth upon which no individual mind had ever drawn out a line of
beauty and to its unwieldy tales that divided against themselves as
they moved down the cycles in the same attitude as towards the Roman
catholic religion, the attitude of a dull-witted loyal serf. Whatsoever
of thought or of feeling came to him from England or by way of English
culture his mind stood armed against in obedience to a password; and of
the world that lay beyond England he knew only the foreign legion of
France in which he spoke of serving.

Coupling this ambition with the young man's humour Stephen had often
called him one of the tame geese and there was even a point of
irritation in the name pointed against that very reluctance of speech
and deed in his friend which seemed so often to stand between Stephen's
mind, eager of speculation, and the hidden ways of Irish life.

One night the young peasant, his spirit stung by the violent or
luxurious language in which Stephen escaped from the cold silence of
intellectual revolt, had called up before Stephen's mind a strange
vision. The two were walking slowly towards Davin's rooms through the
dark narrow streets of the poorer jews.

--A thing happened to myself, Stevie, last autumn, coming on winter,
and I never told it to a living soul and you are the first person now I
ever told it to. I disremember if it was October or November. It was
October because it was before I came up here to join the matriculation
class.

Stephen had turned his smiling eyes towards his friend's face,
flattered by his confidence and won over to sympathy by the speaker's
simple accent.

--I was away all that day from my own place over in Buttevant.

--I don't know if you know where that is--at a hurling match between
the Croke's Own Boys and the Fearless Thurles and by God, Stevie, that
was the hard fight. My first cousin, Fonsy Davin, was stripped to his
buff that day minding cool for the Limericks but he was up with the
forwards half the time and shouting like mad. I never will forget that
day. One of the Crokes made a woeful wipe at him one time with his
caman and I declare to God he was within an aim's ace of getting it at
the side of his temple. Oh, honest to God, if the crook of it caught
him that time he was done for.

--I am glad he escaped, Stephen had said with a laugh, but surely
that's not the strange thing that happened you?

--Well, I suppose that doesn't interest you, but leastways there was
such noise after the match that I missed the train home and I couldn't
get any kind of a yoke to give me a lift for, as luck would have it,
there was a mass meeting that same day over in Castletownroche and
all the cars in the country were there. So there was nothing for it
only to stay the night or to foot it out. Well, I started to walk
and on I went and it was coming on night when I got into the Ballyhoura
hills, that's better than ten miles from Kilmallock and there's a
long lonely road after that. You wouldn't see the sign of a christian
house along the road or hear a sound. It was pitch dark almost. Once
or twice I stopped by the way under a bush to redden my pipe and only
for the dew was thick I'd have stretched out there and slept. At last,
after a bend of the road, I spied a little cottage with a light in the
window. I went up and knocked at the door. A voice asked who was
there and I answered I was over at the match in Buttevant and was
walking back and that I'd be thankful for a glass of water. After
a while a young woman opened the door and brought me out a big mug
of milk. She was half undressed as if she was going to bed when I
knocked and she had her hair hanging and I thought by her figure and
by something in the look of her eyes that she must be carrying a
child. She kept me in talk a long while at the door, and I thought
it strange because her breast and her shoulders were bare. She
asked me was I tired and would I like to stop the night there.
She said she was all alone in the house and that her husband had
gone that morning to Queenstown with his sister to see her off. And all
the time she was talking, Stevie, she had her eyes fixed on my face and
she stood so close to me I could hear her breathing. When I handed her
back the mug at last she took my hand to draw me in over the threshold
and said: 'COME IN AND STAY THE NIGHT HERE. YOU'VE NO CALL TO BE
FRIGHTENED. THERE'S NO ONE IN IT BUT OURSELVES...' I didn't go in,
Stevie. I thanked her and went on my way again, all in a fever. At the
first bend of the road I looked back and she was standing at the door.

The last words of Davin's story sang in his memory and the figure of
the woman in the story stood forth reflected in other figures of the
peasant women whom he had seen standing in the doorways at Clane as the
college cars drove by, as a type of her race and of his own, a bat-like
soul waking to the consciousness of itself in darkness and secrecy and
loneliness and, through the eyes and voice and gesture of a woman
without guile, calling the stranger to her bed.

A hand was laid on his arm and a young voice cried:

--Ah, gentleman, your own girl, sir! The first handsel today, gentleman.
Buy that lovely bunch. Will you, gentleman?

The blue flowers which she lifted towards him and her young blue eyes
seemed to him at that instant images of guilelessness, and he halted
till the image had vanished and he saw only her ragged dress and damp
coarse hair and hoydenish face.

--Do, gentleman! Don't forget your own girl, sir!

--I have no money, said Stephen.

--Buy them lovely ones, will you, sir? Only a penny.

--Did you hear what I said? asked Stephen, bending towards her. I told you
I had no money. I tell you again now.

--Well, sure, you will some day, sir, please God, the girl answered
after an instant.

--Possibly, said Stephen, but I don't think it likely.

He left her quickly, fearing that her intimacy might turn to jibing
and wishing to be out of the way before she offered her ware to
another, a tourist from England or a student of Trinity. Grafton
Street, along which he walked, prolonged that moment of discouraged
poverty. In the roadway at the head of the street a slab was set to the
memory of Wolfe Tone and he remembered having been present with his
father at its laying. He remembered with bitterness that scene of
tawdry tribute. There were four French delegates in a brake and one, a
plump smiling young man, held, wedged on a stick, a card on which were
printed the words: VIVE L'IRLANDE!

But the trees in Stephen's Green were fragrant of rain and the
rain-sodden earth gave forth its mortal odour, a faint incense rising
upward through the mould from many hearts. The soul of the gallant
venal city which his elders had told him of had shrunk with time to a
faint mortal odour rising from the earth and he knew that in a moment
when he entered the sombre college he would be conscious of a
corruption other than that of Buck Egan and Burnchapel Whaley.

It was too late to go upstairs to the French class. He crossed the hall
and took the corridor to the left which led to the physics theatre. The
corridor was dark and silent but not unwatchful. Why did he feel that
it was not unwatchful? Was it because he had heard that in Buck
Whaley's time there was a secret staircase there? Or was the jesuit
house extra-territorial and was he walking among aliens? The Ireland of
Tone and of Parnell seemed to have receded in space.

He opened the door of the theatre and halted in the chilly grey light
that struggled through the dusty windows. A figure was crouching before
the large grate and by its leanness and greyness he knew that it was
the dean of studies lighting the fire. Stephen closed the door quietly
and approached the fireplace.

--Good morning, sir! Can I help you?

The priest looked up quickly and said:

--One moment now, Mr Dedalus, and you will see. There is an art in
lighting a fire. We have the liberal arts and we have the useful arts.
This is one of the useful arts.

--I will try to learn it, said Stephen.

--Not too much coal, said the dean, working briskly at his task, that
is one of the secrets.

He produced four candle-butts from the side-pockets of his soutane and
placed them deftly among the coals and twisted papers. Stephen watched
him in silence. Kneeling thus on the flagstone to kindle the fire and
busied with the disposition of his wisps of paper and candle-butts he
seemed more than ever a humble server making ready the place of
sacrifice in an empty temple, a levite of the Lord. Like a levite's
robe of plain linen the faded worn soutane draped the kneeling figure
of one whom the canonicals or the bell-bordered ephod would irk and
trouble. His very body had waxed old in lowly service of the Lord--in
tending the fire upon the altar, in bearing tidings secretly, in
waiting upon worldlings, in striking swiftly when bidden--and yet had
remained ungraced by aught of saintly or of prelatic beauty. Nay, his
very soul had waxed old in that service without growing towards light
and beauty or spreading abroad a sweet odour of her sanctity--a
mortified will no more responsive to the thrill of its obedience than
was to the thrill of love or combat his ageing body, spare and sinewy,
greyed with a silver-pointed down.

The dean rested back on his hunkers and watched the sticks catch.
Stephen, to fill the silence, said:

--I am sure I could not light a fire.

--You are an artist, are you not, Mr Dedalus? said the dean, glancing
up and blinking his pale eyes. The object of the artist is the creation
of the beautiful. What the beautiful is is another question.

He rubbed his hands slowly and drily over the difficulty.

--Can you solve that question now? he asked.

--Aquinas, answered Stephen, says PULCRA SUNT QUAE VISA PLACENT.

--This fire before us, said the dean, will be pleasing to the eye.
Will it therefore be beautiful?

--In so far as it is apprehended by the sight, which I suppose means
here esthetic intellection, it will be beautiful. But Aquinas also says
BONUM EST IN QUOD TENDIT APPETITUS. In so far as it satisfies the
animal craving for warmth fire is a good. In hell, however, it is an
evil.

--Quite so, said the dean, you have certainly hit the nail on the head.

He rose nimbly and went towards the door, set it ajar and said:

--A draught is said to be a help in these matters.

As he came back to the hearth, limping slightly but with a brisk step,
Stephen saw the silent soul of a jesuit look out at him from the pale
loveless eyes. Like Ignatius he was lame but in his eyes burned no
spark of Ignatius's enthusiasm. Even the legendary craft of the
company, a craft subtler and more secret than its fabled books of
secret subtle wisdom, had not fired his soul with the energy of
apostleship. It seemed as if he used the shifts and lore and cunning of
the world, as bidden to do, for the greater glory of God, without joy
in their handling or hatred of that in them which was evil but turning
them, with a firm gesture of obedience back upon themselves and for all
this silent service it seemed as if he loved not at all the master and
little, if at all, the ends he served. SIMILITER ATQUE SENIS BACULUS,
he was, as the founder would have had him, like a staff in an old man's
hand, to be leaned on in the road at nightfall or in stress of weather,
to lie with a lady's nosegay on a garden seat, to be raised in menace.

The dean returned to the hearth and began to stroke his chin.

--When may we expect to have something from you on the esthetic
question? he asked.

--From me! said Stephen in astonishment. I stumble on an idea once a
fortnight if I am lucky.

--These questions are very profound, Mr Dedalus, said the dean. It is
like looking down from the cliffs of Moher into the depths. Many go
down into the depths and never come up. Only the trained diver can go
down into those depths and explore them and come to the surface again.

--If you mean speculation, sir, said Stephen, I also am sure that
there is no such thing as free thinking inasmuch as all thinking must
be bound by its own laws.

--Ha!

--For my purpose I can work on at present by the light of one or two
ideas of Aristotle and Aquinas.

--I see. I quite see your point.

--I need them only for my own use and guidance until I have done
something for myself by their light. If the lamp smokes or smells I
shall try to trim it. If it does not give light enough I shall sell it
and buy another.

--Epictetus also had a lamp, said the dean, which was sold for a fancy
price after his death. It was the lamp he wrote his philosophical
dissertations by. You know Epictetus?

--An old gentleman, said Stephen coarsely, who said that the soul is
very like a bucketful of water.

--He tells us in his homely way, the dean went on, that he put an iron
lamp before a statue of one of the gods and that a thief stole the
lamp. What did the philosopher do? He reflected that it was in the
character of a thief to steal and determined to buy an earthen lamp
next day instead of the iron lamp.

A smell of molten tallow came up from the dean's candle butts and fused
itself in Stephen's consciousness with the jingle of the words, bucket
and lamp and lamp and bucket. The priest's voice, too, had a hard
jingling tone. Stephen's mind halted by instinct, checked by the
strange tone and the imagery and by the priest's face which seemed like
an unlit lamp or a reflector hung in a false focus. What lay behind it
or within it? A dull torpor of the soul or the dullness of the
thundercloud, charged with intellection and capable of the gloom of
God?

--I meant a different kind of lamp, sir, said Stephen.

--Undoubtedly, said the dean.

--One difficulty, said Stephen, in esthetic discussion is to know
whether words are being used according to the literary tradition or
according to the tradition of the marketplace. I remember a sentence of
Newman's in which he says of the Blessed Virgin that she was detained
in the full company of the saints. The use of the word in the
marketplace is quite different. I HOPE I AM NOT DETAINING YOU.

--Not in the least, said the dean politely.

--No, no, said Stephen, smiling, I mean--

--Yes, yes; I see, said the dean quickly, I quite catch the point:
DETAIN.

He thrust forward his under jaw and uttered a dry short cough.

--To return to the lamp, he said, the feeding of it is also a nice
problem. You must choose the pure oil and you must be careful when you
pour it in not to overflow it, not to pour in more than the funnel can
hold.

--What funnel? asked Stephen.

--The funnel through which you pour the oil into your lamp.

--That? said Stephen. Is that called a funnel? Is it not a tundish?

--What is a tundish?

--That. The... funnel.

--Is that called a tundish in Ireland? asked the dean. I never heard
the word in my life.

--It is called a tundish in Lower Drumcondra, said Stephen, laughing,
where they speak the best English.

--A tundish, said the dean reflectively. That is a most interesting
word. I must look that word up. Upon my word I must.

His courtesy of manner rang a little false and Stephen looked at the
English convert with the same eyes as the elder brother in the parable
may have turned on the prodigal. A humble follower in the wake of
clamorous conversions, a poor Englishman in Ireland, he seemed to have
entered on the stage of jesuit history when that strange play of
intrigue and suffering and envy and struggle and indignity had been all
but given through--a late-comer, a tardy spirit. From what had he set
out? Perhaps he had been born and bred among serious dissenters, seeing
salvation in Jesus only and abhorring the vain pomps of the
establishment. Had he felt the need of an implicit faith amid the
welter of sectarianism and the jargon of its turbulent schisms, six
principle men, peculiar people, seed and snake baptists, supralapsarian
dogmatists? Had he found the true church all of a sudden in winding up
to the end like a reel of cotton some fine-spun line of reasoning upon
insufflation on the imposition of hands or the procession of the Holy
Ghost? Or had Lord Christ touched him and bidden him follow, like that
disciple who had sat at the receipt of custom, as he sat by the door of
some zinc-roofed chapel, yawning and telling over his church pence?

The dean repeated the word yet again.

--Tundish! Well now, that is interesting!

--The question you asked me a moment ago seems to me more interesting.
What is that beauty which the artist struggles to express from lumps of
earth, said Stephen coldly.

The little word seemed to have turned a rapier point of his
sensitiveness against this courteous and vigilant foe. He felt with a
smart of dejection that the man to whom he was speaking was a
countryman of Ben Jonson. He thought:

--The language in which we are speaking is his before it is mine. How
different are the words HOME, CHRIST, ALE, MASTER, on his lips and on
mine! I cannot speak or write these words without unrest of spirit. His
language, so familiar and so foreign, will always be for me an acquired
speech. I have not made or accepted its words. My voice holds them at
bay. My soul frets in the shadow of his language.

--And to distinguish between the beautiful and the sublime, the dean
added, to distinguish between moral beauty and material beauty. And to
inquire what kind of beauty is proper to each of the various arts.
These are some interesting points we might take up.

Stephen, disheartened suddenly by the dean's firm, dry tone, was
silent; and through the silence a distant noise of many boots and
confused voices came up the staircase.

--In pursuing these speculations, said the dean conclusively, there
is, however, the danger of perishing of inanition. First you must take
your degree. Set that before you as your first aim. Then, little by
little, you will see your way. I mean in every sense, your way in life
and in thinking. It may be uphill pedalling at first. Take Mr Moonan.
He was a long time before he got to the top. But he got there.

--I may not have his talent, said Stephen quietly.

--You never know, said the dean brightly. We never can say what is in
us. I most certainly should not be despondent. PER ASPERA AD ASTRA.

He left the hearth quickly and went towards the landing to oversee the
arrival of the first arts' class.

Leaning against the fireplace Stephen heard him greet briskly and
impartially every student of the class and could almost see the frank
smiles of the coarser students. A desolating pity began to fall like
dew upon his easily embittered heart for this faithful serving-man of
the knightly Loyola, for this half-brother of the clergy, more venal
than they in speech, more steadfast of soul than they, one whom he
would never call his ghostly father; and he thought how this man and
his companions had earned the name of worldlings at the hands not of
the unworldly only but of the worldly also for having pleaded, during
all their history, at the bar of God's justice for the souls of the lax
and the lukewarm and the prudent.

The entry of the professor was signalled by a few rounds of Kentish
fire from the heavy boots of those students who sat on the highest tier
of the gloomy theatre under the grey cobwebbed windows. The calling of
the roll began and the responses to the names were given out in all
tones until the name of Peter Byrne was reached.

--Here!

A deep bass note in response came from the upper tier, followed by
coughs of protest along the other benches.

The professor paused in his reading and called the next name:

--Cranly!

No answer.

--Mr Cranly!

A smile flew across Stephen's face as he thought of his friend's
studies.

--Try Leopardstown! said a voice from the bench behind.

Stephen glanced up quickly but Moynihan's snoutish face, outlined on the
grey light, was impassive. A formula was given out. Amid the rustling of
the notebooks Stephen turned back again and said:

--Give me some paper for God's sake.

--Are you as bad as that? asked Moynihan with a broad grin.

He tore a sheet from his scribbler and passed it down, whispering:

--In case of necessity any layman or woman can do it.

The formula which he wrote obediently on the sheet of paper, the
coiling and uncoiling calculations of the professor, the spectre-like
symbols of force and velocity fascinated and jaded Stephen's mind. He
had heard some say that the old professor was an atheist freemason. O
the grey dull day! It seemed a limbo of painless patient consciousness
through which souls of mathematicians might wander, projecting long
slender fabrics from plane to plane of ever rarer and paler twilight,
radiating swift eddies to the last verges of a universe ever vaster,
farther and more impalpable.

--So we must distinguish between elliptical and ellipsoidal. Perhaps some
of you gentlemen may be familiar with the works of Mr W. S. Gilbert. In
one of his songs he speaks of the billiard sharp who is condemned to
play:


    On a cloth untrue
    With a twisted cue
    And elliptical billiard balls.

--He means a ball having the form of the ellipsoid of the principal
axes of which I spoke a moment ago.

Moynihan leaned down towards Stephen's ear and murmured:

--What price ellipsoidal balls! chase me, ladies, I'm in the cavalry!

His fellow student's rude humour ran like a gust through the cloister
of Stephen's mind, shaking into gay life limp priestly vestments that
hung upon the walls, setting them to sway and caper in a sabbath of
misrule. The forms of the community emerged from the gust-blown
vestments, the dean of studies, the portly florid bursar with his cap
of grey hair, the president, the little priest with feathery hair who
wrote devout verses, the squat peasant form of the professor of
economics, the tall form of the young professor of mental science
discussing on the landing a case of conscience with his class like a
giraffe cropping high leafage among a herd of antelopes, the grave
troubled prefect of the sodality, the plump round-headed professor of
Italian with his rogue's eyes. They came ambling and stumbling,
tumbling and capering, kilting their gowns for leap frog, holding one
another back, shaken with deep false laughter, smacking one another
behind and laughing at their rude malice, calling to one another by
familiar nicknames, protesting with sudden dignity at some rough usage,
whispering two and two behind their hands.

The professor had gone to the glass cases on the side wall, from a
shelf of which he took down a set of coils, blew away the dust from
many points and, bearing it carefully to the table, held a finger on it
while he proceeded with his lecture. He explained that the wires in
modern coils were of a compound called platinoid lately discovered by
F. W. Martino.

He spoke clearly the initials and surname of the discoverer. Moynihan
whispered from behind:

--Good old Fresh Water Martin!

--Ask him, Stephen whispered back with weary humour, if he wants a
subject for electrocution. He can have me.

Moynihan, seeing the professor bend over the coils, rose in his bench
and, clacking noiselessly the fingers of his right hand, began to call
with the voice of a slobbering urchin:

--Please teacher! This boy is after saying a bad word, teacher.

--Platinoid, the professor said solemnly, is preferred to German
silver because it has a lower coefficient of resistance by changes of
temperature. The platinoid wire is insulated and the covering of silk
that insulates it is wound on the ebonite bobbins just where my finger
is. If it were wound single an extra current would be induced in the
coils. The bobbins are saturated in hot paraffin wax...

A sharp Ulster voice said from the bench below Stephen:

--Are we likely to be asked questions on applied science?

The professor began to juggle gravely with the terms pure science and
applied science. A heavy-built student, wearing gold spectacles, stared
with some wonder at the questioner. Moynihan murmured from behind in
his natural voice:

--Isn't MacAlister a devil for his pound of flesh?

Stephen looked coldly on the oblong skull beneath him overgrown with
tangled twine-coloured hair. The voice, the accent, the mind of the
questioner offended him and he allowed the offence to carry him towards
wilful unkindness, bidding his mind think that the student's father
would have done better had he sent his son to Belfast to study and have
saved something on the train fare by so doing.

The oblong skull beneath did not turn to meet this shaft of thought and
yet the shaft came back to its bowstring; for he saw in a moment the
student's whey-pale face.

--That thought is not mine, he said to himself quickly. It came from
the comic Irishman in the bench behind. Patience. Can you say with
certitude by whom the soul of your race was bartered and its elect
betrayed--by the questioner or by the mocker? Patience. Remember
Epictetus. It is probably in his character to ask such a question at
such a moment in such a tone and to pronounce the word SCIENCE as a
monosyllable.

The droning voice of the professor continued to wind itself slowly
round and round the coils it spoke of, doubling, trebling, quadrupling
its somnolent energy as the coil multiplied its ohms of resistance.

Moynihan's voice called from behind in echo to a distant bell:

--Closing time, gents!

The entrance hall was crowded and loud with talk. On a table near the
door were two photographs in frames and between them a long roll of
paper bearing an irregular tail of signatures. MacCann went briskly to
and fro among the students, talking rapidly, answering rebuffs and
leading one after another to the table. In the inner hall the dean of
studies stood talking to a young professor, stroking his chin gravely
and nodding his head.

Stephen, checked by the crowd at the door, halted irresolutely. From
under the wide falling leaf of a soft hat Cranly's dark eyes were
watching him.

--Have you signed? Stephen asked.

Cranly closed his long thin-lipped mouth, communed with himself an
instant and answered:

--EGO HABEO.

--What is it for?

--QUOD?

--What is it for?

Cranly turned his pale face to Stephen and said blandly and bitterly:

--PER PAX UNIVERSALIS.

Stephen pointed to the Tsar's photograph and said:

--He has the face of a besotted Christ.

The scorn and anger in his voice brought Cranly's eyes back from a calm
survey of the walls of the hall.

--Are you annoyed? he asked.

--No, answered Stephen.

--Are you in bad humour?

--No.

--CREDO UT VOS SANGUINARIUS MENDAX ESTIS, said Cranly, QUIA FACIES
VOSTRA MONSTRAT UT VOS IN DAMNO MALO HUMORE ESTIS.

Moynihan, on his way to the table, said in Stephen's ear:

--MacCann is in tiptop form. Ready to shed the last drop. Brand new
world. No stimulants and votes for the bitches.

Stephen smiled at the manner of this confidence and, when Moynihan had
passed, turned again to meet Cranly's eyes.

--Perhaps you can tell me, he said, why he pours his soul so freely
into my ear. Can you?

A dull scowl appeared on Cranly's forehead. He stared at the table
where Moynihan had bent to write his name on the roll, and then said
flatly:

--A sugar!

--QUIS EST IN MALO HUMORE, said Stephen, EGO AUT VOS?

Cranly did not take up the taunt. He brooded sourly on his judgement
and repeated with the same flat force:

--A flaming bloody sugar, that's what he is!

It was his epitaph for all dead friendships and Stephen wondered
whether it would ever be spoken in the same tone over his memory. The
heavy lumpish phrase sank slowly out of hearing like a stone through a
quagmire. Stephen saw it sink as he had seen many another, feeling its
heaviness depress his heart. Cranly's speech, unlike that of Davin, had
neither rare phrases of Elizabethan English nor quaintly turned
versions of Irish idioms. Its drawl was an echo of the quays of Dublin
given back by a bleak decaying seaport, its energy an echo of the
sacred eloquence of Dublin given back flatly by a Wicklow pulpit.

The heavy scowl faded from Cranly's face as MacCann marched briskly
towards them from the other side of the hall.

--Here you are! said MacCann cheerily.

--Here I am! said Stephen.

--Late as usual. Can you not combine the progressive tendency with a
respect for punctuality?

--That question is out of order, said Stephen. Next business.

His smiling eyes were fixed on a silver-wrapped tablet of milk chocolate
which peeped out of the propagandist's breast-pocket. A little ring of
listeners closed round to hear the war of wits. A lean student with
olive skin and lank black hair thrust his face between the two, glancing
from one to the other at each phrase and seeming to try to catch each
flying phrase in his open moist mouth. Cranly took a small grey handball
from his pocket and began to examine it closely, turning it over and over.

--Next business? said MacCann. Hom!

He gave a loud cough of laughter, smiled broadly and tugged twice at
the straw-coloured goatee which hung from his blunt chin.

--The next business is to sign the testimonial.

--Will you pay me anything if I sign? asked Stephen.

--I thought you were an idealist, said MacCann.

The gipsy-like student looked about him and addressed the onlookers in
an indistinct bleating voice.

--By hell, that's a queer notion. I consider that notion to be a
mercenary notion.

His voice faded into silence. No heed was paid to his words. He turned
his olive face, equine in expression, towards Stephen, inviting him to
speak again.

MacCann began to speak with fluent energy of the Tsar's rescript, of
Stead, of general disarmament arbitration in cases of international
disputes, of the signs of the times, of the new humanity and the new
gospel of life which would make it the business of the community to
secure as cheaply as possible the greatest possible happiness of the
greatest possible number.

The gipsy student responded to the close of the period by crying:

--Three cheers for universal brotherhood!

--Go on, Temple, said a stout ruddy student near him. I'll stand you a
pint after.

--I'm a believer in universal brotherhood, said Temple, glancing about
him out of his dark oval eyes. Marx is only a bloody cod.

Cranly gripped his arm tightly to check his tongue, smiling uneasily,
and repeated:

--Easy, easy, easy!

Temple struggled to free his arm but continued, his mouth flecked by a
thin foam:

--Socialism was founded by an Irishman and the first man in Europe who
preached the freedom of thought was Collins. Two hundred years ago. He
denounced priestcraft, the philosopher of Middlesex. Three cheers for
John Anthony Collins!

A thin voice from the verge of the ring replied:

--Pip! pip!

Moynihan murmured beside Stephen's ear:

--And what about John Anthony's poor little sister:

    Lottie Collins lost her drawers;
    Won't you kindly lend her yours?

Stephen laughed and Moynihan, pleased with the result, murmured again:

--We'll have five bob each way on John Anthony Collins.

--I am waiting for your answer, said MacCann briefly.

--The affair doesn't interest me in the least, said Stephen wearily.
You know that well. Why do you make a scene about it?

--Good! said MacCann, smacking his lips. You are a reactionary, then?

--Do you think you impress me, Stephen asked, when you flourish your
wooden sword?

--Metaphors! said MacCann bluntly. Come to facts.

Stephen blushed and turned aside. MacCann stood his ground and said with
hostile humour:

--Minor poets, I suppose, are above such trivial questions as the
question of universal peace.

Cranly raised his head and held the handball between the two students
by way of a peace-offering, saying:

--PAX SUPER TOTUM SANGUINARIUM GLOBUM.

Stephen, moving away the bystanders, jerked his shoulder angrily in the
direction of the Tsar's image, saying:

--Keep your icon. If we must have a Jesus let us have a legitimate
Jesus.

--By hell, that's a good one! said the gipsy student to those about
him, that's a fine expression. I like that expression immensely.

He gulped down the spittle in his throat as if he were gulping down the
phrase and, fumbling at the peak of his tweed cap, turned to Stephen,
saying:

--Excuse me, sir, what do you mean by that expression you uttered just
now?

Feeling himself jostled by the students near him, he said to them:

--I am curious to know now what he meant by that expression.

He turned again to Stephen and said in a whisper:

--Do you believe in Jesus? I believe in man. Of course, I don't know
if you believe in man. I admire you, sir. I admire the mind of man
independent of all religions. Is that your opinion about the mind of
Jesus?

--Go on, Temple, said the stout ruddy student, returning, as was his
wont, to his first idea, that pint is waiting for you.

--He thinks I'm an imbecile, Temple explained to Stephen, because I'm a
believer in the power of mind.

Cranly linked his arms into those of Stephen and his admirer and said:

--NOS AD MANUM BALLUM JOCABIMUS.

Stephen, in the act of being led away, caught sight of MacCann's
flushed blunt-featured face.

--My signature is of no account, he said politely. You are right to go
your way. Leave me to go mine.

--Dedalus, said MacCann crisply, I believe you're a good fellow but
you have yet to learn the dignity of altruism and the responsibility of
the human individual.

A voice said:

--Intellectual crankery is better out of this movement than in it.

Stephen, recognizing the harsh tone of MacAlister's voice did not turn
in the direction of the voice. Cranly pushed solemnly through the
throng of students, linking Stephen and Temple like a celebrant
attended by his ministers on his way to the altar.

Temple bent eagerly across Cranly's breast and said:

--Did you hear MacAlister what he said? That youth is jealous of you.
Did you see that? I bet Cranly didn't see that. By hell, I saw that at
once.

As they crossed the inner hall, the dean of studies was in the act of
escaping from the student with whom he had been conversing. He stood at
the foot of the staircase, a foot on the lowest step, his threadbare
soutane gathered about him for the ascent with womanish care, nodding
his head often and repeating:

--Not a doubt of it, Mr Hackett! Very fine! Not a doubt of it!

In the middle of the hall the prefect of the college sodality was
speaking earnestly, in a soft querulous voice, with a boarder. As he
spoke he wrinkled a little his freckled brow and bit, between his
phrases, at a tiny bone pencil.

--I hope the matric men will all come. The first arts' men are pretty
sure. Second arts, too. We must make sure of the newcomers.

Temple bent again across Cranly, as they were passing through the
doorway, and said in a swift whisper:

--Do you know that he is a married man? he was a married man before
they converted him. He has a wife and children somewhere. By hell, I
think that's the queerest notion I ever heard! Eh?

His whisper trailed off into sly cackling laughter. The moment they
were through the doorway Cranly seized him rudely by the neck and shook
him, saying:

--You flaming floundering fool! I'll take my dying bible there isn't a
bigger bloody ape, do you know, than you in the whole flaming bloody
world!

Temple wriggled in his grip, laughing still with sly content, while
Cranly repeated flatly at every rude shake:

--A flaming flaring bloody idiot!

They crossed the weedy garden together. The president, wrapped in a
heavy loose cloak, was coming towards them along one of the walks,
reading his office. At the end of the walk he halted before turning and
raised his eyes. The students saluted, Temple fumbling as before at the
peak of his cap. They walked forward in silence. As they neared the
alley Stephen could hear the thuds of the players' hands and the wet
smacks of the ball and Davin's voice crying out excitedly at each
stroke.

The three students halted round the box on which Davin sat to follow
the game. Temple, after a few moments, sidled across to Stephen and
said:

--Excuse me, I wanted to ask you, do you believe that Jean-Jacques
Rousseau was a sincere man?

Stephen laughed outright. Cranly, picking up the broken stave of a cask
from the grass at his feet, turned swiftly and said sternly:

--Temple, I declare to the living God if you say another word, do you
know, to anybody on any subject, I'll kill you SUPER SPOTTUM.

--He was like you, I fancy, said Stephen, an emotional man.

--Blast him, curse him! said Cranly broadly. Don't talk to him at all.
Sure, you might as well be talking, do you know, to a flaming
chamber-pot as talking to Temple. Go home, Temple. For God's sake, go
home.

--I don't care a damn about you, Cranly, answered Temple, moving out of
reach of the uplifted stave and pointing at Stephen. He's the only man
I see in this institution that has an individual mind.

--Institution! Individual! cried Cranly. Go home, blast you, for
you're a hopeless bloody man.

--I'm an emotional man, said Temple. That's quite rightly expressed.
And I'm proud that I'm an emotionalist.

He sidled out of the alley, smiling slyly. Cranly watched him with a
blank expressionless face.

--Look at him! he said. Did you ever see such a go-by-the-wall?

His phrase was greeted by a strange laugh from a student who lounged
against the wall, his peaked cap down on his eyes. The laugh, pitched
in a high key and coming from a so muscular frame, seemed like the
whinny of an elephant. The student's body shook all over and, to ease
his mirth, he rubbed both his hands delightedly over his groins.

--Lynch is awake, said Cranly.

Lynch, for answer, straightened himself and thrust forward his chest.

--Lynch puts out his chest, said Stephen, as a criticism of life.

Lynch smote himself sonorously on the chest and said:

--Who has anything to say about my girth?

Cranly took him at the word and the two began to tussle. When their
faces had flushed with the struggle they drew apart, panting. Stephen
bent down towards Davin who, intent on the game, had paid no heed to
the talk of the others.

--And how is my little tame goose? he asked. Did he sign, too?

Davin nodded and said:

--And you, Stevie?

Stephen shook his head.

--You're a terrible man, Stevie, said Davin, taking the short pipe
from his mouth, always alone.

--Now that you have signed the petition for universal peace, said
Stephen, I suppose you will burn that little copybook I saw in your
room.

As Davin did not answer, Stephen began to quote:

--Long pace, fianna! Right incline, fianna! Fianna, by numbers,
salute, one, two!

--That's a different question, said Davin. I'm an Irish nationalist,
first and foremost. But that's you all out. You're a born sneerer,
Stevie.

--When you make the next rebellion with hurleysticks, said Stephen,
and want the indispensable informer, tell me. I can find you a few in
this college.

--I can't understand you, said Davin. One time I hear you talk against
English literature. Now you talk against the Irish informers. What with
your name and your ideas--Are you Irish at all?

--Come with me now to the office of arms and I will show you the tree
of my family, said Stephen.

--Then be one of us, said Davin. Why don't you learn Irish? Why did you
drop out of the league class after the first lesson?

--You know one reason why, answered Stephen.

Davin tossed his head and laughed.

--Oh, come now, he said. Is it on account of that certain young lady
and Father Moran? But that's all in your own mind, Stevie. They were
only talking and laughing.

Stephen paused and laid a friendly hand upon Davin's shoulder.

--Do you remember, he said, when we knew each other first? The first
morning we met you asked me to show you the way to the matriculation
class, putting a very strong stress on the first syllable. You
remember? Then you used to address the jesuits as father, you remember?
I ask myself about you: IS HE AS INNOCENT AS HIS SPEECH?

--I'm a simple person, said Davin. You know that. When you told me
that night in Harcourt Street those things about your private life,
honest to God, Stevie, I was not able to eat my dinner. I was quite
bad. I was awake a long time that night. Why did you tell me those
things?

--Thanks, said Stephen. You mean I am a monster.

--No, said Davin. But I wish you had not told me.

A tide began to surge beneath the calm surface of Stephen's
friendliness.

--This race and this country and this life produced me, he said. I
shall express myself as I am.

--Try to be one of us, repeated Davin. In heart you are an Irish man
but your pride is too powerful.

--My ancestors threw off their language and took another, Stephen said.
They allowed a handful of foreigners to subject them. Do you fancy I am
going to pay in my own life and person debts they made? What for?

--For our freedom, said Davin.

--No honourable and sincere man, said Stephen, has given up to you his
life and his youth and his affections from the days of Tone to those of
Parnell, but you sold him to the enemy or failed him in need or reviled
him and left him for another. And you invite me to be one of you. I'd
see you damned first.

--They died for their ideals, Stevie, said Davin. Our day will come
yet, believe me.

Stephen, following his own thought, was silent for an instant.

--The soul is born, he said vaguely, first in those moments I told you
of. It has a slow and dark birth, more mysterious than the birth of the
body. When the soul of a man is born in this country there are nets
flung at it to hold it back from flight. You talk to me of nationality,
language, religion. I shall try to fly by those nets.

Davin knocked the ashes from his pipe.

--Too deep for me, Stevie, he said. But a man's country comes first.
Ireland first, Stevie. You can be a poet or a mystic after.

--Do you know what Ireland is? asked Stephen with cold violence.
Ireland is the old sow that eats her farrow.

Davin rose from his box and went towards the players, shaking his head
sadly. But in a moment his sadness left him and he was hotly disputing
with Cranly and the two players who had finished their game. A match of
four was arranged, Cranly insisting, however, that his ball should be
used. He let it rebound twice or thrice to his hand and struck it strongly
and swiftly towards the base of the alley, exclaiming in answer to its
thud:

--Your soul!

Stephen stood with Lynch till the score began to rise. Then he plucked
him by the sleeve to come away. Lynch obeyed, saying:

--Let us eke go, as Cranly has it.

Stephen smiled at this side-thrust.

They passed back through the garden and out through the hall where the
doddering porter was pinning up a hall notice in the frame. At the foot
of the steps they halted and Stephen took a packet of cigarettes from
his pocket and offered it to his companion.

--I know you are poor, he said.

--Damn your yellow insolence, answered Lynch.

This second proof of Lynch's culture made Stephen smile again.

--It was a great day for European culture, he said, when you made up
your mind to swear in yellow.

They lit their cigarettes and turned to the right. After a pause
Stephen began:

--Aristotle has not defined pity and terror. I have. I say--

Lynch halted and said bluntly:

--Stop! I won't listen! I am sick. I was out last night on a yellow
drunk with Horan and Goggins.

Stephen went on:

--Pity is the feeling which arrests the mind in the presence of
whatsoever is grave and constant in human sufferings and unites it with
the human sufferer. Terror is the feeling which arrests the mind in the
presence of whatsoever is grave and constant in human sufferings and
unites it with the secret cause.

--Repeat, said Lynch.

Stephen repeated the definitions slowly.

--A girl got into a hansom a few days ago, he went on, in London. She
was on her way to meet her mother whom she had not seen for many years.
At the corner of a street the shaft of a lorry shivered the window of
the hansom in the shape of a star. A long fine needle of the shivered
glass pierced her heart. She died on the instant. The reporter called
it a tragic death. It is not. It is remote from terror and pity
according to the terms of my definitions.

--The tragic emotion, in fact, is a face looking two ways, towards
terror and towards pity, both of which are phases of it. You see I use
the word ARREST. I mean that the tragic emotion is static. Or rather
the dramatic emotion is. The feelings excited by improper art are
kinetic, desire or loathing. Desire urges us to possess, to go to
something; loathing urges us to abandon, to go from something. The arts
which excite them, pornographical or didactic, are therefore improper
arts. The esthetic emotion (I used the general term) is therefore
static. The mind is arrested and raised above desire and loathing.

--You say that art must not excite desire, said Lynch. I told you that
one day I wrote my name in pencil on the backside of the Venus of
Praxiteles in the Museum. Was that not desire?

--I speak of normal natures, said Stephen. You also told me that when
you were a boy in that charming carmelite school you ate pieces of
dried cowdung.

Lynch broke again into a whinny of laughter and again rubbed both his
hands over his groins but without taking them from his pockets.

--O, I did! I did! he cried.

Stephen turned towards his companion and looked at him for a moment
boldly in the eyes. Lynch, recovering from his laughter, answered his
look from his humbled eyes. The long slender flattened skull beneath
the long pointed cap brought before Stephen's mind the image of a
hooded reptile. The eyes, too, were reptile-like in glint and gaze. Yet
at that instant, humbled and alert in their look, they were lit by one
tiny human point, the window of a shrivelled soul, poignant and
self-embittered.

--As for that, Stephen said in polite parenthesis, we are all animals.
I also am an animal.

--You are, said Lynch.

--But we are just now in a mental world, Stephen continued. The desire
and loathing excited by improper esthetic means are really not esthetic
emotions not only because they are kinetic in character but also
because they are not more than physical. Our flesh shrinks from what it
dreads and responds to the stimulus of what it desires by a purely
reflex action of the nervous system. Our eyelid closes before we are
aware that the fly is about to enter our eye.

--Not always, said Lynch critically.

--In the same way, said Stephen, your flesh responded to the stimulus
of a naked statue, but it was, I say, simply a reflex action of the
nerves. Beauty expressed by the artist cannot awaken in us an emotion
which is kinetic or a sensation which is purely physical. It awakens,
or ought to awaken, or induces, or ought to induce, an esthetic stasis,
an ideal pity or an ideal terror, a stasis called forth, prolonged, and
at last dissolved by what I call the rhythm of beauty.

--What is that exactly? asked Lynch.

--Rhythm, said Stephen, is the first formal esthetic relation of part
to part in any esthetic whole or of an esthetic whole to its part or
parts or of any part to the esthetic whole of which it is a part.

--If that is rhythm, said Lynch, let me hear what you call beauty;
and, please remember, though I did eat a cake of cowdung once, that I
admire only beauty.

Stephen raised his cap as if in greeting. Then, blushing slightly, he
laid his hand on Lynch's thick tweed sleeve.

--We are right, he said, and the others are wrong. To speak of these
things and to try to understand their nature and, having understood it,
to try slowly and humbly and constantly to express, to press out again,
from the gross earth or what it brings forth, from sound and shape and
colour which are the prison gates of our soul, an image of the beauty
we have come to understand--that is art.

They had reached the canal bridge and, turning from their course, went
on by the trees. A crude grey light, mirrored in the sluggish water and
a smell of wet branches over their heads seemed to war against the
course of Stephen's thought.

--But you have not answered my question, said Lynch. What is art? What
is the beauty it expresses?

--That was the first definition I gave you, you sleepy-headed wretch,
said Stephen, when I began to try to think out the matter for myself.
Do you remember the night? Cranly lost his temper and began to talk
about Wicklow bacon.

--I remember, said Lynch. He told us about them flaming fat devils of
pigs.

--Art, said Stephen, is the human disposition of sensible or
intelligible matter for an esthetic end. You remember the pigs and
forget that. You are a distressing pair, you and Cranly.

Lynch made a grimace at the raw grey sky and said:

--If I am to listen to your esthetic philosophy give me at least
another cigarette. I don't care about it. I don't even care about
women. Damn you and damn everything. I want a job of five hundred a
year. You can't get me one.

Stephen handed him the packet of cigarettes. Lynch took the last one
that remained, saying simply:

--Proceed!

--Aquinas, said Stephen, says that is beautiful the apprehension of
which pleases.

Lynch nodded.

--I remember that, he said, PULCRA SUNT QUAE VISA PLACENT.

--He uses the word VISA, said Stephen, to cover esthetic apprehensions of
all kinds, whether through sight or hearing or through any other avenue of
apprehension. This word, though it is vague, is clear enough to keep
away good and evil which excite desire and loathing. It means certainly
a stasis and not a kinesis. How about the true? It produces also a
stasis of the mind. You would not write your name in pencil across the
hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle.

--No, said Lynch, give me the hypotenuse of the Venus of Praxiteles.

--Static therefore, said Stephen. Plato, I believe, said that beauty
is the splendour of truth. I don't think that it has a meaning, but the
true and the beautiful are akin. Truth is beheld by the intellect which
is appeased by the most satisfying relations of the intelligible;
beauty is beheld by the imagination which is appeased by the most
satisfying relations of the sensible. The first step in the direction
of truth is to understand the frame and scope of the intellect itself,
to comprehend the act itself of intellection. Aristotle's entire system
of philosophy rests upon his book of psychology and that, I think,
rests on his statement that the same attribute cannot at the same time
and in the same connexion belong to and not belong to the same subject.
The first step in the direction of beauty is to understand the frame
and scope of the imagination, to comprehend the act itself of esthetic
apprehension. Is that clear?

--But what is beauty? asked Lynch impatiently. Out with another
definition. Something we see and like! Is that the best you and Aquinas
can do?

--Let us take woman, said Stephen.

--Let us take her! said Lynch fervently.

--The Greek, the Turk, the Chinese, the Copt, the Hottentot, said
Stephen, all admire a different type of female beauty. That seems
to be a maze out of which we cannot escape. I see, however,
two ways out. One is this hypothesis: that every physical quality
admired by men in women is in direct connexion with the manifold
functions of women for the propagation of the species. It may be so.
The world, it seems, is drearier than even you, Lynch, imagined. For my
part I dislike that way out. It leads to eugenics rather than to
esthetic. It leads you out of the maze into a new gaudy lecture-room
where MacCann, with one hand on THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES and the other hand
on the new testament, tells you that you admired the great flanks of
Venus because you felt that she would bear you burly offspring and
admired her great breasts because you felt that she would give good
milk to her children and yours.

--Then MacCann is a sulphur-yellow liar, said Lynch energetically.

--There remains another way out, said Stephen, laughing.

--To wit? said Lynch.

--This hypothesis, Stephen began.

A long dray laden with old iron came round the corner of Sir Patrick
Dun's hospital covering the end of Stephen's speech with the harsh roar
of jangled and rattling metal. Lynch closed his ears and gave out oath
after oath till the dray had passed. Then he turned on his heel rudely.
Stephen turned also and waited for a few moments till his companion's
ill-humour had had its vent.

--This hypothesis, Stephen repeated, is the other way out: that,
though the same object may not seem beautiful to all people, all people
who admire a beautiful object find in it certain relations which
satisfy and coincide with the stages themselves of all esthetic
apprehension. These relations of the sensible, visible to you through
one form and to me through another, must be therefore the necessary
qualities of beauty. Now, we can return to our old friend saint Thomas
for another pennyworth of wisdom.

Lynch laughed.

--It amuses me vastly, he said, to hear you quoting him time after
time like a jolly round friar. Are you laughing in your sleeve?

--MacAlister, answered Stephen, would call my esthetic theory applied
Aquinas. So far as this side of esthetic philosophy extends, Aquinas
will carry me all along the line. When we come to the phenomena of
artistic conception, artistic gestation, and artistic reproduction I
require a new terminology and a new personal experience.

--Of course, said Lynch. After all Aquinas, in spite of his intellect,
was exactly a good round friar. But you will tell me about the new
personal experience and new terminology some other day. Hurry up and
finish the first part.

--Who knows? said Stephen, smiling. Perhaps Aquinas would understand
me better than you. He was a poet himself. He wrote a hymn for Maundy
Thursday. It begins with the words PANGE LINGUA GLORIOSI. They say it
is the highest glory of the hymnal. It is an intricate and soothing
hymn. I like it; but there is no hymn that can be put beside that
mournful and majestic processional song, the VEXILLA REGIS of Venantius
Fortunatus.

Lynch began to sing softly and solemnly in a deep bass voice:

    IMPLETA SUNT QUAE CONCINIT
    DAVID FIDELI CARMINE
    DICENDO NATIONIBUS
    REGNAVIT A LIGNO DEUS.

--That's great! he said, well pleased. Great music!

They turned into Lower Mount Street. A few steps from the corner a fat
young man, wearing a silk neckcloth, saluted them and stopped.

--Did you hear the results of the exams? he asked. Griffin was
plucked. Halpin and O'Flynn are through the home civil. Moonan got
fifth place in the Indian. O'Shaughnessy got fourteenth. The Irish
fellows in Clark's gave them a feed last night. They all ate curry.

His pallid bloated face expressed benevolent malice and, as he had
advanced through his tidings of success, his small fat-encircled eyes
vanished out of sight and his weak wheezing voice out of hearing.

In reply to a question of Stephen's his eyes and his voice came forth
again from their lurking-places.

--Yes, MacCullagh and I, he said. He's taking pure mathematics and I'm
taking constitutional history. There are twenty subjects. I'm taking
botany too. You know I'm a member of the field club.

He drew back from the other two in a stately fashion and placed a plump
woollen-gloved hand on his breast from which muttered wheezing laughter
at once broke forth.

--Bring us a few turnips and onions the next time you go out, said
Stephen drily, to make a stew.

The fat student laughed indulgently and said:

--We are all highly respectable people in the field club. Last
Saturday we went out to Glenmalure, seven of us.

--With women, Donovan? said Lynch.

Donovan again laid his hand on his chest and said:

--Our end is the acquisition of knowledge. Then he said quickly:

--I hear you are writing some essays about esthetics.

Stephen made a vague gesture of denial.

--Goethe and Lessing, said Donovan, have written a lot on that
subject, the classical school and the romantic school and all that. The
Laocoon interested me very much when I read it. Of course it is
idealistic, German, ultra-profound.

Neither of the others spoke. Donovan took leave of them urbanely.

--I must go, he said softly and benevolently, I have a strong
suspicion, amounting almost to a conviction, that my sister intended to
make pancakes today for the dinner of the Donovan family.

--Goodbye, Stephen said in his wake. Don't forget the turnips for me
and my mate.

Lynch gazed after him, his lip curling in slow scorn till his face
resembled a devil's mask:

--To think that that yellow pancake-eating excrement can get a good
job, he said at length, and I have to smoke cheap cigarettes!

They turned their faces towards Merrion Square and went for a little in
silence.

--To finish what I was saying about beauty, said Stephen, the most
satisfying relations of the sensible must therefore correspond to the
necessary phases of artistic apprehension. Find these and you find the
qualities of universal beauty. Aquinas says: AD PULCRITUDINEM TRIA
REQUIRUNTUR INTEGRITAS, CONSONANTIA, CLARITAS. I translate it so: THREE
THINGS ARE NEEDED FOR BEAUTY, WHOLENESS, HARMONY, AND RADIANCE. Do
these correspond to the phases of apprehension? Are you following?

--Of course, I am, said Lynch. If you think I have an excrementitious
intelligence run after Donovan and ask him to listen to you.

Stephen pointed to a basket which a butcher's boy had slung inverted on
his head.

--Look at that basket, he said.

--I see it, said Lynch.

--In order to see that basket, said Stephen, your mind first of all
separates the basket from the rest of the visible universe which is not
the basket. The first phase of apprehension is a bounding line drawn
about the object to be apprehended. An esthetic image is presented to
us either in space or in time.

What is audible is presented in time, what is visible is presented in
space. But, temporal or spatial, the esthetic image is first luminously
apprehended as selfbounded and selfcontained upon the immeasurable
background of space or time which is not it. You apprehended it as ONE
thing. You see it as one whole. You apprehend its wholeness. That is
INTEGRITAS.

--Bull's eye! said Lynch, laughing. Go on.

--Then, said Stephen, you pass from point to point, led by its formal
lines; you apprehend it as balanced part against part within its
limits; you feel the rhythm of its structure. In other words, the
synthesis of immediate perception is followed by the analysis of
apprehension. Having first felt that it is ONE thing you feel now that
it is a THING. You apprehend it as complex, multiple, divisible,
separable, made up of its parts, the result of its parts and their sum,
harmonious. That is CONSONANTIA.

--Bull's eye again! said Lynch wittily. Tell me now what is CLARITAS
and you win the cigar.

--The connotation of the word, Stephen said, is rather vague. Aquinas
uses a term which seems to be inexact. It baffled me for a long time.
It would lead you to believe that he had in mind symbolism or idealism,
the supreme quality of beauty being a light from some other world, the
idea of which the matter is but the shadow, the reality of which it is
but the symbol. I thought he might mean that CLARITAS is the artistic
discovery and representation of the divine purpose in anything or a
force of generalization which would make the esthetic image a
universal one, make it outshine its proper conditions. But that is
literary talk. I understand it so. When you have apprehended that
basket as one thing and have then analysed it according to its form and
apprehended it as a thing you make the only synthesis which is
logically and esthetically permissible. You see that it is that thing
which it is and no other thing. The radiance of which he speaks in the
scholastic QUIDDITAS, the WHATNESS of a thing. This supreme quality is
felt by the artist when the esthetic image is first conceived in his
imagination. The mind in that mysterious instant Shelley likened
beautifully to a fading coal. The instant wherein that supreme quality
of beauty, the clear radiance of the esthetic image, is apprehended
luminously by the mind which has been arrested by its wholeness and
fascinated by its harmony is the luminous silent stasis of esthetic
pleasure, a spiritual state very like to that cardiac condition which
the Italian physiologist Luigi Galvani, using a phrase almost as
beautiful as Shelley's, called the enchantment of the heart.

Stephen paused and, though his companion did not speak, felt that his
words had called up around them a thought-enchanted silence.

--What I have said, he began again, refers to beauty in the wider
sense of the word, in the sense which the word has in the literary
tradition. In the marketplace it has another sense. When we speak of
beauty in the second sense of the term our judgement is influenced in
the first place by the art itself and by the form of that art. The
image, it is clear, must be set between the mind or senses of the
artist himself and the mind or senses of others. If you bear this in
memory you will see that art necessarily divides itself into three
forms progressing from one to the next. These forms are: the lyrical
form, the form wherein the artist presents his image in immediate
relation to himself; the epical form, the form wherein he presents his
image in mediate relation to himself and to others; the dramatic form,
the form wherein he presents his image in immediate relation to others.

--That you told me a few nights ago, said Lynch, and we began the
famous discussion.

--I have a book at home, said Stephen, in which I have written down
questions which are more amusing than yours were. In finding the
answers to them I found the theory of esthetic which I am trying to
explain. Here are some questions I set myself: IS A CHAIR FINELY MADE
TRAGIC OR COMIC? IS THE PORTRAIT OF MONA LISA GOOD IF I DESIRE TO SEE
IT? IF NOT, WHY NOT?

--Why not, indeed? said Lynch, laughing.

--IF A MAN HACKING IN FURY AT A BLOCK OF WOOD, Stephen continued, MAKE
THERE AN IMAGE OF A COW, IS THAT IMAGE A WORK OF ART? IF NOT, WHY NOT?

--That's a lovely one, said Lynch, laughing again. That has the true
scholastic stink.

--Lessing, said Stephen, should not have taken a group of statues to
write of. The art, being inferior, does not present the forms I spoke
of distinguished clearly one from another. Even in literature, the
highest and most spiritual art, the forms are often confused. The
lyrical form is in fact the simplest verbal vesture of an instant of
emotion, a rhythmical cry such as ages ago cheered on the man who pulled
at the oar or dragged stones up a slope. He who utters it is more
conscious of the instant of emotion than of himself as feeling emotion.
The simplest epical form is seen emerging out of lyrical literature
when the artist prolongs and broods upon himself as the centre of an
epical event and this form progresses till the centre of emotional
gravity is equidistant from the artist himself and from others. The
narrative is no longer purely personal. The personality of the artist
passes into the narration itself, flowing round and round the persons
and the action like a vital sea. This progress you will see easily in
that old English ballad TURPIN HERO which begins in the first person
and ends in the third person. The dramatic form is reached when the
vitality which has flowed and eddied round each person fills every
person with such vital force that he or she assumes a proper and
intangible esthetic life. The personality of the artist, at first a cry
or a cadence or a mood and then a fluid and lambent narrative, finally
refines itself out of existence, impersonalizes itself, so to speak.
The esthetic image in the dramatic form is life purified in and
reprojected from the human imagination. The mystery of esthetic, like
that of material creation, is accomplished. The artist, like the God of
creation, remains within or behind or beyond or above his handiwork,
invisible, refined out of existence, indifferent, paring his
fingernails.

--Trying to refine them also out of existence, said Lynch.

A fine rain began to fall from the high veiled sky and they turned into
the duke's lawn to reach the national library before the shower came.

--What do you mean, Lynch asked surlily, by prating about beauty and
the imagination in this miserable Godforsaken island? No wonder the
artist retired within or behind his handiwork after having perpetrated
this country.

The rain fell faster. When they passed through the passage beside
Kildare house they found many students sheltering under the arcade of
the library. Cranly, leaning against a pillar, was picking his teeth
with a sharpened match, listening to some companions. Some girls stood
near the entrance door. Lynch whispered to Stephen:

--Your beloved is here.

Stephen took his place silently on the step below the group of
students, heedless of the rain which fell fast, turning his eyes
towards her from time to time. She too stood silently among her
companions. She has no priest to flirt with, he thought with conscious
bitterness, remembering how he had seen her last. Lynch was right. His
mind emptied of theory and courage, lapsed back into a listless peace.

He heard the students talking among themselves. They spoke of two
friends who had passed the final medical examination, of the chances of
getting places on ocean liners, of poor and rich practices.

--That's all a bubble. An Irish country practice is better.

--Hynes was two years in Liverpool and he says the same. A frightful
hole he said it was. Nothing but midwifery cases.

--Do you mean to say it is better to have a job here in the country
than in a rich city like that? I know a fellow...

--Hynes has no brains. He got through by stewing, pure stewing.

--Don't mind him. There's plenty of money to be made in a big commercial
city.

--Depends on the practice.

--EGO CREDO UT VITA PAUPERUM EST SIMPLICITER ATROX, SIMPLICITER
SANGUINARIUS ATROX, IN LIVERPOOLIO.

Their voices reached his ears as if from a distance in interrupted
pulsation. She was preparing to go away with her companions.

The quick light shower had drawn off, tarrying in clusters of diamonds
among the shrubs of the quadrangle where an exhalation was breathed
forth by the blackened earth. Their trim boots prattled as they stood
on the steps of the colonnade, talking quietly and gaily, glancing at
the clouds, holding their umbrellas at cunning angles against the few
last raindrops, closing them again, holding their skirts demurely.

And if he had judged her harshly? If her life were a simple rosary of
hours, her life simple and strange as a bird's life, gay in the
morning, restless all day, tired at sundown? Her heart simple and
wilful as a bird's heart?


* * * * *


Towards dawn he awoke. O what sweet music! His soul was all dewy wet.
Over his limbs in sleep pale cool waves of light had passed. He lay
still, as if his soul lay amid cool waters, conscious of faint sweet
music. His mind was waking slowly to a tremulous morning knowledge, a
morning inspiration. A spirit filled him, pure as the purest water,
sweet as dew, moving as music. But how faintly it was inbreathed, how
passionlessly, as if the seraphim themselves were breathing upon him!
His soul was waking slowly, fearing to awake wholly. It was that
windless hour of dawn when madness wakes and strange plants open to the
light and the moth flies forth silently.

An enchantment of the heart! The night had been enchanted. In a dream
or vision he had known the ecstasy of seraphic life. Was it an instant
of enchantment only or long hours and years and ages?

The instant of inspiration seemed now to be reflected from all sides at
once from a multitude of cloudy circumstances of what had happened or
of what might have happened. The instant flashed forth like a point of
light and now from cloud on cloud of vague circumstance confused form
was veiling softly its afterglow. O! In the virgin womb of the
imagination the word was made flesh. Gabriel the seraph had come to the
virgin's chamber. An afterglow deepened within his spirit, whence the
white flame had passed, deepening to a rose and ardent light. That rose
and ardent light was her strange wilful heart, strange that no man had
known or would know, wilful from before the beginning of the world; and
lured by that ardent rose-like glow the choirs of the seraphim were
falling from heaven.

    Are you not weary of ardent ways,
    Lure of the fallen seraphim?
    Tell no more of enchanted days.

The verses passed from his mind to his lips and, murmuring them over,
he felt the rhythmic movement of a villanelle pass through them. The
rose-like glow sent forth its rays of rhyme; ways, days, blaze, praise,
raise. Its rays burned up the world, consumed the hearts of men and
angels: the rays from the rose that was her wilful heart.

    Your eyes have set man's heart ablaze
    And you have had your will of him.
    Are you not weary of ardent ways?

And then? The rhythm died away, ceased, began again to move and beat.
And then? Smoke, incense ascending from the altar of the world.

    Above the flame the smoke of praise
    Goes up from ocean rim to rim
    Tell no more of enchanted days.

Smoke went up from the whole earth, from the vapoury oceans, smoke of
her praise. The earth was like a swinging swaying censer, a ball of
incense, an ellipsoidal fall. The rhythm died out at once; the cry of
his heart was broken. His lips began to murmur the first verses over
and over; then went on stumbling through half verses, stammering and
baffled; then stopped. The heart's cry was broken.

The veiled windless hour had passed and behind the panes of the naked
window the morning light was gathering. A bell beat faintly very far
away. A bird twittered; two birds, three. The bell and the bird ceased;
and the dull white light spread itself east and west, covering the
world, covering the roselight in his heart.

Fearing to lose all, he raised himself suddenly on his elbow to look
for paper and pencil. There was neither on the table; only the soup
plate he had eaten the rice from for supper and the candlestick with
its tendrils of tallow and its paper socket, singed by the last flame.
He stretched his arm wearily towards the foot of the bed, groping with
his hand in the pockets of the coat that hung there. His fingers found
a pencil and then a cigarette packet. He lay back and, tearing open the
packet, placed the last cigarette on the window ledge and began to
write out the stanzas of the villanelle in small neat letters on the
rough cardboard surface.

Having written them out he lay back on the lumpy pillow, murmuring them
again. The lumps of knotted flock under his head reminded him of the
lumps of knotted horsehair in the sofa of her parlour on which he used
to sit, smiling or serious, asking himself why he had come, displeased
with her and with himself, confounded by the print of the Sacred Heart
above the untenanted sideboard. He saw her approach him in a lull of
the talk and beg him to sing one of his curious songs. Then he saw
himself sitting at the old piano, striking chords softly from its
speckled keys and singing, amid the talk which had risen again in the
room, to her who leaned beside the mantelpiece a dainty song of the
Elizabethans, a sad and sweet loth to depart, the victory chant of
Agincourt, the happy air of Greensleeves. While he sang and she
listened, or feigned to listen, his heart was at rest but when the
quaint old songs had ended and he heard again the voices in the room he
remembered his own sarcasm: the house where young men are called by
their christian names a little too soon.

At certain instants her eyes seemed about to trust him but he had
waited in vain. She passed now dancing lightly across his memory as she
had been that night at the carnival ball, her white dress a little
lifted, a white spray nodding in her hair. She danced lightly in the
round. She was dancing towards him and, as she came, her eyes were a
little averted and a faint glow was on her cheek. At the pause in the
chain of hands her hand had lain in his an instant, a soft merchandise.

--You are a great stranger now.

--Yes. I was born to be a monk.

--I am afraid you are a heretic.

--Are you much afraid?

For answer she had danced away from him along the chain of hands,
dancing lightly and discreetly, giving herself to none. The white spray
nodded to her dancing and when she was in shadow the glow was deeper on
her cheek.

A monk! His own image started forth a profaner of the cloister, a
heretic franciscan, willing and willing not to serve, spinning like
Gherardino da Borgo San Donnino, a lithe web of sophistry and
whispering in her ear.

No, it was not his image. It was like the image of the young priest in
whose company he had seen her last, looking at him out of dove's eyes,
toying with the pages of her Irish phrase-book.

--Yes, yes, the ladies are coming round to us. I can see it every day.
The ladies are with us. The best helpers the language has.

--And the church, Father Moran?

--The church too. Coming round too. The work is going ahead there too.
Don't fret about the church.

Bah! he had done well to leave the room in disdain. He had done well
not to salute her on the steps of the library! He had done well to
leave her to flirt with her priest, to toy with a church which was the
scullery-maid of christendom.

Rude brutal anger routed the last lingering instant of ecstasy from his
soul. It broke up violently her fair image and flung the fragments on
all sides. On all sides distorted reflections of her image started from
his memory: the flower girl in the ragged dress with damp coarse hair
and a hoyden's face who had called herself his own girl and begged his
handsel, the kitchen-girl in the next house who sang over the clatter
of her plates, with the drawl of a country singer, the first bars of BY
KILLARNEY'S LAKES AND FELLS, a girl who had laughed gaily to see him
stumble when the iron grating in the footpath near Cork Hill had caught
the broken sole of his shoe, a girl he had glanced at, attracted by her
small ripe mouth, as she passed out of Jacob's biscuit factory, who had
cried to him over her shoulder:

--Do you like what you seen of me, straight hair and curly eyebrows?

And yet he felt that, however he might revile and mock her image, his
anger was also a form of homage. He had left the classroom in disdain
that was not wholly sincere, feeling that perhaps the secret of her
race lay behind those dark eyes upon which her long lashes flung a
quick shadow. He had told himself bitterly as he walked through the
streets that she was a figure of the womanhood of her country, a bat-like
soul waking to the consciousness of itself in darkness and secrecy and
loneliness, tarrying awhile, loveless and sinless, with her mild lover and
leaving him to whisper of innocent transgressions in the latticed ear of a
priest. His anger against her found vent in coarse railing at her
paramour, whose name and voice and features offended his baffled pride: a
priested peasant, with a brother a policeman in Dublin and a brother a
potboy in Moycullen. To him she would unveil her soul's shy nakedness, to
one who was but schooled in the discharging of a formal rite rather than
to him, a priest of the eternal imagination, transmuting the daily bread
of experience into the radiant body of everliving life.

The radiant image of the eucharist united again in an instant his
bitter and despairing thoughts, their cries arising unbroken in a hymn
of thanksgiving.

    Our broken cries and mournful lays
    Rise in one eucharistic hymn
    Are you not weary of ardent ways?

    While sacrificing hands upraise
    The chalice flowing to the brim.
    Tell no more of enchanted days.

He spoke the verses aloud from the first lines till the music and
rhythm suffused his mind, turning it to quiet indulgence; then copied
them painfully to feel them the better by seeing them; then lay back on
his bolster.

The full morning light had come. No sound was to be heard; but he knew
that all around him life was about to awaken in common noises, hoarse
voices, sleepy prayers. Shrinking from that life he turned towards the
wall, making a cowl of the blanket and staring at the great overblown
scarlet flowers of the tattered wallpaper. He tried to warm his
perishing joy in their scarlet glow, imagining a roseway from where he
lay upwards to heaven all strewn with scarlet flowers. Weary! Weary! He
too was weary of ardent ways.

A gradual warmth, a languorous weariness passed over him descending
along his spine from his closely cowled head. He felt it descend and,
seeing himself as he lay, smiled. Soon he would sleep.

He had written verses for her again after ten years. Ten years before
she had worn her shawl cowlwise about her head, sending sprays of her
warm breath into the night air, tapping her foot upon the glassy road.
It was the last tram; the lank brown horses knew it and shook their
bells to the clear night in admonition. The conductor talked with the
driver, both nodding often in the green light of the lamp. They stood
on the steps of the tram, he on the upper, she on the lower. She came
up to his step many times between their phrases and went down again and
once or twice remained beside him forgetting to go down and then went
down. Let be! Let be!

Ten years from that wisdom of children to his folly. If he sent her the
verses? They would be read out at breakfast amid the tapping of
egg-shells. Folly indeed! Her brothers would laugh and try to wrest the
page from each other with their strong hard fingers. The suave priest,
her uncle, seated in his arm-chair, would hold the page at arm's
length, read it smiling and approve of the literary form.

No, no; that was folly. Even if he sent her the verses she would not
show them to others. No, no; she could not.

He began to feel that he had wronged her. A sense of her innocence
moved him almost to pity her, an innocence he had never understood till
he had come to the knowledge of it through sin, an innocence which she
too had not understood while she was innocent or before the strange
humiliation of her nature had first come upon her. Then first her soul
had begun to live as his soul had when he had first sinned, and a
tender compassion filled his heart as he remembered her frail pallor
and her eyes, humbled and saddened by the dark shame of womanhood.

While his soul had passed from ecstasy to languor where had she been?
Might it be, in the mysterious ways of spiritual life, that her soul at
those same moments had been conscious of his homage? It might be.

A glow of desire kindled again his soul and fired and fulfilled all his
body. Conscious of his desire she was waking from odorous sleep, the
temptress of his villanelle. Her eyes, dark and with a look of languor,
were opening to his eyes. Her nakedness yielded to him, radiant, warm,
odorous and lavish-limbed, enfolded him like a shining cloud, enfolded
him like water with a liquid life; and like a cloud of vapour or like
waters circumfluent in space the liquid letters of speech, symbols of
the element of mystery, flowed forth over his brain.

    Are you not weary of ardent ways,
    Lure of the fallen seraphim?
    Tell no more of enchanted days.

    Your eyes have set man's heart ablaze
    And you have had your will of him.
    Are you not weary of ardent ways?

    Above the flame the smoke of praise
    Goes up from ocean rim to rim.
    Tell no more of enchanted days.

    Our broken cries and mournful lays
    Rise in one eucharistic hymn.
    Are you not weary of ardent ways?

    While sacrificing hands upraise
    The chalice flowing to the brim.
    Tell no more of enchanted days.

    And still you hold our longing gaze
    With languorous look and lavish limb!
    Are you not weary of ardent ways?
    Tell no more of enchanted days.


* * * * *


What birds were they? He stood on the steps of the library to look at
them, leaning wearily on his ashplant. They flew round and round the
jutting shoulder of a house in Molesworth Street. The air of the late
March evening made clear their flight, their dark quivering bodies
flying clearly against the sky as against a limp-hung cloth of smoky
tenuous blue.

He watched their flight; bird after bird: a dark flash, a swerve, a
flutter of wings. He tried to count them before all their darting
quivering bodies passed: six, ten, eleven: and wondered were they odd
or even in number. Twelve, thirteen: for two came wheeling down from the
upper sky. They were flying high and low but ever round and round in
straight and curving lines and ever flying from left to right, circling
about a temple of air.

He listened to the cries: like the squeak of mice behind the wainscot:
a shrill twofold note. But the notes were long and shrill and whirring,
unlike the cry of vermin, falling a third or a fourth and trilled as
the flying beaks clove the air. Their cry was shrill and clear and fine
and falling like threads of silken light unwound from whirring spools.

The inhuman clamour soothed his ears in which his mother's sobs and
reproaches murmured insistently and the dark frail quivering bodies
wheeling and fluttering and swerving round an airy temple of the
tenuous sky soothed his eyes which still saw the image of his mother's
face.

Why was he gazing upwards from the steps of the porch, hearing their
shrill twofold cry, watching their flight? For an augury of good or
evil? A phrase of Cornelius Agrippa flew through his mind and then
there flew hither and thither shapeless thoughts from Swedenborg on the
correspondence of birds to things of the intellect and of how the
creatures of the air have their knowledge and know their times and
seasons because they, unlike man, are in the order of their life and
have not perverted that order by reason.

And for ages men had gazed upward as he was gazing at birds in flight.
The colonnade above him made him think vaguely of an ancient temple and
the ashplant on which he leaned wearily of the curved stick of an
augur. A sense of fear of the unknown moved in the heart of his
weariness, a fear of symbols and portents, of the hawk-like man whose
name he bore soaring out of his captivity on osier-woven wings, of
Thoth, the god of writers, writing with a reed upon a tablet and
bearing on his narrow ibis head the cusped moon.

He smiled as he thought of the god's image for it made him think of a
bottle-nosed judge in a wig, putting commas into a document which he
held at arm's length, and he knew that he would not have remembered the
god's name but that it was like an Irish oath. It was folly. But was it
for this folly that he was about to leave for ever the house of prayer
and prudence into which he had been born and the order of life out of
which he had come?

They came back with shrill cries over the jutting shoulder of the
house, flying darkly against the fading air. What birds were they? He
thought that they must be swallows who had come back from the south.
Then he was to go away for they were birds ever going and coming,
building ever an unlasting home under the eaves of men's houses and
ever leaving the homes they had built to wander.

    Bend down your faces, Oona and Aleel.
    I gaze upon them as the swallow gazes
    Upon the nest under the eave before
    He wander the loud waters.

A soft liquid joy like the noise of many waters flowed over his memory
and he felt in his heart the soft peace of silent spaces of fading
tenuous sky above the waters, of oceanic silence, of swallows flying
through the sea-dusk over the flowing waters.

A soft liquid joy flowed through the words where the soft long vowels
hurtled noiselessly and fell away, lapping and flowing back and ever
shaking the white bells of their waves in mute chime and mute peal, and
soft low swooning cry; and he felt that the augury he had sought in the
wheeling darting birds and in the pale space of sky above him had come
forth from his heart like a bird from a turret, quietly and swiftly.

Symbol of departure or of loneliness? The verses crooned in the ear of
his memory composed slowly before his remembering eyes the scene of the
hall on the night of the opening of the national theatre. He was alone
at the side of the balcony, looking out of jaded eyes at the culture of
Dublin in the stalls and at the tawdry scene-cloths and human dolls
framed by the garish lamps of the stage. A burly policeman sweated behind
him and seemed at every moment about to act. The catcalls and hisses and
mocking cries ran in rude gusts round the hall from his scattered fellow
students.

--A libel on Ireland!

--Made in Germany.

--Blasphemy!

--We never sold our faith!

--No Irish woman ever did it!

--We want no amateur atheists.

--We want no budding buddhists.

A sudden swift hiss fell from the windows above him and he knew that
the electric lamps had been switched on in the reader's room. He turned
into the pillared hall, now calmly lit, went up the staircase and
passed in through the clicking turnstile.

Cranly was sitting over near the dictionaries. A thick book, opened at
the frontispiece, lay before him on the wooden rest. He leaned back in
his chair, inclining his ear like that of a confessor to the face of
the medical student who was reading to him a problem from the chess
page of a journal. Stephen sat down at his right and the priest at the
other side of the table closed his copy of THE TABLET with an angry
snap and stood up.

Cranly gazed after him blandly and vaguely. The medical student went on
in a softer voice:

--Pawn to king's fourth.

--We had better go, Dixon, said Stephen in warning. He has gone to
complain.

Dixon folded the journal and rose with dignity, saying:

--Our men retired in good order.

--With guns and cattle, added Stephen, pointing to the titlepage of
Cranly's book on which was printed DISEASES OF THE OX.

As they passed through a lane of the tables Stephen said:

--Cranly, I want to speak to you.

Cranly did not answer or turn. He laid his book on the counter and
passed out, his well-shod feet sounding flatly on the floor. On the
staircase he paused and gazing absently at Dixon repeated:

--Pawn to king's bloody fourth.

--Put it that way if you like, Dixon said.

He had a quiet toneless voice and urbane manners and on a finger of his
plump clean hand he displayed at moments a signet ring.

As they crossed the hall a man of dwarfish stature came towards them.
Under the dome of his tiny hat his unshaven face began to smile with
pleasure and he was heard to murmur. The eyes were melancholy as those
of a monkey.

--Good evening, gentlemen, said the stubble-grown monkeyish face.

--Warm weather for March, said Cranly. They have the windows open
upstairs.

Dixon smiled and turned his ring. The blackish, monkey-puckered face
pursed its human mouth with gentle pleasure and its voice purred:

--Delightful weather for March. Simply delightful.

--There are two nice young ladies upstairs, captain, tired of waiting,
Dixon said.

Cranly smiled and said kindly:

--The captain has only one love: sir Walter Scott. Isn't that so,
captain?

--What are you reading now, captain? Dixon asked. THE BRIDE OF
LAMMERMOOR?

--I love old Scott, the flexible lips said, I think he writes something
lovely. There is no writer can touch sir Walter Scott.

He moved a thin shrunken brown hand gently in the air in time to his
praise and his thin quick eyelids beat often over his sad eyes.

Sadder to Stephen's ear was his speech: a genteel accent, low and
moist, marred by errors, and, listening to it, he wondered was the
story true and was the thin blood that flowed in his shrunken frame
noble and come of an incestuous love?

The park trees were heavy with rain; and rain fell still and ever in
the lake, lying grey like a shield. A game of swans flew there and the
water and the shore beneath were fouled with their green-white slime.
They embraced softly, impelled by the grey rainy light, the wet
silent trees, the shield-like witnessing lake, the swans. They embraced
without joy or passion, his arm about his sister's neck. A grey woollen
cloak was wrapped athwart her from her shoulder to her waist and her
fair head was bent in willing shame. He had loose red-brown hair and
tender shapely strong freckled hands. Face? There was no face seen. The
brother's face was bent upon her fair rain-fragrant hair. The hand
freckled and strong and shapely and caressing was Davin's hand.

He frowned angrily upon his thought and on the shrivelled mannikin who
had called it forth. His father's jibes at the Bantry gang leaped out
of his memory. He held them at a distance and brooded uneasily on his
own thought again. Why were they not Cranly's hands? Had Davin's
simplicity and innocence stung him more secretly?

He walked on across the hall with Dixon, leaving Cranly to take leave
elaborately of the dwarf.

Under the colonnade Temple was standing in the midst of a little group
of students. One of them cried:

--Dixon, come over till you hear. Temple is in grand form.

Temple turned on him his dark gipsy eyes.

--You're a hypocrite, O'Keeffe, he said. And Dixon is a smiler. By
hell, I think that's a good literary expression.

He laughed slyly, looking in Stephen's face, repeating:

--By hell, I'm delighted with that name. A smiler.

A stout student who stood below them on the steps said:

--Come back to the mistress, Temple. We want to hear about that.

--He had, faith, Temple said. And he was a married man too. And all the
priests used to be dining there. By hell, I think they all had a touch.

--We shall call it riding a hack to spare the hunter, said Dixon.

--Tell us, Temple, O'Keeffe said, how many quarts of porter have you
in you?

--All your intellectual soul is in that phrase, O'Keeffe, said Temple
with open scorn.

He moved with a shambling gait round the group and spoke to Stephen.

--Did you know that the Forsters are the kings of Belgium? he asked.

Cranly came out through the door of the entrance hall, his hat thrust
back on the nape of his neck and picking his teeth with care.

--And here's the wiseacre, said Temple. Do you know that about the
Forsters?

He paused for an answer. Cranly dislodged a figseed from his teeth on
the point of his rude toothpick and gazed at it intently.

--The Forster family, Temple said, is descended from Baldwin the
First, king of Flanders. He was called the Forester. Forester and
Forster are the same name. A descendant of Baldwin the First, captain
Francis Forster, settled in Ireland and married the daughter of the
last chieftain of Clanbrassil. Then there are the Blake Forsters.
That's a different branch.

--From Baldhead, king of Flanders, Cranly repeated, rooting again
deliberately at his gleaming uncovered teeth.

--Where did you pick up all that history? O'Keeffe asked.

--I know all the history of your family, too, Temple said, turning to
Stephen. Do you know what Giraldus Cambrensis says about your family?

--Is he descended from Baldwin too? asked a tall consumptive student
with dark eyes.

--Baldhead, Cranly repeated, sucking at a crevice in his teeth.

--PERNOBILIS ET PERVETUSTA FAMILIA, Temple said to Stephen.

The stout student who stood below them on the steps farted briefly. Dixon
turned towards him, saying in a soft voice:

--Did an angel speak?

Cranly turned also and said vehemently but without anger:

--Goggins, you're the flamingest dirty devil I ever met, do you know.

--I had it on my mind to say that, Goggins answered firmly. It did no
one any harm, did it?

--We hope, Dixon said suavely, that it was not of the kind known to
science as a PAULO POST FUTURUM.

--Didn't I tell you he was a smiler? said Temple, turning right and
left. Didn't I give him that name?

--You did. We're not deaf, said the tall consumptive.

Cranly still frowned at the stout student below him. Then, with a snort
of disgust, he shoved him violently down the steps.

--Go away from here, he said rudely. Go away, you stinkpot. And you are a
stinkpot.

Goggins skipped down on to the gravel and at once returned to his place
with good humour. Temple turned back to Stephen and asked:

--Do you believe in the law of heredity?

--Are you drunk or what are you or what are you trying to say? asked
Cranly, facing round on him with an expression of wonder.

--The most profound sentence ever written, Temple said with
enthusiasm, is the sentence at the end of the zoology. Reproduction is
the beginning of death.

He touched Stephen timidly at the elbow and said eagerly:

--Do you feel how profound that is because you are a poet?

Cranly pointed his long forefinger.

--Look at him! he said with scorn to the others. Look at Ireland's hope!

They laughed at his words and gesture. Temple turned on him bravely,
saying:

--Cranly, you're always sneering at me. I can see that. But I am as
good as you any day. Do you know what I think about you now as compared
with myself?

--My dear man, said Cranly urbanely, you are incapable, do you know,
absolutely incapable of thinking.

--But do you know, Temple went on, what I think of you and of myself
compared together?

--Out with it, Temple! the stout student cried from the steps. Get it
out in bits!

Temple turned right and left, making sudden feeble gestures as he spoke.

--I'm a ballocks, he said, shaking his head in despair. I am and I
know I am. And I admit it that I am.

Dixon patted him lightly on the shoulder and said mildly:

--And it does you every credit, Temple.

--But he, Temple said, pointing to Cranly, he is a ballocks, too, like
me. Only he doesn't know it. And that's the only difference I see.

A burst of laughter covered his words. But he turned again to Stephen
and said with a sudden eagerness:

--That word is a most interesting word. That's the only English dual
number. Did you know?

--Is it? Stephen said vaguely.

He was watching Cranly's firm-featured suffering face, lit up now by a
smile of false patience. The gross name had passed over it like foul
water poured over an old stone image, patient of injuries; and, as he
watched him, he saw him raise his hat in salute and uncover the black
hair that stood stiffly from his forehead like an iron crown.

She passed out from the porch of the library and bowed across Stephen
in reply to Cranly's greeting. He also? Was there not a slight flush on
Cranly's cheek? Or had it come forth at Temple's words? The light had
waned. He could not see.

Did that explain his friend's listless silence, his harsh comments, the
sudden intrusions of rude speech with which he had shattered so often
Stephen's ardent wayward confessions? Stephen had forgiven freely for
he had found this rudeness also in himself. And he remembered an
evening when he had dismounted from a borrowed creaking bicycle to pray
to God in a wood near Malahide. He had lifted up his arms and spoken in
ecstasy to the sombre nave of the trees, knowing that he stood on holy
ground and in a holy hour. And when two constabulary men had come into
sight round a bend in the gloomy road he had broken off his prayer to
whistle loudly an air from the last pantomime.

He began to beat the frayed end of his ashplant against the base of a
pillar. Had Cranly not heard him? Yet he could wait. The talk about him
ceased for a moment and a soft hiss fell again from a window above. But
no other sound was in the air and the swallows whose flight he had
followed with idle eyes were sleeping.

She had passed through the dusk. And therefore the air was silent save
for one soft hiss that fell. And therefore the tongues about him had
ceased their babble. Darkness was falling.

    Darkness falls from the air.

A trembling joy, lambent as a faint light, played like a fairy host
around him. But why? Her passage through the darkening air or the verse
with its black vowels and its opening sound, rich and lutelike?

He walked away slowly towards the deeper shadows at the end of the
colonnade, beating the stone softly with his stick to hide his revery
from the students whom he had left: and allowed his mind to summon back
to itself the age of Dowland and Byrd and Nash.

Eyes, opening from the darkness of desire, eyes that dimmed the
breaking east. What was their languid grace but the softness of
chambering? And what was their shimmer but the shimmer of the scum that
mantled the cesspool of the court of a slobbering Stuart. And he tasted
in the language of memory ambered wines, dying fallings of sweet airs,
the proud pavan, and saw with the eyes of memory kind gentlewomen in
Covent Garden wooing from their balconies with sucking mouths and the
pox-fouled wenches of the taverns and young wives that, gaily yielding
to their ravishers, clipped and clipped again.

The images he had summoned gave him no pleasure. They were secret and
inflaming but her image was not entangled by them. That was not the way
to think of her. It was not even the way in which he thought of her.
Could his mind then not trust itself? Old phrases, sweet only with a
disinterred sweetness like the figseeds Cranly rooted out of his
gleaming teeth.

It was not thought nor vision though he knew vaguely that her figure
was passing homeward through the city. Vaguely first and then more
sharply he smelt her body. A conscious unrest seethed in his blood.
Yes, it was her body he smelt, a wild and languid smell, the tepid
limbs over which his music had flowed desirously and the secret soft
linen upon which her flesh distilled odour and a dew.

A louse crawled over the nape of his neck and, putting his thumb and
forefinger deftly beneath his loose collar, he caught it. He rolled its
body, tender yet brittle as a grain of rice, between thumb and finger
for an instant before he let it fall from him and wondered would it
live or die. There came to his mind a curious phrase from CORNELIUS A
LAPIDE which said that the lice born of human sweat were not created by
God with the other animals on the sixth day. But the tickling of the
skin of his neck made his mind raw and red. The life of his body, ill
clad, ill fed, louse-eaten, made him close his eyelids in a sudden
spasm of despair and in the darkness he saw the brittle bright bodies
of lice falling from the air and turning often as they fell. Yes, and
it was not darkness that fell from the air. It was brightness.

    Brightness falls from the air.

He had not even remembered rightly Nash's line. All the images it had
awakened were false. His mind bred vermin. His thoughts were lice born
of the sweat of sloth.

He came back quickly along the colonnade towards the group of students.
Well then, let her go and be damned to her! She could love some clean
athlete who washed himself every morning to the waist and had black
hair on his chest. Let her.

Cranly had taken another dried fig from the supply in his pocket and
was eating it slowly and noisily. Temple sat on the pediment of a
pillar, leaning back, his cap pulled down on his sleepy eyes. A squat
young man came out of the porch, a leather portfolio tucked under his
armpit. He marched towards the group, striking the flags with the heels
of his boots and with the ferrule of his heavy umbrella. Then, raising
the umbrella in salute, he said to all:

--Good evening, sirs.

He struck the flags again and tittered while his head trembled with a
slight nervous movement. The tall consumptive student and Dixon and
O'Keeffe were speaking in Irish and did not answer him. Then, turning
to Cranly, he said:

--Good evening, particularly to you.

He moved the umbrella in indication and tittered again. Cranly, who was
still chewing the fig, answered with loud movements of his jaws.

--Good? Yes. It is a good evening.

The squat student looked at him seriously and shook his umbrella gently
and reprovingly.

--I can see, he said, that you are about to make obvious remarks.

--Um, Cranly answered, holding out what remained of the half chewed
fig and jerking it towards the squat student's mouth in sign that he
should eat.

The squat student did not eat it but, indulging his special humour,
said gravely, still tittering and prodding his phrase with his
umbrella:

--Do you intend that...?

He broke off, pointed bluntly to the munched pulp of the fig, and said
loudly:

--I allude to that.

--Um, Cranly said as before.

--Do you intend that now, the squat student said, as IPSO FACTO or,
let us say, as so to speak?

Dixon turned aside from his group, saying:

--Goggins was waiting for you, Glynn. He has gone round to the Adelphi
to look for you and Moynihan. What have you there? he asked, tapping
the portfolio under Glynn's arm.

--Examination papers, Glynn answered. I give them monthly examinations
to see that they are profiting by my tuition.

He also tapped the portfolio and coughed gently and smiled.

--Tuition! said Cranly rudely. I suppose you mean the barefooted
children that are taught by a bloody ape like you. God help them!

He bit off the rest of the fig and flung away the butt.

--I suffer little children to come unto me, Glynn said amiably.

--A bloody ape, Cranly repeated with emphasis, and a blasphemous
bloody ape!

Temple stood up and, pushing past Cranly, addressed Glynn:

--That phrase you said now, he said, is from the new testament about
suffer the children to come to me.

--Go to sleep again, Temple, said O'Keeffe.

--Very well, then, Temple continued, still addressing Glynn, and if
Jesus suffered the children to come why does the church send them all
to hell if they die unbaptized? Why is that?

--Were you baptized yourself, Temple? the consumptive student asked.

--But why are they sent to hell if Jesus said they were all to come?
Temple said, his eyes searching Glynn's eyes.

Glynn coughed and said gently, holding back with difficulty the nervous
titter in his voice and moving his umbrella at every word:

--And, as you remark, if it is thus, I ask emphatically whence comes
this thusness.

--Because the church is cruel like all old sinners, Temple said.

--Are you quite orthodox on that point, Temple? Dixon said suavely.

--Saint Augustine says that about unbaptized children going to hell,
Temple answered, because he was a cruel old sinner too.

--I bow to you, Dixon said, but I had the impression that limbo
existed for such cases.

--Don't argue with him, Dixon, Cranly said brutally. Don't talk to him
or look at him. Lead him home with a sugan the way you'd lead a
bleating goat.

--Limbo! Temple cried. That's a fine invention too. Like hell.

--But with the unpleasantness left out, Dixon said.

He turned smiling to the others and said:

--I think I am voicing the opinions of all present in saying so much.

--You are, Glynn said in a firm tone. On that point Ireland is united.

He struck the ferrule of his umbrella on the stone floor of the
colonnade.

--Hell, Temple said. I can respect that invention of the grey spouse
of Satan. Hell is Roman, like the walls of the Romans, strong and ugly.
But what is limbo?

--Put him back into the perambulator, Cranly, O'Keeffe called out.

Cranly made a swift step towards Temple, halted, stamping his foot,
crying as if to a fowl:

--Hoosh!

Temple moved away nimbly.

--Do you know what limbo is? he cried. Do you know what we call a
notion like that in Roscommon?

--Hoosh! Blast you! Cranly cried, clapping his hands.

--Neither my arse nor my elbow! Temple cried out scornfully. And
that's what I call limbo.

--Give us that stick here, Cranly said.

He snatched the ashplant roughly from Stephen's hand and sprang down
the steps: but Temple, hearing him move in pursuit, fled through the
dusk like a wild creature, nimble and fleet-footed. Cranly's heavy
boots were heard loudly charging across the quadrangle and then
returning heavily, foiled and spurning the gravel at each step.

His step was angry and with an angry abrupt gesture he thrust the stick
back into Stephen's hand. Stephen felt that his anger had another cause
but, feigning patience, touched his arm slightly and said quietly:

--Cranly, I told you I wanted to speak to you. Come away.

Cranly looked at him for a few moments and asked:

--Now?

--Yes, now, Stephen said. We can't speak here. Come away.

They crossed the quadrangle together without speaking. The bird call
from SIEGFRIED whistled softly followed them from the steps of the
porch. Cranly turned, and Dixon, who had whistled, called out:

--Where are you fellows off to? What about that game, Cranly?

They parleyed in shouts across the still air about a game of billiards
to be played in the Adelphi hotel. Stephen walked on alone and out into
the quiet of Kildare Street opposite Maple's hotel he stood to wait,
patient again. The name of the hotel, a colourless polished wood, and
its colourless front stung him like a glance of polite disdain. He
stared angrily back at the softly lit drawing-room of the hotel in
which he imagined the sleek lives of the patricians of Ireland housed
in calm. They thought of army commissions and land agents: peasants
greeted them along the roads in the country; they knew the names of
certain French dishes and gave orders to jarvies in high-pitched
provincial voices which pierced through their skin-tight accents.

How could he hit their conscience or how cast his shadow over the
imaginations of their daughters, before their squires begat upon them,
that they might breed a race less ignoble than their own? And under the
deepened dusk he felt the thoughts and desires of the race to which he
belonged flitting like bats across the dark country lanes, under trees
by the edges of streams and near the pool-mottled bogs. A woman had
waited in the doorway as Davin had passed by at night and, offering him
a cup of milk, had all but wooed him to her bed; for Davin had the mild
eyes of one who could be secret. But him no woman's eyes had wooed.

His arm was taken in a strong grip and Cranly's voice said:

--Let us eke go.

They walked southward in silence. Then Cranly said:

--That blithering idiot, Temple! I swear to Moses, do you know, that
I'll be the death of that fellow one time.

But his voice was no longer angry and Stephen wondered was he thinking
of her greeting to him under the porch.

They turned to the left and walked on as before. When they had gone on
so for some time Stephen said:

--Cranly, I had an unpleasant quarrel this evening.

--With your people? Cranly asked.

--With my mother.

--About religion?

--Yes, Stephen answered.

After a pause Cranly asked:

--What age is your mother?

--Not old, Stephen said. She wishes me to make my easter duty.

--And will you?

--I will not, Stephen said.

--Why not? Cranly said.

--I will not serve, answered Stephen.

--That remark was made before, Cranly said calmly.

--It is made behind now, said Stephen hotly.

Cranly pressed Stephen's arm, saying:

--Go easy, my dear man. You're an excitable bloody man, do you know.

He laughed nervously as he spoke and, looking up into Stephen's face
with moved and friendly eyes, said:

--Do you know that you are an excitable man?

--I daresay I am, said Stephen, laughing also.

Their minds, lately estranged, seemed suddenly to have been drawn
closer, one to the other.

--Do you believe in the eucharist? Cranly asked.

--I do not, Stephen said.

--Do you disbelieve then?

--I neither believe in it nor disbelieve in it, Stephen answered.

--Many persons have doubts, even religious persons, yet they overcome
them or put them aside, Cranly said. Are your doubts on that point too
strong?

--I do not wish to overcome them, Stephen answered.

Cranly, embarrassed for a moment, took another fig from his pocket and
was about to eat it when Stephen said:

--Don't, please. You cannot discuss this question with your mouth full
of chewed fig.

Cranly examined the fig by the light of a lamp under which he halted.
Then he smelt it with both nostrils, bit a tiny piece, spat it out and
threw the fig rudely into the gutter.

Addressing it as it lay, he said:

--Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire!

Taking Stephen's arm, he went on again and said:

--Do you not fear that those words may be spoken to you on the day of
Judgement?

--What is offered me on the other hand? Stephen asked. An eternity of
bliss in the company of the dean of studies?

--Remember, Cranly said, that he would be glorified.

--Ay, Stephen said somewhat bitterly, bright, agile, impassible and,
above all, subtle.

--It is a curious thing, do you know, Cranly said dispassionately, how
your mind is supersaturated with the religion in which you say you
disbelieve. Did you believe in it when you were at school? I bet you
did.

--I did, Stephen answered.

--And were you happier then? Cranly asked softly, happier than you are
now, for instance?

--Often happy, Stephen said, and often unhappy. I was someone else
then.

--How someone else? What do you mean by that statement?

--I mean, said Stephen, that I was not myself as I am now, as I had to
become.

--Not as you are now, not as you had to become, Cranly repeated. Let
me ask you a question. Do you love your mother?

Stephen shook his head slowly.

--I don't know what your words mean, he said simply.

--Have you never loved anyone? Cranly asked.

--Do you mean women?

--I am not speaking of that, Cranly said in a colder tone. I ask you
if you ever felt love towards anyone or anything?

Stephen walked on beside his friend, staring gloomily at the footpath.

--I tried to love God, he said at length. It seems now I failed. It is
very difficult. I tried to unite my will with the will of God instant
by instant. In that I did not always fail. I could perhaps do that
still--

Cranly cut him short by asking:

--Has your mother had a happy life?

--How do I know? Stephen said.

--How many children had she?

--Nine or ten, Stephen answered. Some died.

--Was your father... Cranly interrupted himself for an instant, and then
said: I don't want to pry into your family affairs. But was your father
what is called well-to-do? I mean, when you were growing up?

--Yes, Stephen said.

--What was he? Cranly asked after a pause.

Stephen began to enumerate glibly his father's attributes.

--A medical student, an oarsman, a tenor, an amateur actor, a shouting
politician, a small landlord, a small investor, a drinker, a good
fellow, a story-teller, somebody's secretary, something in a
distillery, a tax-gatherer, a bankrupt and at present a praiser of his
own past.

Cranly laughed, tightening his grip on Stephen's arm, and said:

--The distillery is damn good.

--Is there anything else you want to know? Stephen asked.

--Are you in good circumstances at present?

--Do I look it? Stephen asked bluntly.

--So then, Cranly went on musingly, you were born in the lap of luxury.

He used the phrase broadly and loudly as he often used technical
expressions, as if he wished his hearer to understand that they were
used by him without conviction.

--Your mother must have gone through a good deal of suffering, he said
then. Would you not try to save her from suffering more even if... or would
you?

--If I could, Stephen said, that would cost me very little.

--Then do so, Cranly said. Do as she wishes you to do. What is it for
you? You disbelieve in it. It is a form: nothing else. And you will set
her mind at rest.

He ceased and, as Stephen did not reply, remained silent. Then, as if
giving utterance to the process of his own thought, he said:

--Whatever else is unsure in this stinking dunghill of a world a
mother's love is not. Your mother brings you into the world, carries
you first in her body. What do we know about what she feels? But
whatever she feels, it, at least, must be real. It must be. What are
our ideas or ambitions? Play. Ideas! Why, that bloody bleating goat
Temple has ideas. MacCann has ideas too. Every jackass going the roads
thinks he has ideas.

Stephen, who had been listening to the unspoken speech behind the
words, said with assumed carelessness:

--Pascal, if I remember rightly, would not suffer his mother to kiss
him as he feared the contact of her sex.

--Pascal was a pig, said Cranly.

--Aloysius Gonzaga, I think, was of the same mind, Stephen said.

--And he was another pig then, said Cranly.

--The church calls him a saint, Stephen objected.

--I don't care a flaming damn what anyone calls him, Cranly said rudely
and flatly. I call him a pig.

Stephen, preparing the words neatly in his mind, continued:

--Jesus, too, seems to have treated his mother with scant courtesy in
public but Suarez, a jesuit theologian and Spanish gentleman, has
apologized for him.

--Did the idea ever occur to you, Cranly asked, that Jesus was not
what he pretended to be?

--The first person to whom that idea occurred, Stephen answered, was
Jesus himself.

--I mean, Cranly said, hardening in his speech, did the idea ever
occur to you that he was himself a conscious hypocrite, what he called
the jews of his time, a whited sepulchre? Or, to put it more plainly,
that he was a blackguard?

--That idea never occurred to me, Stephen answered. But I am curious
to know are you trying to make a convert of me or a pervert of
yourself?

He turned towards his friend's face and saw there a raw smile which
some force of will strove to make finely significant.

Cranly asked suddenly in a plain sensible tone:

--Tell me the truth. Were you at all shocked by what I said?

--Somewhat, Stephen said.

--And why were you shocked, Cranly pressed on in the same tone, if you
feel sure that our religion is false and that Jesus was not the son of
God?

--I am not at all sure of it, Stephen said. He is more like a son of
God than a son of Mary.

--And is that why you will not communicate, Cranly asked, because you
are not sure of that too, because you feel that the host, too, may be
the body and blood of the son of God and not a wafer of bread? And
because you fear that it may be?

--Yes, Stephen said quietly, I feel that and I also fear it.

--I see, Cranly said.

Stephen, struck by his tone of closure, reopened the discussion at once
by saying:

--I fear many things: dogs, horses, fire-arms, the sea,
thunder-storms, machinery, the country roads at night.

--But why do you fear a bit of bread?

--I imagine, Stephen said, that there is a malevolent reality behind
those things I say I fear.

--Do you fear then, Cranly asked, that the God of the Roman catholics
would strike you dead and damn you if you made a sacrilegious
communion?

--The God of the Roman catholics could do that now, Stephen said. I fear
more than that the chemical action which would be set up in my soul by
a false homage to a symbol behind which are massed twenty centuries of
authority and veneration.

--Would you, Cranly asked, in extreme danger, commit that particular
sacrilege? For instance, if you lived in the penal days?

--I cannot answer for the past, Stephen replied. Possibly not.

--Then, said Cranly, you do not intend to become a protestant?

--I said that I had lost the faith, Stephen answered, but not that I
had lost self-respect. What kind of liberation would that be to forsake
an absurdity which is logical and coherent and to embrace one which is
illogical and incoherent?

They had walked on towards the township of Pembroke and now, as they
went on slowly along the avenues, the trees and the scattered lights in
the villas soothed their minds. The air of wealth and repose diffused
about them seemed to comfort their neediness. Behind a hedge of laurel
a light glimmered in the window of a kitchen and the voice of a servant
was heard singing as she sharpened knives. She sang, in short broken
bars:

Rosie O'Grady.

Cranly stopped to listen, saying:

--MULIER CANTAT.

The soft beauty of the Latin word touched with an enchanting touch the
dark of the evening, with a touch fainter and more persuading than the
touch of music or of a woman's hand. The strife of their minds was
quelled. The figure of a woman as she appears in the liturgy of the
church passed silently through the darkness: a white-robed figure,
small and slender as a boy, and with a falling girdle. Her voice, frail
and high as a boy's, was heard intoning from a distant choir the first
words of a woman which pierce the gloom and clamour of the first
chanting of the passion:

--ET TU CUM JESU GALILAEO ERAS.

And all hearts were touched and turned to her voice, shining like a
young star, shining clearer as the voice intoned the proparoxytone and
more faintly as the cadence died.

The singing ceased. They went on together, Cranly repeating in strongly
stressed rhythm the end of the refrain:

    And when we are married,
    O, how happy we'll be
    For I love sweet Rosie O'Grady
    And Rosie O'Grady loves me.

--There's real poetry for you, he said. There's real love.

He glanced sideways at Stephen with a strange smile and said:

--Do you consider that poetry? Or do you know what the words mean?

--I want to see Rosie first, said Stephen.

--She's easy to find, Cranly said.

His hat had come down on his forehead. He shoved it back and in the
shadow of the trees Stephen saw his pale face, framed by the dark, and
his large dark eyes. Yes. His face was handsome and his body was strong
and hard. He had spoken of a mother's love. He felt then the sufferings
of women, the weaknesses of their bodies and souls: and would shield
them with a strong and resolute arm and bow his mind to them.

Away then: it is time to go. A voice spoke softly to Stephen's lonely
heart, bidding him go and telling him that his friendship was coming to
an end. Yes; he would go. He could not strive against another. He knew
his part.

--Probably I shall go away, he said.

--Where? Cranly asked.

--Where I can, Stephen said.

--Yes, Cranly said. It might be difficult for you to live here now.
But is it that makes you go?

--I have to go, Stephen answered.

--Because, Cranly continued, you need not look upon yourself as driven
away if you do not wish to go or as a heretic or an outlaw. There are
many good believers who think as you do. Would that surprise you? The
church is not the stone building nor even the clergy and their dogmas.
It is the whole mass of those born into it. I don't know what you wish
to do in life. Is it what you told me the night we were standing
outside Harcourt Street station?

--Yes, Stephen said, smiling in spite of himself at Cranly's way of
remembering thoughts in connexion with places. The night you spent half
an hour wrangling with Doherty about the shortest way from Sallygap to
Larras.

--Pothead! Cranly said with calm contempt. What does he know about the
way from Sallygap to Larras? Or what does he know about anything for
that matter? And the big slobbering washing-pot head of him!

He broke into a loud long laugh.

--Well? Stephen said. Do you remember the rest?

--What you said, is it? Cranly asked. Yes, I remember it. To discover the
mode of life or of art whereby your spirit could express itself in
unfettered freedom.

Stephen raised his hat in acknowledgement.

--Freedom! Cranly repeated. But you are not free enough yet to commit
a sacrilege. Tell me would you rob?

--I would beg first, Stephen said.

--And if you got nothing, would you rob?

--You wish me to say, Stephen answered, that the rights of property
are provisional, and that in certain circumstances it is not unlawful
to rob. Everyone would act in that belief. So I will not make you that
answer. Apply to the jesuit theologian, Juan Mariana de Talavera, who
will also explain to you in what circumstances you may lawfully kill
your king and whether you had better hand him his poison in a goblet or
smear it for him upon his robe or his saddlebow. Ask me rather would I
suffer others to rob me, or if they did, would I call down upon them
what I believe is called the chastisement of the secular arm?

--And would you?

--I think, Stephen said, it would pain me as much to do so as to be
robbed.

--I see, Cranly said.

He produced his match and began to clean the crevice between two teeth.
Then he said carelessly:

--Tell me, for example, would you deflower a virgin?

--Excuse me, Stephen said politely, is that not the ambition of most
young gentlemen?

--What then is your point of view? Cranly asked.

His last phrase, sour smelling as the smoke of charcoal and
disheartening, excited Stephen's brain, over which its fumes seemed to
brood.

--Look here, Cranly, he said. You have asked me what I would do and
what I would not do. I will tell you what I will do and what I will not
do. I will not serve that in which I no longer believe, whether it call
itself my home, my fatherland, or my church: and I will try to express
myself in some mode of life or art as freely as I can and as wholly as
I can, using for my defence the only arms I allow myself to use--silence,
exile, and cunning.

Cranly seized his arm and steered him round so as to lead him back
towards Leeson Park. He laughed almost slyly and pressed Stephen's arm
with an elder's affection.

--Cunning indeed! he said. Is it you? You poor poet, you!

--And you made me confess to you, Stephen said, thrilled by his touch,
as I have confessed to you so many other things, have I not?

--Yes, my child, Cranly said, still gaily.

--You made me confess the fears that I have. But I will tell you also
what I do not fear. I do not fear to be alone or to be spurned for
another or to leave whatever I have to leave. And I am not afraid to
make a mistake, even a great mistake, a lifelong mistake, and perhaps
as long as eternity too.

Cranly, now grave again, slowed his pace and said:

--Alone, quite alone. You have no fear of that. And you know what that
word means? Not only to be separate from all others but to have not
even one friend.

--I will take the risk, said Stephen.

--And not to have any one person, Cranly said, who would be more than
a friend, more even than the noblest and truest friend a man ever had.

His words seemed to have struck some deep chord in his own nature. Had
he spoken of himself, of himself as he was or wished to be? Stephen
watched his face for some moments in silence. A cold sadness was there.
He had spoken of himself, of his own loneliness which he feared.

--Of whom are you speaking? Stephen asked at length.

Cranly did not answer.


* * * * *


MARCH 20. Long talk with Cranly on the subject of my revolt.

He had his grand manner on. I supple and suave. Attacked me on the
score of love for one's mother. Tried to imagine his mother: cannot.
Told me once, in a moment of thoughtlessness, his father was sixty-one
when he was born. Can see him. Strong farmer type. Pepper and salt
suit. Square feet. Unkempt, grizzled beard. Probably attends coursing
matches. Pays his dues regularly but not plentifully to Father Dwyer of
Larras. Sometimes talks to girls after nightfall. But his mother? Very
young or very old? Hardly the first. If so, Cranly would not have
spoken as he did. Old then. Probably, and neglected. Hence Cranly's
despair of soul: the child of exhausted loins.

MARCH 21, MORNING. Thought this in bed last night but was too lazy and
free to add to it. Free, yes. The exhausted loins are those of
Elizabeth and Zacchary. Then he is the precursor. Item: he eats chiefly
belly bacon and dried figs. Read locusts and wild honey. Also, when
thinking of him, saw always a stern severed head or death mask as if
outlined on a grey curtain or veronica. Decollation they call it in the
gold. Puzzled for the moment by saint John at the Latin gate. What do I
see? A decollated percursor trying to pick the lock.

MARCH 21, NIGHT. Free. Soul free and fancy free. Let the dead bury the
dead. Ay. And let the dead marry the dead.

MARCH 22. In company with Lynch followed a sizeable hospital nurse.
Lynch's idea. Dislike it. Two lean hungry greyhounds walking after a
heifer.

MARCH 23. Have not seen her since that night. Unwell? Sits at the fire
perhaps with mamma's shawl on her shoulders. But not peevish. A nice
bowl of gruel? Won't you now?

MARCH 24. Began with a discussion with my mother. Subject: B.V.M.
Handicapped by my sex and youth. To escape held up relations between
Jesus and Papa against those between Mary and her son. Said religion
was not a lying-in hospital. Mother indulgent. Said I have a queer mind
and have read too much. Not true. Have read little and understood less.
Then she said I would come back to faith because I had a restless mind.
This means to leave church by back door of sin and re-enter through the
skylight of repentance. Cannot repent. Told her so and asked for
sixpence. Got threepence.

Then went to college. Other wrangle with little round head rogue's eye
Ghezzi. This time about Bruno the Nolan. Began in Italian and ended in
pidgin English. He said Bruno was a terrible heretic. I said he was
terribly burned. He agreed to this with some sorrow. Then gave me
recipe for what he calls RISOTTO ALLA BERGAMASCA. When he pronounces a
soft O he protrudes his full carnal lips as if he kissed the vowel. Has
he? And could he repent? Yes, he could: and cry two round rogue's
tears, one from each eye.

Crossing Stephen's, that is, my green, remembered that his countrymen
and not mine had invented what Cranly the other night called our
religion. A quartet of them, soldiers of the ninety-seventh infantry
regiment, sat at the foot of the cross and tossed up dice for the
overcoat of the crucified.

Went to library. Tried to read three reviews. Useless. She is not out
yet. Am I alarmed? About what? That she will never be out again.

Blake wrote:

    I wonder if William Bond will die
    For assuredly he is very ill.

Alas, poor William!

I was once at a diorama in Rotunda. At the end were pictures of big
nobs. Among them William Ewart Gladstone, just then dead. Orchestra
played O WILLIE, WE HAVE MISSED YOU.

A race of clodhoppers!

MARCH 25, MORNING. A troubled night of dreams. Want to get them off my
chest.

A long curving gallery. From the floor ascend pillars of dark vapours.
It is peopled by the images of fabulous kings, set in stone. Their
hands are folded upon their knees in token of weariness and their eyes
are darkened for the errors of men go up before them for ever as dark
vapours.

Strange figures advance as from a cave. They are not as tall as men.
One does not seem to stand quite apart from another. Their faces are
phosphorescent, with darker streaks. They peer at me and their eyes
seem to ask me something. They do not speak.

MARCH 30. This evening Cranly was in the porch of the library,
proposing a problem to Dixon and her brother. A mother let her child
fall into the Nile. Still harping on the mother. A crocodile seized the
child. Mother asked it back. Crocodile said all right if she told him
what he was going to do with the child, eat it or not eat it.

This mentality, Lepidus would say, is indeed bred out of your mud by
the operation of your sun.

And mine? Is it not too? Then into Nile mud with it!

APRIL 1. Disapprove of this last phrase.

APRIL 2. Saw her drinking tea and eating cakes in Johnston's, Mooney
and O'Brien's. Rather, lynx-eyed Lynch saw her as we passed. He tells
me Cranly was invited there by brother. Did he bring his crocodile? Is
he the shining light now? Well, I discovered him. I protest I did.
Shining quietly behind a bushel of Wicklow bran.

APRIL 3. Met Davin at the cigar shop opposite Findlater's church. He
was in a black sweater and had a hurley stick. Asked me was it true I
was going away and why. Told him the shortest way to Tara was VIA
Holyhead. Just then my father came up. Introduction. Father polite and
observant. Asked Davin if he might offer him some refreshment. Davin
could not, was going to a meeting. When we came away father told me he
had a good honest eye. Asked me why I did not join a rowing club. I
pretended to think it over. Told me then how he broke Pennyfeather's
heart. Wants me to read law. Says I was cut out for that. More mud,
more crocodiles.

APRIL 5. Wild spring. Scudding clouds. O life! Dark stream of swirling
bogwater on which apple-trees have cast down their delicate flowers.
Eyes of girls among the leaves. Girls demure and romping. All fair or
auburn: no dark ones. They blush better. Houpla!

APRIL 6. Certainly she remembers the past. Lynch says all women do.
Then she remembers the time of her childhood--and mine, if I was ever
a child. The past is consumed in the present and the present is living
only because it brings forth the future. Statues of women, if Lynch be
right, should always be fully draped, one hand of the woman feeling
regretfully her own hinder parts.

APRIL 6, LATER. Michael Robartes remembers forgotten beauty and, when
his arms wrap her round, he presses in his arms the loveliness which
has long faded from the world. Not this. Not at all. I desire to press
in my arms the loveliness which has not yet come into the world.

APRIL 10. Faintly, under the heavy night, through the silence of the
city which has turned from dreams to dreamless sleep as a weary lover
whom no caresses move, the sound of hoofs upon the road. Not so faintly
now as they come near the bridge; and in a moment, as they pass the
darkened windows, the silence is cloven by alarm as by an arrow. They
are heard now far away, hoofs that shine amid the heavy night as gems,
hurrying beyond the sleeping fields to what journey's end--what
heart?--bearing what tidings?

APRIL 11. Read what I wrote last night. Vague words for a vague
emotion. Would she like it? I think so. Then I should have to like it
also.

APRIL 13. That tundish has been on my mind for a long time. I looked it
up and find it English and good old blunt English too. Damn the dean of
studies and his funnel! What did he come here for to teach us his own
language or to learn it from us. Damn him one way or the other!

APRIL 14. John Alphonsus Mulrennan has just returned from the west of
Ireland. European and Asiatic papers please copy. He told us he met an
old man there in a mountain cabin. Old man had red eyes and short pipe.
Old man spoke Irish. Mulrennan spoke Irish. Then old man and Mulrennan
spoke English. Mulrennan spoke to him about universe and stars. Old man
sat, listened, smoked, spat. Then said:

--Ah, there must be terrible queer creatures at the latter end of the
world.

I fear him. I fear his red-rimmed horny eyes. It is with him I must
struggle all through this night till day come, till he or I lie dead,
gripping him by the sinewy throat till... Till what? Till he yield to me?
No. I mean no harm.

APRIL 15. Met her today point blank in Grafton Street. The crowd
brought us together. We both stopped. She asked me why I never came,
said she had heard all sorts of stories about me. This was only to gain
time. Asked me was I writing poems? About whom? I asked her. This
confused her more and I felt sorry and mean. Turned off that valve at
once and opened the spiritual-heroic refrigerating apparatus, invented
and patented in all countries by Dante Alighieri. Talked rapidly of
myself and my plans. In the midst of it unluckily I made a sudden
gesture of a revolutionary nature. I must have looked like a fellow
throwing a handful of peas into the air. People began to look at us.
She shook hands a moment after and, in going away, said she hoped I
would do what I said.

Now I call that friendly, don't you?

Yes, I liked her today. A little or much? Don't know. I liked her and
it seems a new feeling to me. Then, in that case, all the rest, all
that I thought I thought and all that I felt I felt, all the rest
before now, in fact... O, give it up, old chap! Sleep it off!

APRIL 16. Away! Away!

The spell of arms and voices: the white arms of roads, their promise of
close embraces and the black arms of tall ships that stand against the
moon, their tale of distant nations. They are held out to say: We are
alone--come. And the voices say with them: We are your kinsmen. And
the air is thick with their company as they call to me, their kinsman,
making ready to go, shaking the wings of their exultant and terrible
youth.

APRIL 26. Mother is putting my new secondhand clothes in order. She
prays now, she says, that I may learn in my own life and away from home
and friends what the heart is and what it feels. Amen. So be it.
Welcome, O life, I go to encounter for the millionth time the reality
of experience and to forge in the smithy of my soul the uncreated
conscience of my race.

APRIL 27. Old father, old artificer, stand me now and ever in good
stead.


ASSETS OF MONEY MARKET MUTUAL FUNDS ROSE 720.4 MLN DLRS IN LATEST WEEK

  ASSETS OF MONEY MARKET MUTUAL FUNDS ROSE 720.4 MLN DLRS IN LATEST WEEK
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET SHORTAGE FORECAST AT 250 MLN STG
  The Bank of England said it forecast a
  shortage of around 250 mln stg in the money market today.
      Among the factors affecting liquidity, it said bills
  maturing in official hands and the treasury bill take-up would
  drain around 1.02 billion stg while below target bankers'
  balances would take out a further 140 mln.
      Against this, a fall in the note circulation would add 345
  mln stg and the net effect of exchequer transactions would be
  an inflow of some 545 mln stg, the Bank added.
  

BANK OF FRANCE SETS MONEY MARKET TENDER
  The Bank of France said it invited offers
  of first category paper today for a money market intervention
  tender.
      Money market dealers said conditions seemed right for the
  Bank to cut its intervention rate at the tender by a quarter
  percentage point to 7-3/4 pct from eight, reflecting an easing
  in call money rate last week, and the French franc's steadiness
  on foreign exchange markets since the February 22 currency
  stabilisation accord here by the Group of Five and Canada.
      Intervention rate was last raised to eight pct from 7-1/4
  on January 2. Call money today was quoted at 7-11/16 7-3/4 pct.
  

AMOCO REPORTS SOUTH CHINA SEA OIL FIND
  The U.S. &lt;Amoco Petroleum Corp> has
  reported an offshore oil find at its Pearl River basin
  concession in the South China Sea, the New China News Agency
  said.
      It said the Liu Hua 11-1-1 A well produced at around 2,240
  barrels per day at a depth of 305 metres.
      The news agency said Amoco plans to drill a second well in
  the area this year, but gave no further details.
  

NATIONAL WESTMINSTER BANK SAYS IT CUTTING BASE LENDING RATE TO 10.5 PCT FROM 11 PCT.

  NATIONAL WESTMINSTER BANK SAYS IT CUTTING BASE LENDING RATE TO 10.5 PCT FROM 11 PCT.
  

NATIONAL WESTMINSTER BANK CUTS BASE RATE
  National Westminster Bank Plc said it has
  cut its base lending rate  0.5 percentage points to 10.5 pct
  today.
      National Westminster said that it was responding to general
  easing in money market rates.
      Its move followed a signal from the Bank of England earlier
  this afternoon that it would endorse a half point cut in the
  base rate, a surprise move following its strong signals last
  week that such a move would be premature.
      However, since then the pound has continued to gain
  strongly.
  

U.S. FACILITIES &lt;USRE> SEMI-ANNUAL DIVIDEND
  Semi-annual dividend 4 cts
      Pay May 29
      Record April 14
  Note: full name is U.S. Facilities Corp. This is first dividend
  declared since company completed its initial public offering on
  November 7.
  

STANDARD PACIFIC &lt;SPF> ACQUIRES SOUTH BAY S/L
  Standard Pacific LP said it
  has acquired substantially all of the assets and liabilities of
  South Bay Savings and Loan Association of Newport Beach.
      The firm said over the weekend that it will conduct its
  savings and loan activities through Standard Pacific Savings
  FA, a Federal stock association.
      On Friday, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in Washington
  said it approved the acquisition of South Bay S and L, a 62.5
  mln dlr state-chartered stock association, by Standard Pacific,
  which has 312.8 mln dlrs in assets.
      The Bank Board said that the Federal Savings and Loan
  Insurance Corp will make a cash contribution, provide capital
  loss coverage and indemnify Standard Pacific against
  undisclosed liabilities.
  

U.S. TO ALLOW TEMPORARY IMPORTS OF S.A. URANIUM
  The Treasury Department said it would
  temporarily permit imports of South African uranium ore and
  oxide pending clarification of anti-apartheid sanctions laws
  passed by Congress last fall.
      The decision was announced late Friday. It applies, until
  July 1, to uranium ore and oxide imported into the U.S. for
  processing and re-export to third countries.
      The Treasury said it took the action because it felt that
  when Congress passed the comprehensive South African sanctions
  bill last fall over President Reagan's veto it had not intended
  to hurt U.S. industry.
      In addition, the Treasury said it would permit U.S.-made
  goods to be imported temporarily from South African
  state-controlled organizations for repair or servicing.
  

PIEDMONT &lt;PIE> AGREES TO USAIR &lt;U> BUYOUT
  USAir Group Inc said Piedmont Aviation
  Inc has agreed to be acquired for 69 dlrs per share.
      The company, in a newspaper advertisement, said it has
  started a tender offer for all Piedmont shares at that price,
  and the Piedmont board, with two directors absent, has
  unanimously approved the bid.  The offer and withdrawal rights
  are to expire April Three unless extended, and the bid is to be
  followed by a merger at the same price.
      USAir said Piedmont has granted it an irrevocable option to
  buy up to 3,491,030 new shares under certain circumstances.
  Piedmont now has about 18.6 mln shares outstanding.
      USAir said the tender is conditioned on receipt of enough
  shares to give USAir at least a 50.1 pct interest in Piedmont
  on a fully diluted basis and approval by the U.S. Department of
  Transportation of a voting trust agreement permitting USAir to
  buy and hold shares pending review of its application to gain
  control of Piedmont.
      The company said its merger agreement with Piedmont
  provides that the offer is not to be amended without Piedmont's
  prior written consent in any way that would be adverse to
  Piedmont shareholders, but it said it could cut the number of
  shares to be bought without Piedmont's consent.
      USAir said it could reduce the number of Piedmont shares to
  be purchased in the offer to no less than the minimum number
  needed to cause the voting trust condition of the bid to be
  satisfied.
      In that case, it said if more than that minimum number of
  shares were tendered, it would buy shares on a pro rata basis.
      In February USAir had offered to pay 71 dlrs per share in
  cash for 50 pct of Piedmont's stock and 1.55 to 1.90 USAir
  shares for each remaining Piedmont share.
      Last week, Carl C. Icahn-controlled Trans World Airlines
  Inc &lt;TWA> made a conditional offer to acquire USAir for 52 dlrs
  per share, a bid that was rejected by the USAir board.
      The Transportation Department on Friday rejected TWA's
  application to acquire USAir on the grounds that the
  application failed to comply with department regulations by
  omitting necessary information.  TWA said it would refile
  today, providing the information needed.
      On Friday TWA said it had already acquired four mln shares
  or 15 pct of USAir.
  

API REPORTS SHARP FALL IN DRILLINGS
  Estimated oil and gas drilling
  completions in the United States dropped by almost 41 per cent
  in 1986 from 1985, the American Petroleum Institute said.
      API, an industry group, said that of the 42,387 wells
  completed last year, a total of 19,741 were oil wells, 8,645
  were natural gas wells and 14,001 were dry holes.
      In 1985, a total of 71,539 wells were drilled - 36,834 oil
  wells, 13,036 gas wells and 21,669 dry holes.
  

U.K. CREDIT BUSINESS FALLS IN JANUARY
  New credit advanced by finance houses,
  retailers, bank credit cards and other specialist providers of
  credit slipped to 2.66 billion stg in January from 2.78 billion
  in December - but remained close to the average level for
  1986's fourth quarter, the Department of Trade and Industry
  said.
      Of the January total, 1.15 billion stg was advanced on bank
  credit cards.
      On a three-month basis, total advances in November to
  January were 3.0 pct lower than in the previous three months.
  Within this total, lending to consumers fell by 6.0 pct and
  lending to businesses declined by 5.0 pct.
      At end-January 1987, the total amount outstanding was 24.07
  billion stg, up from December's 23.77 billion stg and 3.0 pct
  above the total three months earlier, the department said.
      January saw a rise of 300 mln stg in amounts outstanding to
  finance houses, other specialist credit grantors and retailers.
      The department said advances on credit cards rose by 1.0
  pct between the latest two three-month periods. Retailers
  advanced 3.0 pct less in the latest three months than in the
  previous three months, it said.
  

BRAZILIAN SEAFARERS' STRIKE DAMAGES OIL EXPORTS
  A strike by Brazil's 40,000 seafarers
  who want pay rises of up to 180 pct may have cost the
  state-owned oil company Petrobras 20 mln dlrs in lost export
  orders, the company's commercial director Arthur de Carvalho
  was quoted as saying in press reports.
      More than 170 ships in Brazil, and about nine more in
  foreign ports, have been halted by the strike, which began on
  February 27.
      Marines began blockading the ships on Friday after the
  strike was ruled illegal, and some strikers are running short
  of food, National Merchants Marine Union president Edson Areias
  said.
  

OECD TRADE, GROWTH SEEN SLOWING IN 1987
  The 24 nations of the Organisation for
  Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), hampered by
  sluggish industrial output and trade, face slower economic
  growth, and their joint balance of payments will swing into
  deficit in 1987, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU ) said.
      The EIU said in its World Trade Forecast it revised OECD
  economic growth downwards to 2.5 pct this year, compared with a
  2.8 pct growth forecast in December.
      It said the new areas of weakness are West Germany and the
  smaller European countries it influences, and Japan, hardest
  hit by currency appreciation this year.
      The independent research organisation cut its 1987 growth
  rate forecasts for West Germany to 2.2 pct from 3.2 pct in
  December and to 2.3 pct from three pct for Japan.
      It said it expected the OECD to post a current account
  deficit of some 13 billion dlrs in both 1987 and 1988, due in
  large part to a 1.50 dlrs a barrel rise in 1987 oil prices.
      It said the U.S. Current account deficit looked likely to
  fall even more slowly than forecast, to 125 billion dlrs in
  1987 and 115 billion in 1988 from 130 billion in 1986.
      It said it expected West Germany to post a 31 billion dlr
  payments surplus and Japan a 76 billion dlr surplus this year.
      The EIU said it saw oil prices dropping to around 16.50
  dlrs a barrel by end-1987 and 15.50 dlrs in 1988 from about 18
  dlrs last year, as adherence to OPEC output policy becomes
  increasingly ragged.
      It said the dollar is poised to resume its decline in
  foreign exchange markets, and will lose a further 13 pct on its
  trade-weighted index this year and five pct in 1988 after last
  year's 18.4 pct drop. The average mark/dollar rate is put at
  1.80 marks this year and 1.70 in 1988 while the yen/dollar rate
  is expected to break through the 150 yen barrier with an
  average value of 150 yen in 1987 and 146 yen in 1988, it said.
      "This is not a crash scenario but the dollar's steeper
  angle of descent increases the risk of ending with a fireball
  rather than a three-point landing," the EIU said.
      "Talking will not stop the dollar's slide for long and the
  February meeting (of finance ministers of the Group of Five and
  Canada) produced scant promise of either a decisive shift to
  more expansive policies in West Germany and Japan, or a tighter
  U.S. Fsical policy," it said.
      It said the key to the dollar's fortunes was the
  willingness of Japanese institutions to buy U.S. Government
  assets despite prospects of sustaining a currency loss.
      "Thus far they have been willing," the EIC said, adding
  that if Japan was deterred from buying U.S. bonds the dollar
  would collapse.
      To contain such a currency crisis, dollar interest rates
  would have to soar, bringing recession and a Third World debt
  crisis, it said.
      On trade, the EIU said prospects for 1987 look
  "increasingly sick."
      Import growth, forecast in December at 4.5 pct, is now seen
  slowing down to around 3.8 pct in 1987 with a recovery only to
  4.2 pct in 1988, it said.
      The weakness of the West German economy is the biggest
  single factor, with import growth there expected to feature a
  sluggish 3.5 pct growth in 1987 against the 6.5 pct forecast in
  December, the EIU said.
      On the export side, it said it saw weak demand in West
  Germany affecting export prospects elsewhere in Europe, while
  Japan's exports in 1987 would remain flat and sales by U.S.
  Exporters would respond only marginally to a lower, more
  competitively-priced dollar.
      It said in most of Europe and in Japan, raw materials and
  oil will cost less in domestic currency in 1987 than in 1986.
  

WALLENBERGS FIGHT BID FOR SWEDISH MATCH STAKE
  Sweden's Wallenberg group fought back
  a bid by the London-based Swedish financier Erik Penser to
  secure a large stake in Swedish Match &lt;SMBS ST>, one of the
  companies at the core of their business empire.
      A statement issued by the Wallenberg holding companies AB
  Investor and Forvaltnings AB Providentia said they had taken
  over an option held by Nobel Industrier Sweden AB to acquire 33
  pct of the voting rights in Swedish Match.
      Thre Wallenbergs paid Nobel Industrier &lt;NOBL ST>, in which
  Penser group has a 72 pct stake, about 20 pct over the market
  price for the Swedish Match option, the statement said.
      Swedish Match's B shares open to foreign buyers closed at
  424 crowns on Friday. The A shares -- with increased voting
  rights -- closed at 450 crowns for the restricted and 455 for
  the free shares.
      The statement said the deal increased Investor's stake to
  49.4 pct of the voting rights and 14.8 pct of the share capital
  while Providentia is left holding 34.1 pct of the voting rights
  and 14.5 pct of the share capital in Swedish Match.
      The Wallenbergs' stake in Swedish Match had previously
  amounted to 52 pct of the voting rights in the company.
      The Swedish Match deal will cost the Wallenbergs about 400
  mln crowns, share analysts said, making it one of the most
  expensise moves the group has undertaken in the last four years
  to defend its far-flung interests from outside predators.
      The Wallenbergs originally sold Nobel Industrier, an arms
  and chemicals group, to Penser in 1984 to pay for buying Volvo
  &lt;VOLV ST> out of two other key group companies, Atlas Copco
  &lt;ASTS ST> and Stora Koppabergs &lt;SKPS ST>.
      Since then, the Wallenbergs were ousted as the largest
  shareholders in SKF (SKFR ST> by Skanska AB &lt;SKBS ST> and
  Frederik Lundberg wrested control of Incentive AB from them.
      Lundberg, a Zurich-based Swedish property tycoon, also
  managed to acquire a 25 pct stake in another Wallenberg
  company, the diary equipment firm Alfa -Laval AB &lt;ALFS ST>.
      During 1986, the Wallenbergs have been concentrating on
  building up their stake in Investor and Providentia to prevent
  any raid on the heart of their business empire.
      But analysts say the Wallenbergs' position in the
  electrical engineering firm ASEA AB &lt;ASEA ST> is also too small
  at 12.6 pct of the voting rights and there has been growing
  speculation that the group will be forced to sell off fringe
  interests to protect its core activities.
  

POEHL SAYS FURTHER RATE CUT POSSIBLE - SOURCES
  Bundesbank president Karl Otto Poehl
  told a closed investment symposium that West Germany could cut
  leading interest rates again if the United States makes a
  similar move, banking sources said.
      The sources were reporting Poehl's remarks at a symposium
  in Duesseldorf last week organised by Deutsche Bank Ag. Press
  representatives were not invited.
      The sources, speaking separately, said Poehl told about 200
  bankers in reply to questions that a cut in U.S. Interest rates
  would give room for a matching measure in Germany.
      "It was a definite hint at lower German interest rates," said
  one banker who attended the symposium.
      A Bundesbank spokesman said the central bank would have no
  comment on the reported remarks, made at the private meeting.
      But, according to a second source, who also declined to be
  identified, Poehl's comments were seen by bankers present as a
  direct pointer to further moves by the central bank to defend
  German industry from an additional revaluation of the mark.
      "He said if the Americans drop their interest rates then the
  Bundesbank would also drop them. He said that quite clearly,"
  the second source said.
      In reply to questions, Poehl also said the half-point cut
  in the discount and Lombard rates on January 22 came after the
  U.S. Had signalled it would be prepared to attend a meeting to
  discuss the level of the dollar on condition Germany made such
  a move in advance, the sources said.
      Asked if American authorities could have been persuaded, by
  cuts in German rates, to come to the bargaining table as early
  as last September, one of the sources quoted Poehl as saying,
  "No, they wouldn't have been. We checked that."
      The Paris meeting of the Group of Six industrial nations
  took place exactly one month after the German cut in rates.
      Poehl emphasised in his comments the very close talks
  between central banks before and after the G-6 meeting, saying
  that financial markets had not fully realised the significance
  of the Paris session and the U.S. Agreement to stem further
  falls in the value of the dollar, the sources said.
      For the first time all participants at the summit agreed
  that a further fall in the dollar would be harmful for all
  world economies, including the U.S., Poehl had said.
      The sources said the tone of Poehl's comments boosted
  growing sentiment that the dollar would be stabilised around
  current levels by international central bank cooperation.
      One source said Poehl's remarks also underlined the fact
  that the Bundesbank was now more prepared to be accommodative
  in monetary policy in order to prevent a further slowdown in
  West Germany's economic growth.
      Poehl and other Bundesbank officials have in the past
  stressed that the German central bank had no direct
  responsibility for growth and was solely concerned with
  combatting inflation.
      This led, for instance, to the introduction of a tighter
  monetary stance from the beginning of December until the
  half-point cut in rates in late January.
      The sources quoted Poehl as saying that the current
  overshooting of the German monetary target would not directly
  respark inflation. The Bundesbank was not obliged to react
  immediately whenever such overshooting occurs.
      Latest data for central bank money stock, the Bundesbank's
  main measure of money supply, showed the measure was growing at
  7-1/2 pct in January, outside its three to six pct 1987 target.
      Share prices rose in very active trading today, with
  dealers reporting that Poehl's remarks, coupled with a bullish
  outlook on stock prices from Deutsche at the same symposium,
  brought in strong bargain hunting at current low levels.
  

SOSNOFF STARTS BID FOR CAESARS WORLD &lt;CAW>
  &lt;MTS Acquisition Corp>, a company
  formed by Martin T. Sosnoff, said it has started a tender offer
  for all shares of Caesars World Inc at 28 dlrs each.
      In a newspaper advertisement, MTS said the offer and
  withdrawal rights expire April Three unless extended.
      Sosnoff, a New York investor, already owns about four mln
  of Caesars' 30.3 mln shares outstanding, or about 13.3 pct, and
  is Caesars' largest shareholder.  Caesars owns casino hotels in
  Nevada and honeymoon resorts in Pennsylvania's Pocono
  Mountains.  It also controls Caesars New Jersey Inc &lt;CJN>,
  which owns an Atlantic City, N.J., casino hotel.
      For the second quarter ended January 31, Caesars World
  earned 12.6 mln dlrs on revenues of 190.4 mln dlrs, up from
  earnings of 7,500,000 dlrs and revenues of 163.8 mln dlrs a
  year before.  For all of fiscal 1986, the company earned 41.0
  mln dlrs on revenues of 694.4 mln dlrs.
      MTS said the offer is conditioned on receipt of at least
  enough shares to give Sosnoff a majority interest on a fully
  diluted basis, the arrangement of sufficient financing to buy
  all Caesars shares not already owned and pay related costs and
  approval by the New Jersey Casino control Commission and the
  NEvada Gaming Commission and State Gaming Control Board.
      MTS said Marine Midland Banks Inc &lt;MM> has committed to
  lend it 100 mln dlrs for the acquisition and use its best
  efforts to syndicate another 400 mln dlrs in senior financing
  for the transaction.
      It said its financial adviser, PaineWebber Group Inc &lt;PWJ>,
  has stated in writing that subject to market conditions, it is
  highly confident that it can arrange commitments for up to 475
  mln dlrs in "mezzanine" financing.
      MTS said it does not expect problems in obtaining New
  Jersey and Nevada regulatory approval for the acquisition,
  since ownership in a Caesars stake has already been cleared.
      In June 1986, Sosnoff requested a seat on the Caesars World
  board, a request that has not yet been granted.  In September
  1986, Sosnoff, who is chairman of &lt;Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital
  Corp>, filed for clearance under U.S. antitrust laws to raise
  his interest in Caesars World to 25 pct.
      Sosnoff said, in a letter to Caesars World chairman and
  chief executive officer Henry Gluck, that "The decision to go
  directly to the shareholders was made at the urging of may
  financial and legal advisors, who repeatedly stressed to me the
  lack of responsiveness of the management in the past."
      Sosnoff, who said he has made numerous efforts to express
  his views to management on ways of maximizing shareholder
  values, said Caesars twicce refused his request for a board
  seat.  "My advisers felt that, had I given you advance notice,
  you would have used the time to throw up obstacles to my offer
  rather than giving it serious consideration," he said.
      Sosnoff said he hopes that Caesars World management will be
  willing to negotiate an acquisition agreement with him.
      "As I have indicated publicly in the past, I believe
  operating management of the company has performed well and that
  appropriate consideration should be given to a significant
  equity interest for them in the company following the
  acquisition," Sosnoff said in the letter to Gluck.
      MTS said Sosnoff has asked the company to fix March 27 as
  the record date for the determination of shareholders entitled
  to authorize action without a meeting -- including the election
  or removal of directors.
  

DUTCH PLANNING AGENCY FORECASTS LOWER GROWTH
  Dutch economic growth is slowing as a
  firming guilder cuts competitiveness abroad and industries
  reduce the pace of investment, the Dutch official planning
  agency CPB said.
      The Centraal Planbureau, publishing its 1987 economic
  outlook, said Dutch Net National Income (NNI) was expected to
  grow by one pct this year, down from two pct growth recorded in
  1986 and 2.5 pct in 1985 and 1984.
      Dutch Gross National Product is expected to rise to 432.20
  billion guilders in 1987 in constant prices, a two pct increase
  from last year's 423.95 billion.
      The CPB, forecasting an 8.5 pct increase in the value of
  the guilder on a trade-weighted basis compared with 10.0 pct
  last year, said the dollar was expected to trade at an average
  of 2.0 guilders in 1987 compared with 2.45 guilders in 1986.
      "The higher guilder is causing a substantial fall in unit
  labour costs abroad, when measured in guilder terms, while
  these are rising slightly in the Netherlands," the CPB said.
      More of economic growth now depended on domestic
  consumption, the CPB said, but noting that higher margins set
  by domestic producers and importers mitigated the effect on
  purchasing power of lower import costs and deflation.
      Consumer prices were set to fall by 1.5 pct this year, the
  CPB said. Inflation was zero last year.
      Gross investment in industry was expected to grow by five
  pct this year, a slowdown compared with 11.5 pct growth last
  year, the CPB said.
      Exchange rate and oil price fluctuations will continue to
  condition the Dutch economy in the future as it has in recent
  years, the CPB said, noting a continued depressing impact of
  these factors on Dutch competitiveness.
      In addition, it noted a slight rise in taxation and social
  security costs to employers.
      The CPB, forecasting a rise in the budget deficit to 7.2
  pct of Net National Income in 1987 from 6.3 pct last year,
  urged the government to cut expenditure further to bring down
  the deficit and reduce tax and social security payments in
  future.
      Dutch government revenue is being depressed further by
  falling income from natural gas sales in 1987, the CPB said.
      It said unemployment was expected to fall to 675,000 this
  year from 710,000 last year.
      While the two pct GDP growth forecast set by the CPB is
  within its latest forecast, issued last month, of 1.5 to two
  pct growth, the figure is well above recent market estimates.
      Dutch merchant bank Pierson, Heldring en Pierson said in
  its February economic outlook that GDP growth at constant
  prices was expected to be 1.1 pct this year and market analysts
  had expected the CPB's final forecast to be below its own
  latest estimate.
      "It is too early to comment because I haven't seen the whole
  document yet, but it would seem we are more pessimistic in some
  of our estimates," a Pierson economist said.
      The CPB forecast 2.5 pct export growth in volume terms in
  1987, after four pct growth last year. Excluding energy
  exports, the 1987 figure would be two pct, it said.
      Imports were set to rise by 4.5 pct this year compared with
  four pct in 1986 in volume terms, the CPB said.
      The balance of payments would see a sharp decline in the
  surplus, to six billion guilders in 1987 compared with 12.1
  billion last year, the CPB forecast.
  

TRUMP MAKES BID FOR CONTROL OF RESORTS &lt;RTB>
  Casino owner and real estate developer
  Donald Trump has offered to acquire all Class B common shares
  of Resorts International Inc, a spokesman for Trump said.
      The estate of late Resorts chairman James M. Crosby owns
  340,783 of the 752,297 Class B shares.
      Resorts also has about 6,432,000 Class A common shares
  outstanding. Each Class B share has 100 times the voting power
  of a Class A share, giving the Class B stock about 93 pct of
  Resorts' voting power.
   More
  

IOMEGA &lt;IOMG> SETS MANAGEMENT, LABOR LAYOFFS
  Iomega Corp said it has laid off over
  a quarter of its professional and management staff and nearly
  half of its direct labor force as part of a restructuring and
  downsizing of its business.
      The company also said it will receive a qualified opinion
  from the auditors of it 1986 financial statement subject to the
  outcome of two suits. The company is a defendant in a
  consolidated class action law suit which seeks damages in an
  unspecified amount and is also a defendant in a related
  shareholder action.
      Iomega said the auditors state in their opinion letter that
  both actions are in the early stages of discovery and the
  likely outcome can not be determined at this time.
      The company said a corporate wide reduction of its
  professional, management and indirect labor will result in the
  permanent elimination of 183 positions in all functional areas
  of the company's business. This represents over 25 pct of
  professional, management and indirect employees, it added.
      In addition, Iomega announced layoff of about 182
  employees, principally from its manufacturing direct labor
  force. Those affected represent about 46 pct of direct labor.
      Commenting on the layoffs, Iomega said those from among the
  direct labor force affects personnel building the Alpha Eight
  Inch Disk Drive and Bernoulli Boxes.
      "This action is required as we bring our finished goods
  inventory and inventory in our distribution channels down to
  acceptable levels," it explained.
      The company stated this layoff does not affect the
  production of its new 5-1/4 inch Beta 20 product which is
  currently being built to a backlog of orders.
  

BRAZIL SEAMEN CONTINUE STRIKE DESPITE COURT
  Hundreds of marines were on alert
  at 11 key Brazilian ports after 40,000 seamen decided to remain
  on indefinite strike, even after the Higher Labour Court
  Saturday ruled it illegal, union leaders said.
      The halt, the first national strike by seamen in 25 years,
  started on February 27, and union leaders said they would not
  return to work unless they got a 275 pct pay rise. Shipowners
  have offered a 100 per cent raise, which the seamen rejected.
      "We have nothing to lose. If they want to lay off the
  workers, fine, but we are determined to carry on with our
  protest until the end," a union leader said.
   more
      He said they had decided in a meeting that if the marines
  take over the ships, the seamen would abandon the vessels and
  let the marines handle the situation by themselves.
      A spokesman for the Rio de Janeiro Port said the order to
  send marines to take over the ports was given by Navy Minister
  Henrique Saboya on grounds that ports are areas of national
  security. But he said there were no incidents. The strike has
  cut exports and imports and made an estimated 160 ships idle.
      Petrol station owners in four states also continued their
  shutdown and there were fears that the combination of the two
  stoppages could lead to a serious fuel shortage.
  

INDONESIAN SOYBEAN IMPORTS FORECAST TO RISE
  Soybean imports are forecast to rise to
  425,000 tonnes in 1987/88 (October/September) from an estimated
  300,000 in 1986/87 and 375,000 in 1985/86, the U.S. Embassy
  said in its annual report on Indonesia's agriculture.
      It said Indonesia did not achieve its goal of
  self-sufficiency in soybean output in calendar 1986 because it
  did not meet a planned increase in area planted and because
  yields have remained below target.
      Soybean meal imports are forecast to fall to around 190,000
  tonnes in 1987/88 from 270,000 tonnes in 1986/87 and 295,000
  tonnes in 1985/86.
      Domestic soybean production is forecast to rise steadily to
  1.08 mln tonnes in 1987/88 from 980,000 in the current year and
  890,000 in 1985/86, the report said.
      Imports are forecast to fall in the current year but to
  rise in 1987/88 because of a new soybean crushing plant due to
  come on stream in early 1988.
      China is the main supplier with a 79 pct share, while the
  U.S. Provides the rest, it said.
      "This pattern will likely continue during 1986/87 since
  domestic soyfood processors prefer Chinese beans and are
  willing to pay a premium for them," it said.
      Area planted is expected to increase by 10 pct in both
  1986/87 and 1987/88.
      "Yield increases continue to be hampered by an insufficient
  supply of quality seeds, along with pest and disease problems,"
  the report said.
  

BONN SERIOUS ABOUT CURRENCY PACT, SAYS TIETMEYER
  West Germany takes "very seriously" the
  recent undertaking by major industrial countries to promote
  exchange rate stability around current levels, Finance Ministry
  State Secretary Hans Tietmeyer said.
      Talking to journalists before a meeting of European
  Community Economy and Finance Ministers here, Tietmeyer
  declined to say whether the February 22 Paris accord by the
  Group of Five countries plus Canada included secret agreements
  for stabilising currencies.
      But he noted the official communique said the participants
  agreed to cooperate closely to foster stability of exchange
  rates around current levels. "We're taking this sentence very
  seriously," he said.
      Tietmeyer remarked that the dollar had hardly moved against
  the mark since the meeting.
      He said a slowdown in West German economic growth had been
  caused by sharp exchange rate swings and that the Paris
  agreement should help in this respect.
      Economics Ministry State Secretary Otto Schlecht said the
  Bonn government saw no current need for measures to bolster the
  economy but was paying close attention to the slower growth and
  had not ruled out "appropriate and timely" action if necessary.
      Schlecht and Tietmeyer were speaking ahead of a discussion
  by the EC ministers of the latest EC Commission report on the
  economic situation in the 12-nation bloc.
      The Commission has sharply revised down expected German
  gross national product growth this year to two pct from 3.2 pct
  predicted last autumn and says Bonn has the most room of any EC
  country to stimulate economic activity.
      Schlecht said the upturn in West Germany's economy slowed
  in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of
  1987. But he said there was no cumulative downwards trend in
  view that would make quick remedial action necessary.
      He said a number of favourable indicators such as high
  level of investment and a good climate for consumption meant a
  recovery could be expected, while exports would pick up
  slightly during the course of the year.
  

UGANDA DISAPPOINTED BY COFFEE TALKS FAILURE
  Uganda, Africa's second largest coffee
  producer, was disappointed by the stalemate in recent coffee
  talks in London, the chairman of the state-run Coffee Marketing
  Board, CMB, said.
      "This has not been good for coffee producers, more so in a
  situation where the prices dropped by 200 pounds per tonne of
  robusta coffee," J. Makumbi said when he returned from London on
  Friday.
      Producers and consumers failed to agree on a quota formula
  to share the world's coffee production during International
  Coffee Organisation, ICO, talks that ended last week.
      Makumbi blamed the failure to set quotas, which were
  suspended in Feburary last year, on Indonesian demands that its
  quota be increased dramatically.
      Uganda -- which earns about 400 mln dlrs annually from
  coffee exports, over 95 pct of its foreign exchange earnings --
  had sought to raise its ICO quota to 3.0 mln from 2.45 mln
  60-kilo bags, according to sources close to the CMB.
      The CMB has estimated that production will rise 20 to 25
  pct in the current 1986/87 October-September season to over
  three mln bags.
      For several years Uganda had been unable to meet its ICO
  export quota as rebel activity disrupted the coffee industry.
      The Ugandan government depends on coffee export duties for
  about 60 pct of its sales tax revenue and the industry employs
  over half of salaried manpower.
      In Dar es Salaam, Tanzania's Agriculture and Livestock
  Development Minister Paul Bomani said today Third World
  countries would suffer from the failure of the London coffee
  talks.
      "It is only the middlemen who will benefit, he said.
      Bomani called on the ICO to convene another meeting within
  two months, saying, "Once tempers have cooled and delegations
  have had time to report back to their headquarters, common
  sense will prevail."
  

 Chrysler to take over Renault stake in American Motors, says Renault

   Chrysler to take over Renault stake in American Motors, says Renault
  

ADDITIONAL CCC CREDIT GUARANTEES FOR HUNGARY
  The Commodity Credit Corporation,
  CCC, has authorized an additional 8.0 mln dlrs in credit
  guarantees for sales of vegetable protein meals to Hungary for
  fiscal year 1987, the U.S. Agriculture Department said.
      The additional guarantees increase the vegetable protein
  meal credit line to 16.0 mln dlrs and increases the cumulative
  fiscal year 1987 program for agricultural products to 23.0 mln
  dlrs from 15.0 mln, it said.
      The department also announced an extension of the export
  period from September 30, 1987, to December 31 for sales of
  vegetable protein meals.
      To be eligible for the credit guarantees all sales must be
  registered before export but not later than September 30.
  

SOUTHERN CO TO TAKE 226 MLN DLR CHARGE ON PROJECTED VOGTLE COST RISE

  SOUTHERN CO TO TAKE 226 MLN DLR CHARGE ON PROJECTED VOGTLE COST RISE
  

APPLIED CIRCUIT&lt;ACRT> SELLS ELECTRONICS BUSINESS
  Applied Circuit Technology Inc
  (ACT) said it has agreed in principal to sell its primary
  computer electronics business to the &lt;Sanpao Group> of San
  Francisco.
      ACT said it has not disclosed the deal's terms, but added
  that 50 pct of the sale price is in cash, with the remainder to
  be paid over a two year period.
      The deal is expected to close on March 31, ACT said.
      ACT said it made the move to concentrate resources on its
  pharmaceuticals subsidiaries.
  

USAIR &lt;U> ACQUIRES 9.9 PCT OF PIEDMONT &lt;PIE>
  USAir Group Inc said it has
  acquired 2,292,599 Piedmont Aviation Inc shares, about 9.9 pct
  on a fully diluted basis, from Norfolk Southern Corp &lt;NSC>.
      The acquisition of Piedmont by USAir has been approved by
  the directors of both companies.
      USAir said it has been advised by Norfolk Southern that the
  company supports the proposed merger and intends to tender all
  of its remaining 1,477,829 Piedmont common shares in response
  to USAir's tender offer which began today. This total includes
  shares issuable upon conversion of Piedmont preferred, USAir
  noted.
      USAir said Piedmont has about 23.1 mln common shares on a
  fully diluted basis, adding its offer is conditioned on the
  tender of at least 9,309,394 shares, representing 40.2 pct of
  the oustanding shares on a diluted basis.
      USAir said the 3,491,030 new shares it has an option to buy
  represent 18.5 pct of Piedmont's currently outstanding shares.
  

SHV SAYS IT MAKING TENDER OFFER FOR IC GAS
  &lt;SHV (United Kingdom) Holding Co Ltd>
  said it was making a tender offer for up to 33 mln ordinary
  shares in Imperial Continental Gas Association.&lt;ICGS.L>.
      It said in a statement the offer was on the basis of 700p
  for each IC Gas ordinary and 252p for every one stg nominal of
  IC Gas loan stock.
      SHV already holds 6.8 mln IC Gas ordinary stock units
  representing around 4.9 pct of the current issued share
  capital.
      Successful completion of the offer would increase SHV's
  stake in IC Gas to 39.8 mln shares, representing around 27.9
  pct of issued share capital, it said.
      The offer capitalises IC Gas at around one billion stg.
      It said it was tendering for both ordinary stock and loan
  stock, which when fully converted, gave a total of 33 mln IC
  Gas ordinary. It is making the tender offer through N.M.
  Rothschilds.
      IC Gas said in a statement it noted the SHV tender offer
  and the terms were being considered.
      It said a further statement would be made as soon as
  possible.
   REUTER...
  

BRAZILIAN COFFEE RAINFALL
  THE FOLLOWING RAINFALL WAS RECORDED IN
  THE AREAS OVER PAST 72 HOURS
      PARANA STATE: UMUARAMA NIL, PARANAVAI 1.5 MILLIMETRES,
  LONDRINA NIL, MARINGA NIL.
      SAO PAULO STATE: PRESIDENTE PRUDENTE O.6 MM, VOTUPORANGA
  12.0 MM, FRANCA 28.0 MM, CATANDUVA 10.0 MM, SAO CARLOS NIL, SAO
  SIMAO NIL. REUTER11:43/VB
  

GENCORP TO SELL LOS ANGELES TELEVISION STATION TO WALT DISNEY CO

  GENCORP TO SELL LOS ANGELES TELEVISION STATION TO WALT DISNEY CO
  

NATIONWIDE CELLULAR &lt;NCEL> COMPLETES PURCHASE
  Nationwide Cellular Service
  Inc said it has completed the previously-announced acquisition
  of privately-held Nova Cellular Co, a Chicago reseller of
  mobile telephone service with 1,800 subscribers, for about
  65,000 common shares.
      Nova Cellular has an accumulated deficit of about 650,000
  dlrs and had revenues of about 2,600,000 dlrs for 1986, it
  said.
  

NATIONAL WESTMINSTER BANK CUTS BASE RATE
  National Westminster Bank Plc said it has
  cut its base lending rate  0.5 percentage points to 10.5 pct
  today.
      National Westminster said it was responding to general
  easing in money market rates.
      Its move followed a signal from the Bank of England earlier
  this afternoon that it would endorse a half point cut in the
  base rate, a surprise move following its strong signals last
  week that such a move would be premature.
      However, since then the pound has continued to gain
  strongly.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN FURTHER HELP AT NEW RATES
  The Bank of England said it provided the
  market with further assistance during the afternoon, buying
  bills worth 166 mln stg at the lower rates introduced this
  morning.
      It bought 45 mln stg of local authority bills plus 27 mln
  stg of bank bills in band one at 10-3/8 pct together with 94
  mln stg of band two bank bills at 10-5/16 pct.
      The bank also revised its estimate of the market shortage
  up to 300 mln stg from 250 mln this morning. It has given total
  assistance of 213 mln stg today.
  

HUTCHISON UNIT BUYS CONTAINER CRANES FROM JAPAN
  Container port operator, &lt;Hong Kong
  International Terminals Ltd>, a 89 pct held unit of Hutchison
  Whampoa Ltd &lt;HWHH.HK>, said it has placed a 164 mln H.K. Dlr
  order for seven quayside container cranes of 800 tons each with
  Japan's Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding Co Ltd &lt;MSET.T> for
  May 1988 to August 1989 delivery.
      Hong Kong International Terminals operates 32 cranes.
  

BOSPHORUS SHIPPING MOVES, ISTANBUL OFFICES CLOSE
  Istanbul remained at a virtual
  standstill today under snow up to a meter deep but shipping was
  moving through the narrow Bosphorus waterway linking the Sea of
  Marmara and the Black Sea, officials said.
      The authorities ordered government offices closed until
  Wednesday. Many banks, businesses and schools stayed shut as
  workers struggled to keep main roads and supply lines open in
  this city of 6.5 mln people.
      The second blizzard to hit Istanbul in a week stopped
  yesterday afternoon and the international airport reopened
  today after a two-day closure. It was also shut earlier last
  week.
  

ECUADOR TO EXPORT NO OIL FOR 4 MONTHS, OFFICIAL
  The suspension of Ecuador's crude oil
  shipments after an earthquake cut an oil pipeline will last at
  least four months, a senior Energy Ministry official said.
      The official said Ecuador could resume exports after
  repairing a 40 km section of the 510 km pipeline, which links
  jungle oil fields at Lago Agrio to Balao on the Pacific coast.
  It would take about 100 mln U.S. Dlrs to repair the pipeline,
  the official, who did not want to be named, told Reuters.
  Ecuador had enough oil to meet domestic demand for about 35
  days and would have to import crude to supplement stocks.
      The earthquake last Thursday night registered six on the
  12-point international Mercalli scale. The damage to the
  pipeline was a severe economic blow to Ecuador, where oil
  accounts for up to two-thirds of total exports and as much as
  60 pct of government revenues.
      Financially pressed Ecuador, a member of the Organisation
  of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), was recently pumping
  about 260,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude, about 50,000 bpd
  above the output quota assigned by the cartel, another Energy
  Ministry spokesman said. Last year, it exported an average of
  173,500 bpd, according to the central bank.
      However, Ecuador might build an emergency 25 km pipeline,
  costing 15 to 20 mln dlrs, to hook up with a Colombian
  pipeline, the first official said. He estimated it could take
  about 60 days to build.
      Ecuador, squeezed by the slide in world oil prices in 1986,
  had only 138 mln dlrs in net international reserves at the end
  of January, about equal to one month's imports.
      It suspended interest payments in January on 5.4 billion
  dlrs owed to about 400 private foreign banks. The country's
  total foreign debt is 8.16 billion dlrs, the eighth largest in
  Latin America.
      In Caracas, President Jaime Lusinchi said Venezuela would
  loan five mln barrels of crude to Ecuador over the next three
  months to make up for losses from damage to the pipeline.
      Ecuador asked for the loan to guarantee domestic supplies
  and would ship an equivalent volume back to Venezuela in
  repayment in May, Lusinchi said.
      A commission headed by Venezuelan Investment Fund Minister
  Hector Hurtado and including representatives from the interior
  and defence ministries and the state oil company Petroleos de
  Venezuela will travel to Ecuador Tuesday to evaluate and
  co-ordinate an emergency relief program, he said.
  

FRENCH JAN M-3 MONEY SUPPLY ROSE PROV ADJUSTED ONE PCT (O.7 PCT FALL IN DEC) - OFFICIAL.

  FRENCH JAN M-3 MONEY SUPPLY ROSE PROV ADJUSTED ONE PCT (O.7 PCT FALL IN DEC) - OFFICIAL.
  

MALAYSIA SAYS RUBBER PACT DEPENDS ON CONSUMERS
  Malaysia said the success of talks
  opening today on a new International Natural Rubber Agreement
  (INRA) depends on how flexible consumer countries are.
      Rubber producer and consumer countries meet for 12 days in
  Geneva from tomorrow to try to hammer out a rubber pact after
  they failed to reach agreement last November to replace the
  current accord, which expires next October.
      Primary Industries Minister Lim Keng Yaik said in a
  statement that Malaysia wants to continue with a second INRA
  and is prepared to accept modifications that would strengthen
  the present agreement.
      He said the second INRA would allow for an orderly disposal
  of the accumulated buffer stock of 375,000 tonnes, since the
  market is now capable of absorbing such releases.
  

MCDOWELL &lt;ME> TO MERGER WITH &lt;INTERPHARM INC>
  McDowell Enterprises Inc said
  it has signed a definitive agreement to acquire an 80 pct
  interest in privately held Interpharm Inc for a 19.9 pct
  interest in McDowell.
      The company said subject to contigencies, including future
  sales and profit levels, McDowell could over a four-year period
  acquire 100 pct of Interpharm in exchange for up to 51 pct of
  McDowell's voting stock.
      It said the transaction is expected to be completed within
  60 days, at which time the McDowell board would be restructured
  to include Interpharm management. 
  

RENAULT, CHRYSLER IN ACCORD FOR CHRYSLER TO BUY AMC
  Regie Nationale des Usines Renault
  &lt;RENA.PA> said it and Chrysler Corp &lt;C> have signed a letter of
  intent in which Chrysler plans to buy American Motors Corp
  &lt;AMO.N>, 46 pct owned by Renault.
      Renault President Raymond Levy said in a statement issued
  by the French state car group the agreement was an important
  stage in Renault's redeployment. "It will allow Renault to
  continue its export programme to the U.S. And also opens a
  perspective of cooperation with a major American constructor,"
  the statement said. Under the terms of the letter of intent,
  Chrysler will purchase Renault's stake held in the form of
  bonds and shares.
      The Renault statement quoted Chrysler Chairman Lee Iacocca
  as saying, "We welcome AMC shareholders into the Chrysler
  family."
      He added that the accord would allow Renault and Chrysler
  to study the development of future products destined to be
  distributed by Renault and Chrysler in the North American and
  world markets.
      "Renault is a leader in our industry and I am happy to be
  working with them," Iacocca was quoted as saying.
      Chrysler will pay for Renault's AMC interests held in bonds
  by a 200 mln dlr bond and will pay up to 350 mln dlrs for
  Renault share interests, depending on AMC sales and future
  profits, the Renault statement said.
      The statement said the agreement in principle gave each
  side 30 days to put together a definitive accord. Approval
  would also be necessary from the Renault, Chrysler and AMC
  boards, from AMC shareholders and the relevant government
  authorities.
      If the deal goes ahead, the statement said, AMC
  shareholders other than Renault will receive Chrysler shares
  for each of their shares valued at four dlrs.
      AMC shareholders with convertible preferential shares will
  have the possibility to exchange them for Chrysler shares on
  the same conditions as those they would have had in exchanging
  them for AMC shares.
  

HOG AND CATTLE SLAUGHTER GUESSTIMATES
  Chicago Mercantile Exchange floor
  traders and commission house representatives are guesstimating
  today's hog slaughter at about 285,000 to 300,000 head versus
  292,000 week ago and 309,000 a year ago.
      Cattle slaughter is guesstimated at about 125,000 to
  131,000 head versus 129,000 week ago and 119,000 a year ago.
  

 Bank of France said it cut money market intervention rate to 7-3/4 pct from eight pct

   Bank of France said it cut money market intervention rate to 7-3/4 pct from eight pct
  

FIRST BOSTON AFFILIATE TO ACQUIRE ALLEGHENY INT'L FOR 24.60 DLRS/SHR

  FIRST BOSTON AFFILIATE TO ACQUIRE ALLEGHENY INT'L FOR 24.60 DLRS/SHR
  

SOUTHERN &lt;SO> TO TAKE CHARGE ON VOGTLE COST
  Southern Co said it will take an
  after-tax charge of 226 mln dlrs against earnings no later than
  January 1988 because the projected cost of the Vogtle nuclear
  power plant has risen abover the amount which retail customers
  in Georgia will be asked to pay.
      The company's largest subsidiary, Georgia Power Co, said
  the budget for the plant has increased by 6.3 pct, or 522 mln
  dlrs, to 8.87 billion. However, because of a pledge the made
  last year to Georgia's Public Service Commission, the increased
  cost will not be included in the utility's retail electric
  rates.
      Geogia Power also said its board has delayed the scheduled
  completion of Vogtle's Unit Two to June 1989 from September
  1988. Unit Two is about 60 pct complete, it added.
      The utility said fuel loading has been completed at Unit
  One and the unit is being put through a series of low-power
  tests before the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is asked for a
  full-power license.
      The nuclear power plant, located near Waynesboro, Ga., is
  co-owned by &lt;Oglethorpe Power Corp>, the Municipal Electric
  Authority of Georgia and the city of Dalton.
      Georgia Power said the revised Vogtle budget estimate was
  due to several factors, including additional labor costs
  incurred to keep the plant's first unit on schedule for
  commercial operation by June. The new figure represents the
  first change in the plant's budget since August 1985, when it
  was estimated at 8.35 billion dlrs.
      In March 1986, the utility told Georgia regulators it would
  "cap" the price of Vogtle its customers would be asked to pay
  at 3.56 billion dlrs, the company's share of the then projected
  8.35 billion dlr total. Under the new budget, Georgia Power
  said, its share amounts to 3.87 billion dlrs.
      Noting that Georgia Power's share of the Vogtle increase is
  313 mln dlrs, Southern said this will result in a charge
  against earnings of 177 mln dlrs after taxes.
      In addition, the company said, Georgia Power's contracts
  with the joint owners require the utility to buy back
  significant amounts of Vogtle capacity during the plant's
  initial years of operation. Under terms of the cap on costs, it
  will not attempt to recover the portion of the budget increase
  that applies to the buybacks.
      This bings the total amount that must be charged against
  earnings to 2326 mln dlrs after taxes, Southern said.
      Southern said new rules of the Financial Accounting
  Standards Board, which are effective in January 1988, require
  any costs that are determined nonrecoverable to be charged
  against earnings once that determination is made.
      The company also said its board has approved a capital
  budget of 2.1 billion dlrs in 1987, including work on the
  Vogtle project.
      It said a 5.9 billion dlr capita budget for the three-year
  period 1987-1989 was also outlined at the board meeting, noting
  this is 700 mln dlrs below the comparable figure for the years
  1986-1988.
  

STORA CLOSE TO COMPLETING PAPYRUS TAKEOVER
  Sweden's Stora Kopparbergs Bergslags
  AB &lt;SKPS ST> said it had now acquired 90 pct of shares in rival
  pulp and paper makers Papyrus AB, thus passing the threshold
  above which it can compulsorily buy the rest of the company.
      Remaining shareholders would have until later this month to
  sell their shares to Stora, the company said in a statement.
      Stora announced last September it would acquire Papyrus at
  a price of 5.8 billion crowns, thus forming Europe's second
  largest forest group after London-based Reed International Plc
  &lt;REED L>.
  

OECD TRADE, GROWTH SEEN SLOWING IN 1987
  The 24 nations of the Organisation for
  Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), hampered by
  sluggish industrial output and trade, face slower economic
  growth, and their joint balance of payments will swing into
  deficit in 1987, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU ) said.
      The EIU said in its World Trade Forecast it revised OECD
  economic growth downwards to 2.5 pct this year, compared with a
  2.8 pct growth forecast in December.
      It said the new areas of weakness are West Germany and the
  smaller European countries it influences, and Japan, hardest
  hit by currency appreciation this year.
      The independent research organisation cut its 1987 growth
  rate forecasts for West Germany to 2.2 pct from 3.2 pct in
  December and to 2.3 pct from three pct for Japan.
      It said it expected the OECD to post a current account
  deficit of some 13 billion dlrs in both 1987 and 1988, due in
  large part to a 1.50 dlrs a barrel rise in 1987 oil prices.
      It said the U.S. Current account deficit looked likely to
  fall even more slowly than forecast, to 125 billion dlrs in
  1987 and 115 billion in 1988 from 130 billion in 1986.
      It said it expected West Germany to post a 31 billion dlr
  payments surplus and Japan a 76 billion dlr surplus this year.
      The EIU said it saw oil prices dropping to around 16.50
  dlrs a barrel by end-1987 and 15.50 dlrs in 1988 from about 18
  dlrs last year, as adherence to OPEC output policy becomes
  increasingly ragged.
      It said the dollar is poised to resume its decline in
  foreign exchange markets, and will lose a further 13 pct on its
  trade-weighted index this year and five pct in 1988 after last
  year's 18.4 pct drop.
      The average mark/dollar rate is put at 1.80 marks this year
  and 1.70 in 1988 while the yen/dollar rate is expected to break
  through the 150 yen barrier with an average value of 150 yen in
  1987 and 146 yen in 1988, it said.
      "This is not a crash scenario but the dollar's steeper angle
  of descent increases the risk of ending with a fireball rather
  than a three-point landing," the EIU said.
      "Talking will not stop the dollar's slide for long and the
  February meeting (of finance ministers of the Group of Five and
  Canada) produced scant promise of either a decisive shift to
  more expansive policies in West Germany and Japan, or a tighter
  U.S. Fiscal policy," it said.
      It said the key to the dollar's fortunes was the
  willingness of Japanese institutions to buy U.S. Government
  assets despite prospects of sustaining a currency loss.
      "Thus far they have been willing," the EIC said, adding that
  if Japan was deterred from buying U.S. Bonds the dollar would
  collapse.
      To contain such a currency crisis, dollar interest rates
  would have to soar, bringing recession and a Third World debt
  crisis, it said.
      On trade, the EIU said prospects for 1987 look "increasingly
  sick."
      Import growth, forecast in December at 4.5 pct, is now seen
  slowing down to around 3.8 pct in 1987 with a recovery only to
  4.2 pct in 1988, it said.
      The weakness of the West German economy is the biggest
  single factor, with import growth there expected to feature a
  sluggish 3.5 pct growth in 1987 against the 6.5 pct forecast in
  December, the EIU said.
      On the export side, it said it saw weak demand in West
  Germany affecting export prospects elsewhere in Europe, while
  Japan's exports in 1987 would remain flat and sales by U.S.
  Exporters would respond only marginally to a lower, more
  competitively-priced dollar.
      It said in most of Europe and in Japan, raw materials and
  oil will cost less in domestic currency in 1987 than in 1986.
      However, rates of inflation will edge up in 1988 to over
  the current OECD average of three pct. Non-oil commodity prices
  will show a modest dollar price increase in 1988 for the first
  time since 1984, the EIU said.
      After a rise of 18 pct in 1986, the dollar price of
  internationally traded manufactures will go up by 8.5 pct in
  1987 and by five pct in 1988, it said.
      It said OECD industrial production would rise by only 1.6
  pct in 1987 after a weak 1.5 pct increase in 1986.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN LATE HELP WORTH 15 MLN STG
  The Bank of England said it provided the
  market with unspecified late assistance worth 15 mln stg.
      It has given the market total assistance of 228 mln stg
  today compared with a liquidity shortage it estimated at a
  revised 300 mln stg.
  

BANK OF FRANCE CUTS INTERVENTION RATE
  The Bank of France said it cut its money
  market intervention rate to 7-3/4 pct from eight pct when it
  injected money against first category paper.
      The bank also cut its seven-day repossession rate to 8-1/2
  pct from 8-3/4 pct.
      The intervention rate has stood at eight pct since it was
  raised from 7-1/4 pct on January 2 as the French franc came
  under pressure ahead of the EMS realignment on January 11.
      The bank said the purchase, effective tomorrow, is for five
  pct of private paper and fixed rate Treasury bills maturing
  between March 25 and June 25 and of other Treasury bills
  maturing between March 25, 1987 and March 25, 1989.
      The rate cut had been expected since the bank announced a
  money market intervention tender earlier today.
      Money market dealers said conditions seemed right for a
  quarter percentage point cut, reflecting an easing in the call
  money rate last week, and the French franc's steadiness on
  foreign exchange markets since the February 22 currency
  stabilisation accord here by the Group of Five and Canada.
  

WHITE ENGINE BOUGHT BY PRIVATE INVESTOR
  White Engine, a manufacturer of
  industrial and automotive diesel and gasoline engines with more
  than 100 mln dlrs in sales, said it has been sold to a group of
  group investors.
      White Engine said the purchase is led by Donald Stewart, a
  private investment banker, along with White senior executives.
      A source close to the transaction said the purchase prices
  is being set at more than 55 mln dlrs.
      The company said it will change its name to Hercules
  Engines Inc, and Stewart will be the majority interest owner,
  as well as the president and chief executive officer.
      In addition, John Lennon, current chairman and chief
  executive officer, will remain as chairman, he company said.
  And Joseph G. Scheetz, currently president, will be vice
  chairman, according to the company.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET DEFICIT FORECAST AT 800 MLN STG
  The Bank of England said it forecast a
  shortage of around 800 mln stg in the money market today.
      Among the main factors affecting liquidity, bills maturing
  in official hands and the take-up of treasury bills will drain
  some 1.61 billion stg.
      Partly offsetting this outflow, exchequer transactions and
  a fall in note circulation will add around 425 mln stg and 360
  mln stg respectively. In addition, bankers' balances above
  target will add some 20 mln stg to the system today.
  

STORA CLOSE TO COMPLETING PAPYRUS TAKEOVER
  Sweden's Stora Kopparbergs Bergslags
  AB &lt;SKPS.ST> said it has now acquired 90 pct of shares in rival
  pulp and paper makers Papyrus AB, thus passing the threshold
  above which it can compulsorily buy the rest of the company.
      Remaining shareholders would have until later this month to
  sell their shares to Stora, the company said in a statement.
      Stora announced last September it would acquire Papyrus at
  a price of 5.8 billion crowns, thus forming Europe's second
  largest forest group after London-based Reed International Plc
  &lt;REED L>.
  

ALLEGHENY INT'L &lt;AG>, FIRST BOSTON SET MERGER
  Allegheny International Inc said it
  has entered into an agreement to merge with an affiliate of
  First Boston Inc's &lt;FPC> First Boston Corp in a transaction
  valued at about 500 mln dlrs.
      Allegheny said the agreement calls for holders of its
  common to receive 24.60 dlrs a share. Holders of the company's
  2.19 dlrs cumulative preference shares will receive 20 dlrs a
  share and those owning its 11.25 dlrs convertible preferred
  will receive 87.50 dlrs a share.
      Allegheny International said the agreement calls for the
  First Boston affiliate to start a cash tender offer for all
  outstanding shares of Allegheny's common, cumulative preferred
  and convertible preferred.
      The company said First Boston has committed to provide all
  financing necessary to acquire such securities in the tender
  offer which is estimated to be about 500 mln dlrs.
      It said the agreement is also subject to the waiver by
  March 13 of certain conditions under the company's existing
  bank credit agreement.
      Allegheny International's statement did not name or
  describe the First Boston affiliate involved in the agreement.
      It did say the offer for the company's stock will be
  conditioned also on the valid tender of securities representing
  at least a majority of the voting power for the election of
  directors of the company and the valid tender of at least two
  third's of the outstanding cumulative preferred and convertible
  preferred shares.
  

FRENCH JANUARY M-3 MONEY SUPPLY RISES ONE PCT
  French money supply, measured in terms of
  M-3, rose a provisional one pct in January after falling 0.7
  pct in December, the Bank of France said.
      M-3 is the main money supply aggregate used by the French
  monetary authorities. It has been joined as a second main money
  supply aggregate for 1987 by M-2, which rose a provisional 1.2
  pct in January after falling a confirmed 0.9 pct in December.
      Calculated on a three-month moving average basis, M-3 rose
  4.4 pct year-on-year in the quarter based on December after
  rising 5.4 pct in the quarter centred on September.
      The M-2 aggregate, centred on a three-month moving average,
  rose year-on-year by four pct, within a 1987 target range of
  four to six pct.
      M-1 rose 2.5 pct after a 1.1 pct fall in December. M-1
  measures notes and coins in circulation plus sight deposits.
      M-2 adds in short-term bank deposits and M-3 adds in other
  short-term deposits.
      The central bank's widest measure of liquidity, L, rose 1.5
  pct in January after one pct fall in December. The bank said
  the money supply growth reflected a net increase of sight
  deposits and renewed interest in money market instruments.
  

CHRYSLER SAYS AMC HOLDERS TO GET CHRYSLER STOCK WORTH FOUR DLRS A SHARE UNDER BUYOUT PLAN

  CHRYSLER SAYS AMC HOLDERS TO GET CHRYSLER STOCK WORTH FOUR DLRS A SHARE UNDER BUYOUT PLAN
  

TURKISH CENTRAL BANK SETS LIRA/DOLLAR, DM RATES
  The Turkish Central Bank set a
  Lira/Dollar rate for March 10 of 773.05/776.92 to the Dollar,
  down from the previous 769.60/773.45.
      The Bank also set a Lira/Mark rate of 417.20/419.29 to the
  Mark, up from the previous 419.15/421.25.
  

CONTINENTAL BANK/CANADA SETS DISTRIBUTION
  Continental Bank of Canada, a subsidiary
  of Lloyds Bank PLC &lt;LLOY.L>, said it intends to redeem all
  existing preferred shares and distribute a stock dividend to
  common shareholders.
      The initial distribution will be in cumulative redeemable
  retractable floating rate class A preferred shares series II,
  which will carry a retraction right enabling holders to receive
  12.75 dlrs for each share.
      Continental said the 58.6 mln dlrs of existing outstanding
  preferred shares will be paid off at par plus accrued dividends.
       Continental said the notes will carry a dividend rate of
  72 pct of prime and it expects that the shares will trade at
  12.75 dlrs or more, enabling shareholders who wish to receive
  cash to do so.
      The bank said it expects the distribution will be made in
  early May, subject to various approvals.
      Continental also said that, as of March 2, it had cash of
  more than 250 mln dlrs and equity of about 284.6 mln dlrs,
  allowing for a final total distribution of 16.60 dlrs per
  common share.
      Continental Bank said it continues to expect that the final
  distribution to shareholders will be in the range of 16.50 dlrs
  to 17.25 dlrs per share and will take place in late 1988 or
  early 1989.
      Until the initial stock distribution takes place, regular
  dividend payments will be maintained on the existing preferred
  shares, the bank said.
      The distribution is part of the terms of Continental Bank
  of Canada's sale of its banking assets to Lloyds Bank Canada, a
  subsidiary of Lloyds Bank PLC.
      Continental Bank said Lloyds Bank Canada paid the balance
  of the purchase price but that it was lower than originally
  anticipated since Continental was unable to transfer certain
  income tax deductions to Lloyds Bank. Continental did not give
  further details.
   More
  

STUDY SAYS U.S., CANADA PACT WOULD SPUR ECONOMIES
  A free trade pact between the United
  States and Canada could spur the economies of both sides
  substantially, according to a study released by the Institute
  for International Economics.
      The study, by Paul Wonnacott, said a successful conclusion
  to the free trade talks now under way could raise Canada's
  gross national product by more than five pct and expand U.S.
  export's by about seven pct.
      He said the pact could resolve the knotty issue of
  government subsidies, end curbs on trade in services and
  investments and pave the way for new global talks under the 
  General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
      The United States and Canada - the world's two biggest
  trading partners with cross border shipments of about 150
  billion dlrs a year - opened free trade talks last June. They
  are aiming for a pact by next October.
      Wonnacott, an economics professor at the Univerity of
  Maryland, said an agreement should include:
      - Elimination of tariffs between the two countries, phased
  in over a five to 10-year period;
      - Equal access to federal government procurement in the two
  countries, replacing current "Buy America" and "Buy Canada"
  provisions with a "Buy North America" provision;
      - Fewer restrictions in trade in services, chiefly finance
  and transportation;
      - A commitment not to screen foreign investments in favor
  domestic producers;
      - A commission to resolve bilateral trade disputes.
       Wonnacott said that to resolve the subsidy problem, the
  two sides should permit export subsidies of exports of up to
  2.0 or 2.5 pct without imposing coutervailing duties.
      The limit on subsidies is now 0.5 pct.
      He proposed that any attempt to impose new duties to offset
  subsidies should go first a special disputes commission for
  resolution at an early stage.
      Wonnacott said "bilateral free trade would contribute to the
  efficiency of the North American economies and to their
  competitiveness in facing overseas producers.
      He said it would it would open U.S. markets to Canadian
  goods and enable them to benefit from the economies of mass
  production.
      Benefits to the United States would be fewer than those to
  Canada proportionately, he said, because of the already large
  U.S. gross national product.
      Wonnacott said also that a U.S.-Canada pact in such areas
  as export subsidies and the creation of a dispute commission
  could set an example for the current attempt by GATT to write
  new and more liberal global trading regulations.
  

GULF RESOURCES &lt;GRE> TO HAVE GAIN ON STOCK SALE
  Gulf Resources and Chemical Corp said it
  has sold 9,534,633 shares of &lt;Imperial Continental Gas
  Association> for 720 pence a share, or 68.6 mln stg, in a
  private transaction for a pretax gain of about 19.6 mln dlrs.
      Gulf Resources said it still owns 6.7 mln shares of
  Imperial Continental, or a 4.6 pct interest, and continues to
  study various alternatives.
  

ROTTERDAM GRAIN HANDLER SAYS PORT BALANCE ROSE
  Graan Elevator Mij said its balance in
  port of grains, oilseeds and derivatives rose to 136,000 tonnes
  on March 7 from 31,000 a week earlier, after arrivals of
  523,000 tonnes and discharges of 418,000 tonnes last week.
      The balance comprised 38,000 tonnes of grains and oilseeds
  and 98,000 tonnes of derivatives.
      This week's estimated arrivals total 194,000 tonnes, of
  which 45,000 are grains/oilseeds and 149,000 derivatives.
      The figures cover around 95 pct of Rotterdam traffic in the
  products concerned.
  

DONALD TRUMP SAID HE HAS AGREED TO PURCHASE CROSBY ESTATE'S RESORTS SHARES

  DONALD TRUMP SAID HE HAS AGREED TO PURCHASE CROSBY ESTATE'S RESORTS SHARES
  

U.K. AGRICULTURAL FUTURES MARKETS TO MERGE
  Three London markets which trade potato,
  soymeal and meat futures said they will merge to form a new
  Agricultural Futures Exchange.
      Legal advisers have been instructed to implement the
  amalgamation of the London Potato Futures Association, LPFA,
  the London Meat Futures Exchange, LMFE, and the Grain and Feed
  Trade Association's, GAFTA, Soya Bean Meal Futures Association,
  SOMFA. No timetable was given.
      Members of the three exchanges have been consulted,
  Agricultural Futures Exchange secretary Bill Englebright told
  Reuters, and no objections have been raised to the merger.
      Three markets are involved at present but the new exchange
  could ultimately combine five markets.
      Discussions are taking place with the Baltic International
  Freight Futures Exchange, BIFFEX, and the GAFTA London Grain
  Futures Market is considering the possibility of joining the
  other markets, market officials said.
      The BIFFEX board is expected to reach a decision on the
  merger at its meeting at the end of this month, after members
  are consulted at a meeting on March 16.
      The grain futures market also intends to consult its
  members soon, GAFTA director general James Mackie said.
      The aim of the amalgamation is to limit regulatory and
  administrative costs and achieve the recognition required under
  the 1986 Financial Services Act. This legislation requires a
  futures market to become a Recognised Investment Exchange, RIE,
  for trading to continue.
      Representatives of all the futures markets on the Baltic
  Exchange have been discussing the possibility of a single RIE
  structure since the beginning of the year.
      The new exchange now planned will apply to the Securities
  and Investments Board for recognition as an RIE "at the
  appropriate time," the Agricultural Futures Exchange said.
      "This commitment by the markets will enable progress to be
  made to develop a stronger and more effective exchange to the
  benefit of all those involved in the industry," the chairman of
  the formation committee, Pat Elmer, said.
      The merged markets will remain at the Baltic Exchange.
  

BSN &lt;BSN> SHARE SALE ADVANCES
  BSN Corp said its agreement to sell
  1,750,000 new common shares, or a 25 pct interest, to 31
  unaffiliated European institutional investors for 30.4 mln dlrs
  has become definitive.
      The company said closing is expected shortly after the
  filing of a registration statement with the Securities and
  Exchange Commission, which is expected to be made this month.
  

GENCORP&lt;GY> UNIT TO SELL LOS ANGELES TV STATION
  Gencorp said its RKO General
  subsidiary agreed to sell KHJ-TV in Los Angeles to Walt Disney
  Co &lt;DIS> for 217 mln dlrs cash plus working capital and other
  adjustments at closing.
      The company said under the agreement in principle, RKO's
  application to renew the station's broadcast license would be
  dismissed and the competing application of Fidelity Television
  would be granted. Disney would then acquire privately held
  Fidelity for about 103 mln dlrs and other adjustments.
      Renewal of the KHJ-TV license has been challenged in
  regulatory proceedings for more than 20 years.
      The deal is subject to prior approval by the Federal
  Communications Commission, the company said.
      Late in 1985, Gencorp cut a deal with Fidelity, a Los
  Angeles investor group, and Westinghouse Electric Corp &lt;WX> to
  settle the license proceedings and sell KHJ-TV for 313 mln
  dlrs, 70 pct of which would go to Westinghouse and the
  remainder to Fidelity. But on Jan 28, 1987, Westinghouse
  withdrew from the deal because the FCC would not approve it.
      In early 1986, Gencorp and RKO agreed to sell WOR-TV in
  Secaucus, N.J., to MCA Inc &lt;MCA> for 387 mln dlrs. The FCC has
  approved the transaction, but several parties have appealed.
      The FCC has not said when it would rule on the appeals,
  according to a spokemsan for Akron, Ohio-based Gencorp.
      Fidelity Television originally filed a competing
  application for the RKO license for KHJ, an independent
  station, in 1965.
      In 1980, the FCC disqualified RKO as licensee of WNAC-TV in
  Boston, citing anti-competitive trade practices and inaccurate
  financial reporting to the agency, causing renewals previously
  granted to RKO in New York, for WOR, and Los Angeles, for KHJ,
  to be denied.
  

BARCLAYS BANK SAID IT CUTTING BASE LENDING RATE TO 10.5 PCT FROM 11 PCT.

  BARCLAYS BANK SAID IT CUTTING BASE LENDING RATE TO 10.5 PCT FROM 11 PCT.
  

MIDLAND BANK SAID IT CUTTING ITS BASE RATE TO 10.5 PCT FROM 11 PCT.

  MIDLAND BANK SAID IT CUTTING ITS BASE RATE TO 10.5 PCT FROM 11 PCT.
  

IMATRON &lt;IMAT> SELLS STAKE TO MITSUI &lt;MITSY>
  Imatron Inc said
  Mitsui and Co Ltd of Japan has purchased a two mln dlr equity
  interest in Imatron at market price and was granted a 120-day
  option to make another two mln dlr investment at the same price.
      Imatron said Mitsui, the exclusive importer of Imatron's
  Ultrafast computed tomography scanners into Japan, is scheduled
  to take delivery of its first scanner next month for
  installation in a large cardiology center.
      It said it has entered into preliminary discussions with
  Mitsui on the formation of a joint venture to finance the
  accelerated development of Imatron's technology and its
  commercialization in Japan.
  

BLACK MINERS SUPPORT S. AFRICAN MINES TAKEOVER
  Thousands of black
  mineworkers roared support for a union proposal to seize
  control of South Africa's gold, uranium, platinum and coal
  mines if the owners refuse to improve conditions for migrant
  black workers.
      About 15,000 miners attended a rally here to endorse moves
  proposed by last week's annual meeting of the 200,000 strong
  National Union of Mineworkers (NUM).
      They also supported a proposal for a national strike at the
  end of this month if the owners refused to begin negotiations.
      Migrant workers from surrounding countries make up more
  than half of the labour force in the mines.
      It was not stated how the union would "seize control."
      The miners' leaders also demanded an end to the system of
  single sex hostels for migrant workers, to be replaced by
  housing schemes so that workers could live with their families.
      The crowd, one of the largest to attend a meeting since
  South Africa declared a state of emergency last June, also
  shouted approval of a proposal to work closely with
  anti-apartheid movements such as the United Democratic Front
  (UDF) which claims two mln members. They also shouted their
  support for a demand that jailed black nationalist leader
  Nelson Mandela be released.
  

A.H. ROBINS'S &lt;QRAH> JANUARY EARNINGS UP
  A. H. Robins Co, the drug company
  in bankruptcy proceedings due to litigation over its Dalkon
  Shield contraceptive device, reported consolidated net earnings
  for the month ended January 31 of 17.3 mln dlrs.
      In the corresponding year-ago period it reported net
  earnings of 13.8 mln dlrs.
      Robins said the filings were made with the U.S. trustee
  overseeing its chapter 11 bankruptcy case.
  

BARCLAYS, MIDLAND FOLLOW NATWEST BASE RATE CUT
  Barclays Bank Plc &lt;BCS.L> and Midland
  Bank Plc &lt;MDBL.L> said they are cutting their base lending
  rates to 10.5 pct from 11 pct. The cuts follow a similar move
  by National Westminster Bank Plc &lt;NWBL.L>
      The rate changes take effect tomorrow.
  

CONTROL DATA &lt;CDA> TO BUY PERIPHERALS STAKE
  Control Data Corp said it
  agreed to acquire Unisys Inc's &lt;UIS> 13 pct stake in &lt;Magnetic
  Peripherals Inc>.
      The letter of intent provides that Unisys converts from an
  owner in Magnetic Peripherals to a customer of Control Data's
  data storage products group over a two year period.
      Under the agreement, Control Data will continue to furnish
  disk drives to Unisys, it said.
      No other details of the proposed agreement were available.
      Magnetic Controls, managed by the data storage products
  group of Control Data, was founded in 1975 as a joint venture
  to maintain a technological base in data storage, and supply
  peripheral equipment for the computer systems of its owners.
      The venture has become a developer and manufacturer of high
  performance, high-capacity data storage products sold by
  Control Data to computer systems manafacturers worldwide, it
  said.
      After conversion of the Unisys interest, Control Data will
  own 80 pct, Honeywell Inc &lt;HON>, 14 pct and Bull S.A. of
  France, six pct, it said.
  

DONALD TRUMP TO BUY CROSBY RESORTS &lt;RTB> STOCK
  Casino hotel operator and real estate
  developer Donald Trump said he has agreed to purchase the Class
  B common stock of Resorts International Inc held by the family
  and estate of late Resorts chairman James Crosby for 135 dlrs
  per share.
      Trump said he is also considering a tender offer for
  remaining Class B shares at the same price but has no interest
  in Resorts' Class A shares.
      Trump said the shares he has agreed already to buy
  represent a 78 pct interest in the Class B stock. The estate
  itself owns 340,783 of the 752,297 Class B shares. There are
  also about 6,432,000 Class A shares outstanding, but Trump said
  "I have no interest in the Class A shares."
      Each Class B share has 100 times the voting power of a
  Class A share.
      In Atlantic City, Resorts said in a statement that the
  Class B shares being sold to Trump represents 73 pct of the
  combined voting power in Resorts.
      It said closing is dependent on receipt of necessary
  regulatory approvals and other matters, and after closing,
  Trump will tender for remaining Class B shares at the same
  price.
  

USAIR &lt;U> WINS COURT ORDER AGAINST TWA &lt;TWA>
  USAir Group Inc said a U.S. District
  Court in Pittsburgh issued a temporary restraining order to
  prevent Trans World Airlines Inc from buying additional USAir
  shares.
      USAir said the order was issued in response to its suit,
  charging TWA chairman Carl Icahn and TWA violated federal laws
  and made misleading statements.
      TWA last week said it owned 15 pct of USAir's shares. It
  also offered to buy the company for 52 dlrs a share cash or 1.4
  billion dlrs.
   More
  

GREASE MONKEY &lt;GMHC> GETS, REJECTS MERGER OFFER
  Grease Monkey Holding Corp said it has
  received and rejected an unsolicited merger offer from Jiffy
  Lube International Inc &lt;LUBE>.
      The company said the proposal involved an exchange of
  Grease Monkey common stock for a combination of Jiffy Lube
  securities with an estimated current value substantially below
  Grease Monkey's current market
   price.
      It said it will not disclosed details.
  

U.S. RULING ON BRAZIL FCOJ MAY COME TOMORROW
  A decision on final dumping duties on
  frozen orange juice from Brazil may not be issued until
  tomorrow, Commerce Department officials said.
      They said the department has until midnight tonight to set
  the duty but may not make the finding public until tomorrow.
      A preliminary duty of 8.54 pct was set October 17, 1986.
      The final ruling will be based on more detailed
  information, the officials said.
  

THAILAND ANNOUNCES THIRD TAPIOCA QUOTA FOR EC
  Thailand's Commerce Ministry announced a
  new tapioca export quota of 737,987 tonnes for the European
  Community against 762,860 tonnes for the previous allocation.
      The ministry said the fresh allocation, for the February
  27-July 7 shipment period, is the third under a maximum 5.5 mln
  tonne overall quota that Thailand obtained from the EC for
  calendar 1987.
      It said the quota allocation was based on a national
  tapioca pellet stock of 4.34 mln tonnes surveyed last week, up
  from 3.05 mln in mid-January.
  

CHRYSLER &lt;C> IN DEAL TO BUY AMC &lt;AMO>
  Chrysler Corp said it agreed in
  principle with French state-owned Renault to acquire American
  Motors Corp., in which Renault is controlling shareholder,
  under a deal in which AMC stockholders other than Renault would
  receive Chrysler common stock with a market value of four dlrs
  for each AMC common share they hold.
      Chrysler said the letter of intent for the deal, which
  needs government and AMC shareholder and board approval,
  provides that AMC holders will receive not more than .0840 or
  less than .0687 of a share of Chrysler common for each share of
  AMC common they hold.
   more
  

BARCLAYS, MIDLAND FOLLOW NATWEST BASE RATE CUT
  Barclays Bank Plc &lt;BCS.L> and Midland
  Bank Plc &lt;MDBL.L> said they are cutting their base lending
  rates to 10.5 pct from 11 pct. The cuts follow a similar move
  by National Westminster Bank Plc &lt;NWBL.L>
      The rate changes take effect tomorrow.
      The base rate reductions came after the Bank of England cut
  its dealing rates this morning in a signal to the money markets
  that it would not resist a half percentage point drop in bank
  base lending rates, market sources said.
      Until the end of last week, the central was holding out
  staunchly against market pressures for lower rates in an
  apparent effort to preserve the expected rate cuts for around
  the time of the government's annual Budget on March 17.
      Sterling remained firm around 1.59 dlrs compared with its
  close here on Friday at 1.5865 dlrs.
  

U.S. MINT SEEKING 4,784,000 LBS ZINC
  The U.S. Mint said it is seeking
  offers on 4,784,000 lbs of special high-grade zinc that it
  intends to purchase.
      It said selling offers will be due at 1100 hrs EST, March
  24.
      The Mint said two increments of 1,300,000 lbs each are for
  delivery the weeks of April 13 and april 20 to Ball Corp,
  Greeneville, Tenn., and two increments of 1,092,000 lbs each
  are to be delivered the weeks of April 20 and April 27 to
  LaSalle Rolling Mills, LaSalle, Ill.
      Firms, in submitting offers, may elect to receive payment
  from the Mint by standard check or by wire transfer. Awards
  will be based on whichever method is most cost advantageous to
  the goverment at the time the awards are determined.
      The offers will have a minimum acceptance period of 10
  calendar days, the Mint said.
  

CANADA BUILDING PERMITS RISE IN NOVEMBER
  Led by the non-residential sector,
  Canadian building permits issued in November rose 0.7 pct to
  2.18 billion dlrs, seasonally adjusted, from 2.16 billion dlrs
  in October, Statistics Canada said.
      Residential permits fell 3.9 pct to 1.25 billion dlrs from
  1.30 billion dlrs in October while the number of units approved
  fell to 17,552 from 19,079 units.
      The value of non-residential projects rose 7.6 pct to 927.6
  mln dlrs in the month.
  

DIXIE YARNS &lt;DXYN> TO ACQUIRE TI-CARO INC
  Dixie Yarns Inc and &lt;TI-CARO
  Inc> jointly said they signed a merger agreement calling for
  Dixie to acquire all TI-CARO's stock in exchange for three mln
  of Dixie's common.
      The companies said the previously announced merger has been
  approved by TI-CARO's board and is expected to close by early
  April.
      They said the revenues of the combined companies will be
  over 600 mln dlrs, and Dixie said the merger will not dilute
  its 1987 results. TI-CARO was taken private in 1984 in a
  management led leveraged buy-out.
  

U.S. HAS TO MIDNIGHT TO SET ORANGE JUICE DUTIES
  A decision on final dumping duties on
  frozen orange juice from Brazil may not be issued until
  tomorrow, Commerce Department officials said.
      They said the department has until midnight tonight to set
  the duty, but may not make the finding public until tomorrow.
      A preliminary duty of 8.54 pct was set last Oct. 17.
      The final duty will be based on more detailed information,
  the officials said.
  

ATPC MEMBERS FIND WAYS TO CURB TIN EXPORTS
  Mine and industry officials from
  most member states of the Association of Tin Producing
  Countries (ATPC) say they have found ways to limit group
  exports to 96,000 tonnes in the year started March 1, according
  to views polled by Reuter correspondents.
      The plan to curb exports, agreed in January, is aimed at
  cutting the world surplus to 50,000 tonnes from 70,000 now and
  boosting prices to about 19 ringgit a kilo from just over 16.
      Members of the seven-member Kuala Lumpur-based ATPC account
  for some 65 pct of the world's tin output.
      Under the ATPC plan, Malaysia has been allocated an export
  quota of 28,526 tonnes, Indonesia 24,516, Thailand 19,000,
  Bolivia 13,761, Zaire 1,736 and Nigeria 1,461.
      Australia has said it is not setting any export quota.
  However, the tonnage allocated to it, 7,000 tonnes, is roughly
  equal to its expected output this year.
      Comment from officials in Zaire was unavailable.
      Mine officials in Malaysia, the world's leading producer,
  said only 188 mines will be allowed to operate to ensure that
  output is limited to around 31,500 tonnes in the year started
  March 1.
      Chief Inspector of Mines Redzuan Sumun told Reuters that
  excess output of some 3,000 tonnes after exports of 28,500 in
  the one-year quota period would be kept in the national stock.
      Mine owners in Malaysia have welcomed the ATPC export curb
  and asked the government not to issue new mining licences. More
  than 100 applications for licences are pending.
      Redzuan said the Mines Department would approve new mining
  licences only if a six-month review of production trends showed
  that local mines were not overproducing.
      ATPC chairman and Indonesia's Mining and Energy Minister
  Subroto has pledged his country's support for the export curb.
      A spokesman for the state-owned tin mining company PT
  Tambang Timah told Reuters it would be easy for Indonesia to
  stick to an export quota of 24,516 tonnes because this was
  close to exports in calendar 1986 of 24,636.
      In Bangkok, Thai Industry Minister Pramual Sabhavasu said
  Thailand would keep to its 19,000 tonne quota and added this
  would not cause the local industry hardship at current prices.
      To insure adherence, the industry ministry and sole tin
  exporter Thailand Smelting and Refining Co would encourage
  bigger stockpiles, and income tax exemptions would be
  permitted, he said.
      The Thai Mineral Resources Department is expected to
  disallow new tin mines opening this year to prevent excessive
  production, industry sources said.
      But Mining Industry Council President Dam Teutong told
  Reuters that if the tin price rose above 18 ringgit a kilo,
  Thai miners would press for the opening of more new mines.
      Thailand exported 18,367 tonnes in 1986, up from 17,359 in
  1985, Pramual said.
      Bolivia said it expects to export less tin this year than
  its allocated 13,761 tonne quota.
      Mining Minister Jaimie Villalobos told Reuters in La Paz
  that Bolivia expected to export about 9,000 tonnes of tin in
  calendar 1987.
      He said this was due to the sacking after the tin crisis of
  October 1985 of about 20,000 of the 28,000 workers at the state
  mining company Comibol, which produces more than 80 pct of
  Bolivia's total exports.
      He said there were risks in the ATPC plan to cut exports
  but added he was confident the goals set by the plan would be
  achieved. He did not elaborate.
      Mines, Power and Steel Minister Bunu Sheriff Musa said in
  Lagos that Nigeria would have no difficulty keeping within its
  ATPC quota of 1,461 tonnes because its metals output had
  declined due to poor demand and high production costs.
      Industry sources told Reuters that Nigeria's output was
  less than 1,000 tonnes last year.
      ATPC officials said they would monitor member countries'
  export figures every three months using customs documents and
  make projections from such data to see if quotas were likely to
  be breached within the year-long quota period.
      The ATPC officials said members that appeared likely to
  breach their quotas would be told to take remedial measures.
      They added that if member countries were unable to fulfil
  their quotas their extra tonnage would be reallocated to other
  members at the ATPC's discretion.
      The ATPC would have produced and exported an estimated
  106,000 tonnes of tin in 1987 without the plan.
      Non-members Brazil and China have pledged to cooperate with
  the ATPC and limit their exports to 21,000 and 7,000 tonnes
  respectively during the quota period.
  

GALE FORCE WINDS BUFFET GREAT LAKES
  The National Weather Service said
  warnings of gale force winds remained in effect over lakes
  Erie, Huron and Michigan.
      Also, warnings have been posted for large waves and beach
  erosion along the shores of the Lakes. Winds gusting to 45 mph
  caused four to six foot waves along the western and southern
  shores of Lake Michigan during the morning.
      Advisories for low wind chill temperatures have also been
  posted across portions of upper Michigan and northern lower
  Michigan. Early morning gusty winds brought the wind chill to
  15 and 25 degrees below zero.
      Freezing rain was scattered over central Colorado by mid
  morning, also over central Kansas and northeast Illinois.
      Snow reached from south central Montana across Wyoming,
  western Nebraska and western Kansas. Snow also extended across
  northern Wisconsin, upper Michigan and northern lower Michigan.
      Rain reached along the northern Pacific Coast, across
  northwest Utah, Maryland, Deleware, Virginia, the Carolinas,
  Georgia and northern Alabama.
  

U.K. ISSUES ONE BILLION STG BOND TRANCHE
  The Bank of England said it was taking
  onto its books a further one billion stg tranche of 8-3/4 pct
  Treasury Loan stock due 1997, payable 40 stg pct on
  application. The stock was issued to the Bank at 96.50 stg pct
  and will be available for dealings from March 11, with the
  remainder of the amount payable on May 5. The Bank said the
  bonds would yield 9.28 pct at the issue price and would be free
  of tax to residents overseas. The issue would be designated
  8-3/4 pct Treasury Loan 1997 "B."  A further 100 mln stg was
  reserved for the National Debt Commissioners.
      The market dropped by up to 1/2 point following the Bank's
  announcement, with the Treasury 13-1/2 pct stock due 2004/08
  quoted one full point lower at 134-12/32 stg pct around 20
  minutes after the news.
      Dealers said the announcement had to be viewed against the
  backdrop of intense pressure for lower U.K. Interest rates
  which had built up over the past two weeks as a result of
  sterling's strength.
      The Bank this morning finally signalled it was prepared to
  see lower rates and U.K. Clearing banks this afternoon
  announced cuts in their base lending rates to 10.5 pct from 11
  pct.
      The Bank had initially been reluctant to countenance a rate
  cut because, dealers said, the authorities had wished to delay
  a reduction until around the time of the U.K. Budget on March
  17, thereby preserving the full impact of Chancellor of the
  Exchequer Nigel Lawson's package of measures.
      However, in the face of sterling's apparently inexorable
  climb, the authorities today decided to cede to pressure and
  allow a half-point cut.
      Today's one billion stg tap issue was viewed by the market
  as a move by the Bank to eradicate hopes for a further early
  rate cut which might arise as a result of strong sterling.
      Most market participants believe that Lawson will now
  foster a further half point interest rate reduction at the time
  of the budget, although one or two said they would not be
  surprised to see a full point decline at this stage.
      Dealers noted that as part of the authorities' attempts
  last week to ease pressure for lower rates, the Bank had issued
  a one billion stg tap stock with a view to subduing the
  Government bond market.
      To the surprise of most participants, the issue was sold
  out within hours of becoming available for trading and the
  market pushed on to register further sharp gains.
      Dealers said that at this stage it seemed unlikely that the
  issue announced today would be absorbed by the market as
  rapidly as last week's.
      However, they noted that although sterling had edged down
  from its highs following the base rate cut, it had still closed
  on a trade-weighted basis at 72.4, well ahead of Friday's final
  71.8 and only just beneath the peak of 72.5 touched at 1300
  GMT.
  

AMC SAYS IT IS "STUDYING" CHRYSLER BUYOUT PROPOSAL AND WILL COMMENT WHEN "APPROPRIATE"

  AMC SAYS IT IS "STUDYING" CHRYSLER BUYOUT PROPOSAL AND WILL COMMENT WHEN "APPROPRIATE"
  

PETRO-CANADA TO DRILL TWO TERRA NOVA TEST WELLS
  Petro-Canada, Canada's
  state-owned oil company, said it will drill two delineation
  wells this summer at the Terra Nova oil field offshore
  Newfoundland.
      Evaluation of test results and preliminary engineering work
  should put Petro-Canada in a position to propose a development
  plan for the Terra Nova field in 1988, the company said.
      Depending on time required for regulatory approvals,
  construction could begin in 1989, with first oil production as
  early as 1991, Petro-Canada said.
      "We have a high degree of confidence that the western
  portion of the (Terra Nova) field contains at least 11 mln
  cubic meters of recoverable oil, or more than 70 mln barrels,
  and that we could produce it economicly using a floating
  production system," Petro-Canada said.
      The Terra-Nova field, lying 350 kilometers east of St.
  John's and 35 kilometers southeast of Hibernia field, was
  discovered by Petro-Canada in 1984.
      "We've had encouraging results from the eastern portion of
  the field, and we hope this summer's drilling will prove up
  additional reserves there," the company said.
      Petro-Canada believes Terra Nova field is a good commercial
  prospect and the company wants to move some of those resources
  towards development so it can start generating a return on
  investments, Petro-Canada said.
      Petro-Canada, which will act as operator of the two wells,
  has a 75 pct interest in the western portion of Graven block of
  the Terra Nova field and a 26 pct interest in the field's East
  Flank block, a company spokesman said later. Other field
  participants include Canterra Energy Ltd, Mobil Oil Canada Ltd,
  Gulf Canada Resources Inc, ICG Resources Ltd, Trillium
  Exploration Corp and general partnership PAREX.
      Petro-Canada estimates reserves in the Terra Nova field's
  Graven block of between 68 mln and 70 mln barrels of oil,
  company spokesman Bob Foulkes said from Petro-Canada's Calgary
  office.
      Combined reserves for Graven Block and the field's East
  Flank block are estimated between 70 mln and 130 mln barrels,
  he added.
      Petro-Canada expects to spend about 500 mln Canadian dlrs
  to bring the field to production by about 1991, and the
  development budget could double if the company builds a
  production system combining both blocks in the field, he said.
      Petro-Canada estimates the Terra Nova field Graven block
  would produce between 25,000 and 26,000 barrels average daily
  production, with a production system that would have maximum
  capacity of 40,000 bpd, company spokesman Foulkes said in
  answer to a query.
      The company estimates a production system combining both
  Graven and East Flank blocks in the Terra Nova field could
  produce about 45,000 bpd average daily production, he said.
  

CHARAN SEES AT LEAST 50 PCT RISE IN 1987 PROFIT
  (Charan Industries Inc), a distributor
  of toys and other consumer products, expects 1987 net profit to
  rise at least 50 pct over last year's 6.1 mln dlrs, president
  Earl Takefman told reporters before the annual meeting.
      "We grew basically 100 pct last year, I'm not sure we're
  going to be able to grow 100 pct again this year but we
  certainly will grow at least 50 pct over last year," Takefman
  said.
      Charan reported profit of 3.0 mln dlrs in 1985.
      Takefman said he expects sales to rise to about 100 mln
  dlrs this year from 57.3 mln dlrs in 1986.
      Fiscal 1985 ended September 30, while fiscal 1986 ended
  November 30.
      Takefman said the company is actively looking for
  acquisitions in the consumer products industry, likely in
  Canada.
      The company said it expects to resolve delivery problems
  this year which last year hindered the growth of its toy
  distribution business, which accounts for about one-third of
  revenues.
      Charan is the exclusive distributor in Canada for &lt;Worlds
  of Wonder> toys, which include the Teddy Ruxpin voice-activated
  talking plush bear.
      Takefman said new products this year, which will be on the
  shelves for Christmas, include a smaller version of Teddy
  Ruxpin, a talking Mickey Mouse toy, dancing plush toys, a doll
  with a voice activated by sound, touch, light and heat, and
  talking books.
      The company is also marketing an extended line of "laser
  tag" kits, which shoot rays of light and tell you when you've
  hit someone.
      Other products include a recorder device which allows
  students to leave taped messages in each others' school
  lockers, retailing for about 60 dlrs.
  

MAYFAIR SUPER MARKETS &lt;MYFRA> SALES INCREASED
  Mayfair Super Markets said its
  sales for the second qtr ended Feb 28 were 122.0 mln dlrs, an
  increase of more than 15 pct compared to sales of 105.9 mln
  dlrs in the comparable quarter last year.
      The company said sales for the first six months of the year
  were 242.0 mln dlrs, more than 15 pct above the 210.1 mln dlrs
  reported in the same period last year.
      This was the 12th consecutive quarterly gain, the company
  said.  The company said it expects to release earnings in
  April.
  

SOUTH KOREA TO HOLD CURRENT ACCOUNT SURPLUS DOWN
  South Korea plans to take steps to keep
  its 1987 current account surplus below five billion dlrs,
  Economic Planning Board Minister Kim Mahn-je said.
      Kim told reporters the government would repay loans ahead
  of schedule and encourage firms to increase imports and
  investment abroad to prevent the current account surplus from
  rising too quickly.
      Last year South Korea's current account surplus was 4.65
  billion dlrs. It widened to 622 mln dlrs in January from 484
  mln in December and compared with a deficit of 334 mln in
  January 1986, Bank of Korea figures show.
  

PPG INDUSTRIES &lt;PPG> SELLS ETHYLENE INTERESTS
  PPG Industries Inc said a group of
  investors led by &lt;Sterling Group> of Houston said it has agreed
  to acquire PPG's ethylene products business, including its
  inteest in an ethylene glycols joint venture with du Pont Co
  &lt;DD> in Beaumont, Texas, for undisclosed terms.
      The company said completion is expected in the second
  quarter.
      It said the business had sales of over 50 mln dlrs in 1986.
  

FED EXPECTED TO ADD TEMPORARY RESERVES
  The Federal Reserve is expected to
  intervene in the government securities market to add temporary
  reserves via customer repurchase agreements, economists said.
      Most economists said the Fed will add 1.5 to two billion
  dlrs of temporary reserves via customer repurchase agreements,
  but some said there is a slim chance the Fed will inject
  permanent reserves via three-day system repurchase agreements.
      Federal funds opened at 6-1/16 pct and firmed to 6-1/8 pct
  in early trading. Funds averaged six pct on Friday.
  

BARCLAYS, MIDLAND FOLLOW NATWEST BASE RATE CUT
  Barclays Bank Plc &lt;BCS.L> and Midland
  Bank Plc &lt;MDBL.L> said they are cutting their base lending
  rates to 10.5 pct from 11 pct. The cuts follow a similar move
  by National Westminster Bank Plc &lt;NWBL.L>
      The rate changes take effect tomorrow.
      The base rate reductions came after the Bank of England cut
  its dealing rates this morning in a signal to the money markets
  that it would not resist a half percentage point drop in bank
  base lending rates, market sources said.
      Until the end of last week, the central was holding out
  staunchly against market pressures for lower rates in an
  apparent effort to preserve the expected rate cuts for around
  the time of the government's annual Budget on March 17.
      Sterling remained firm around 1.59 dlrs compared with its
  close here on Friday at 1.5865 dlrs.
  

UNITED AUTO WORKERS UNION SAYS IT SUPPORTS CHRYSLER-AMC MERGER

  UNITED AUTO WORKERS UNION SAYS IT SUPPORTS CHRYSLER-AMC MERGER
  

LLOYDS BANK MATCHES BASE RATE CUT TO 10.5 PCT
  Lloyds Bank Plc &lt;LLOY.L> said it is
  cutting its base lending rate to 10.5 pct from 11 pct,
  effective tomorrow.
      The reduction follows similar moves from the three other
  British clearing banks.
      National Westminster Bank Plc &lt;NWBL.L> led the way this
  morning after the Bank of England lowered its dealing rates in
  a signal that it would tolerate a half percentage point
  reduction.
      The central bank's surprise signal followed its strenuous
  efforts last week to prevent market forces from bringing down
  base rates before the U.K. Budget on March 17.
  

NORCROS BREAKS OFF MERGER TALKS WITH WILLIAMS
  Norcros &lt;NCRO.L> Plc said it has no
  intention of proceeding any further with talks on Williams
  Holdings Plc's suggestion that there would be benefits arising
  from a merger between the two groups.
      Norcros said any such benefits could be achieved through
  normal trading and did not warrant a closer formal association.
      Norcros shares firmed 30p to 342p after the news on
  investor speculation of a possible hostile bid from Williams,
  dealers said. Williams rose 2p to 742.
      Williams earlier informed Norcros that it holds some
  2,890,000 of its ordinary shares or 2.2 pct of those issued.
  

DUTCH OILSEEDS/FATS IMPORTS ROSE IN 1986
  and oil-bearing
  raw materials, fats and oils rose to 2.16 mln tonnes on a
  fat/oil basis in 1986 from 2.12 mln tonnes in 1985, the
  Commodity Board for Margarine, Fats and Oils said.
      Exports of the same commodities fell to 1.35 mln tonnes
  from 1.38 mln on a fat-oil basis.
      Fat- and oil-bearing raw materials imports rose to 760,000
  from 709,200 tonnes on a fat/oil basis and to 3.47 mln tonnes
  actual weight from 3.32 mln.
      Soyabeans were the main component, with imports rising to
  2.82 mln tonnes actual weight from 2.75 mln. Sunflowerseed
  imports fell to 308,200 from 342,900 tonnes while rapeseed
  imports rose to 292,000 from 201,400 tonnes.
      Exports of fat- and oil-bearing raw materials rose to
  28,700 tonnes from 19,800 on a fat/oil basis and to 137,200
  from 89,900 tonnes actual weight.
      Soyabean exports rose to 119,400 tonnes actual weight from
  73,200 tonnes.
      Imports of vegetable fats, including palm oil, rose to
  445,400 tonnes from 362,500 and exports to 151,500 from
  139,800.
      Vegetable oil imports fell to 227,500 tonnes in 1986 from
  286,300 in 1985, and exports to 661,400 from 683,400 tonnes.
      Soyabean oil imports were 32,000 (48,200), sunflower oil
  61,600 (92,800), rape oil 82,900 (94,900) and groundnut oil
  9,300 (12,200). Exports of soybean oil were 325,900 (338,800),
  sun oil 172,100 (189,800), rape oil 114,300 (103,400) and
  groundnut oil 7,000 (10,400).
      Animal fat imports rose to 371,700 from 345,800 tonnes and
  exports to 124,100 tonnes from 113,000. Fishoil imports fell to
  190,600 from 265,600 and exports to 56,500 from 85,500 tonnes.
   reuter...
  

LLOYDS BANK MATCHES BASE RATE CUT TO 10.5 PCT
  Lloyds Bank Plc &lt;LLOY.L> said it is
  cutting its base lending rate to 10.5 pct from 11 pct,
  effective tomorrow.
      The reduction follows similar moves from the three other
  British clearing banks.
      National Westminster Bank Plc &lt;NWBL.L> led the way this
  morning after the Bank of England lowered its dealing rates in
  a signal that it would tolerate a half percentage point
  reduction.
      The central bank's surprise signal followed its strenuous
  efforts last week to prevent market forces from bringing down
  base rates before the U.K. Budget on March 17.
  

LESS GRAIN FLOWS INTO WEST GERMAN INTERVENTION
  The West German Intervention Board said
  it accepted 962,192 tonnes of grain from the start of the
  current agricultural year to the end of last month, compared
  with 1.8 mln tonnes during the July/February period in 1985/86.
      It said it accepted 336,097 tonnes of bread wheat (nil in
  the year-earlier period), 16,818 (nil) tonnes of high quality
  wheat, 33,623 (523,625) tonnes of feed wheat, 3,426 (168,682)
  tonnes of rye, 88,494 (32,766) tonnes of high quality rye,
  2,313 (105,005) tonnes of summer barley and 481,421 (972,794)
  tonnes of winter barley.
  

LLOYDS BANK MATCHES BASE RATE CUT TO 10.5 PCT
  Lloyds Bank Plc said it is cutting its
  base lending rate to 10.5 pct from 11 pct, effective tomorrow.
      The reduction follows similar moves from the three other
  British clearing banks.
      National Westminster Bank Plc led the way this morning
  after the Bank of England lowered its dealing rates in a signal
  that it would tolerate a half percentage point reduction.
      The central bank's surprise signal followed its strenuous
  efforts last week to prevent market forces from bringing down
  base rates before the U.K. Budget on March 17.
  

FRENCH 13-WEEK T-BILL AVERAGE RATE FALLS TO 7.37 PCT FROM 7.69 PCT - OFFICIAL

  FRENCH 13-WEEK T-BILL AVERAGE RATE FALLS TO 7.37 PCT FROM 7.69 PCT - OFFICIAL
  

LITTLE MOVEMENT ON HAMBURG FISHMEAL MARKET
  The Hamburg fishmeal market saw little
  movement in the past week with demand slack as in other protein
  feed sectors, trade sources said.
      Prices edged up on firmer origin offering levels and the
  stronger dollar. Sellers quoted 64 pct fishmeal at between 640
  and 650 marks per tonne free on truck for spot and between 630
  and 640 marks for April/Dec.
      International demand was also slow but some inquiries from
  Far Eastern buyers were noted in South American producer
  countries, the sources said.
      Chile is said to have good catches in northern and southern
  fishing grounds, with offers unchanged at 330 dlrs per tonne c
  and f North German ports.
      Peru's catches differ regionally and stocks are low.
  Sellers quoted a nominal offering level of 320 dlrs per tonne c
  and f north German ports. Ecuador was not in the market and
  catches are said to be poor.
      Denmark has seasonally low catches, with 72 pct meal
  offered at 315 crowns per 100 kilos cif North European ports
  for April/Oct deliveries. Iceland has good catches and sellers
  quoted a price of 5.45 dlrs per percentage point protein cif
  North European ports. Norway was not in the market.
  

UK MONEY RATES FALL AS BANK APPROVES BASE RATE CUT
  A half point cut in base lending rates
  was announced by the big four clearing banks today after the
  Bank of England finally endorsed such a move following weeks of
  downward pressure, dealers said.
      During its routine intervention in the market, the bank
  trimmed the rates at which it deals with the discount houses by
  half a point and National Westminster led the other clearing
  banks in reducing its base rate to 10-1/2 pct from 11 pct.
      The timing of the Bank of England move took operators by
  surprise after its recent action seemingly designed to dampen
  hopes of a base rate cut ahead of the U.K. Budget on March 17.
         For some time, fundamentals have
  led the market to push for a one point cut in base lending
  rates to 10 pct but the central bank has declined to follow
  wholesale money market rates down.
      Although political considerations -- the government's wish
  to see a fall in base rates coincide with the Budget -- had
  been suggested by operators last week as reasons for the Bank's
  delaying action, worries about the real strength of sterling
  and perhaps about the market's reaction to the content of the
  Budget may have been behind the central bank's caution, dealers
  said.
      In the event, sterling continued firm after the rate cut,
  leaving the market still looking for another half point fall.
      Consequently, rates in the money market eased during the
  day, one-month interbank sterling shedding 5/16 point to
  10-9/16 7/16 and three-months trading 1/16 point down at
  10-5/16 3/16 pct. Sterling cd's were similarly down between
  5/16 point in one month and 1/8 point in one year.
      Overnight interbank money for tomorrow was indicated at
  around 11 pct, almost a point below the levels ruling at the
  end of last week. Today, overnight touched a high of some
  11-3/4 pct after the Bank took out 228 mln stg of an estimated
  300 mln stg shortage.
  

GRAIN CERTIFICATE REDEMPTIONS PUT AT 240 MLN BU
  Over 240 mln bushels of government
  grain have been allocated in redemptions for commodity
  certificates since the program began April 30, according to the
  Commodity Credit Corporation.
      Redemptions included 11.4 mln bushels of corn valued at
  17.0 mln dlrs, or an average per-bushel price of 1.492 dlrs,
  since the current grain catalogs were issued December 1 by CCC.
      Wheat redemptions totaled 9.6 mln bushels, valued at 23.7
  mln dlrs, since December 1.
   More
  

AMC &lt;AMO> STUDYING CHRYSLER &lt;C> PROPOSAL
  American Motors Corp said it
  is studying a proposed merger with Chrysler Corp.
      American Motors said it received a letter from Chrysler
  Corp "advising us of their proposal to enter into a merger
  transaction with American Motors Corp."
      In a brief statement, the company said, "We are studying
  the proposal. We will have further comment when it is
  appropriate."
  

CHINA'S HEILONGJIANG PROVINCE BOOSTS GOLD OUTPUT
  Gold output in the northeast China
  province of Heilongjiang rose 22.7 pct in 1986 from 1985's
  level, the New China News Agency said. It gave no figures.
      It said the province, China's second largest gold producer
  after Shandong, plans to double gold output by 1990 from the
  1986 level. China does not publish gold production figures.
      However, industry sources estimate output at about 65
  tonnes a year, with exports put between 11 and 31 tonnes.
      China is selling more gold abroad to offset large trade
  deficits in recent years, western diplomats said.
  

WALL STREET STOCKS/AMERICAN EXPRESS &lt;AXP>
  American Express Co's stock fell
  sharply, reflecting, in part, investors' disappointment that
  the company did not make an announcement about its plans for
  brokerage unit Shearson Lehman Brothers, traders said.
      The company has said it is studying options for its
  Shearson unit. Traders said many investors anticipated an
  announcement this weekend that it would spin off Shearson
  Lehman. Also, they said, a flurry of arbitrage related sell
  programs that pounded the general market today accelerated the
  selloff of American Express, a component of the Dow Industrial
  Average. American Express fell 3-1/8 to 77-3/8.
      "It was part programs and part that there was anticipation
  of an announcement of a spinoff or something with Shearson this
  weekend, and that announcement never happened," one trader
  said.
      In the last few minutes of trading on Friday, another
  trader said, the stock jumped to close up 3-3/8, largely on
  anticipation that the company would make a weekend
  announcement.
  

RANGER &lt;RGO> COMPLETES U.S. PROPERTY SALE
  Ranger Oil Ltd said it
  completed on March 2 the previously announced sale of its U.S.
  oil and gas properties held by subsidiaries Ranger Oil Co and
  Ranger Inc to Ampol Exploration Ltd, of Australia, for 18.5 mln
  U.S. dlrs.
      Ranger said that under the deal, it would retain a five pct
  gross overriding royalty on its stake from blocks east cameron
  65 and 82 in the Gulf of Mexico offshore Lousiana.
      It said the sale did not include U.S. properties acquired
  from &lt;Berkeley Exploration and Production PLC> last December.
  

AMOCO'S FIRST SOUTH CHINA SEA EXPLORATORY WELL FLOWS 2,240 BARRELS OF OIL DAILY

  AMOCO'S FIRST SOUTH CHINA SEA EXPLORATORY WELL FLOWS 2,240 BARRELS OF OIL DAILY
  

TRADERS SAY USDA MAY LOWER ORANGE CROP ESTIMATE
  The U.S. Department of Agriculture will
  probably decrease its estimate of the 1986/87 Florida orange
  crop today to as low as 123 mln boxes from 129 mln boxes,
  analysts and industry sources said.
      The Department is scheduled to release the new estimate at
  1500 hrs EST (2100 gmt) today.
      Analysts said the market is anticipating a downward
  revision and much of the bullish impact has been discounted.
      The estimate, which the USDA has left unchanged since
  October, should be affected this time by recent evidence of a
  shortfall in the early and midseason crop now that those
  harvests are complete. Analysts said based on earlier USDA
  projections, the harvests should have been five to seven mln
  boxes larger than they were.
      "They are going to cut their estimate," said Bob Tate, an
  FCOJ broker with Dean Witter Reynolds in Miami. "The only
  question is whether they will admit the whole thing in this
  estimate."
      Tate said it is possible the USDA will lower its estimate
  by a lesser amount, perhaps three mln boxes, and continue to
  drop the estimate in subsequent reports as the crop picture
  clarifies. The late season harvest, consisting mostly of
  Valencia oranges, has not yet started, he noted.
      "They'll temper it," said Judy Weissman, FCOJ analyst with
  Shearson Lehman Bros. "The main drop will probably come in
  July."
      She expects today's estimate will be 126 mln boxes.
  

SALE TILNEY BUYS STAKE IN U.S. INSURANCE BROKER
  &lt;Sale Tilney Plc> said it has purchased
  80 pct of the ordinary share capital of &lt;B and R International
  Inc.>, a U.S. Insurance broker, for 5.6 mln dlrs.
      Sale is paying 3.6 mln dlrs in cash on completion, with the
  balance plus interest to be paid in equal instalments over the
  next six years.
      B and R posted pretax profit of 855,000 dlrs in the year to
  Dec 31, 1986 when it had net tangible assets of 563,000 dlrs.
  

UAW SAYS IT BACK CHRYSLER &lt;C>, AMC &lt;AMO> MERGER
  The United Auto Workers &lt;UAW> union said
  it supports Chrysler Corp's proposal to buy American Motors
  Corp as creating "a good match that potentially points the way
  to a more secure future for workers at both companies."
      "We believe our members' interests can be well served
  within the Chrysler family, and we are committed to making that
  happen," UAW president Owen Bieber and vice president Marc
  Stepp said in a statement.
      "We believe Chrysler's purchase is a logical and sound step
  for all concerned," the union said.
      The UAW is negotiating with AMC over the carmaker's demand
  for economic concessions covering workers at its Wisconsin
  operations, without which AMC has said it would cease vehicle
  production at its Kenosha, Wisconsin, assembly plant by 1989.
  

TWA &lt;TWA> DECLINES COMMENT ON USAIR &lt;U>
  A Transworld Airlines Inc official said
  the airline has no comment on USAir Group Inc's planned buyout
  of Piedmont Aviation Inc.
      TWA, however, has pursued its application with the
  Department of Transportation for a takeover of USAir, according
  to Mark Buckstein, TWA general counsel and vice president. TWA
  filed a revised application today, following the DOT's
  rejection Friday of an incomplete application filed last week.
      Earlier USAir said it agreed to buy Piedmont for 69 dlrs
  cash per share.
  

MOODY'S MAY DOWNGRADE PIEDMONT AVIATION &lt;PIE> 
  Moody's Investors Service Inc said it
  may downgrade 120 mln dlrs of debt of Piedmont Aviation Inc
  because of the airline's agreement to be acquired by USAir
  Group Inc &lt;U>.
      The rating agency said its review would focus on the effect
  of the acquisition on Piedmont's financial leverage and its
  debt-service requirements. Moody's said it is also examining
  the potential use of the airline's borrowing capacity to
  finance the merger.
      Piedmont currently carries Baa-2 preferred stock and
  Prime-2 commercial paper.
  

RUBBER PRODUCERS, CONSUMERS START NEW PACT TALKS
  The chairman of the conference on a new
  International Natural Rubber Agreement (INRA), Manaspas Xuto of
  Thailand, said it was imperative to try to settle the main
  outstanding issues this week.
      The INRA renegotiation conference, which resumed today
  under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade
  and Development (UNCTAD), is scheduled to last until March 20.
      Xuto told delegates this session of the conference
  presented a promising opportunity to conclude a new pact but it
  had to be the last before the current accord expires in
  October.
      Xuto said in his consultations with representatives of
  major exporting and importing countries over the last few
  months, "I have found a constructive attitude and willingness to
  be flexible on the part of all concerned."
      "It is imperative that we try to settle the major
  outstanding issues in the course of this week, since a
  considerable amount of technical drafting work will remain to
  be completed." He said he will immediately start consultations
  with producers and consumers.
      The last October negotiations collapsed in disagreement
  over buffer stock operations.
      Consumer demands for tighter buffer stock controls, aimed
  at preventing INRA from following the collapse of the
  International Tin Agreement (ITA), were rejected by producers
  who argued for unchanged INRA terms.
      The tin pact failed when its buffer stock manager ran out
  of funds to support prices.
      Three previous rounds of talks between rubber producers and
  consumers for a new five-year pact ended without agreement. The
  INRA, originally due to expire in October 1985, was extended to
  October 1987 to facilitate renegotiation.
      Wong Kum Choon, head of the Malaysian delegation, said he
  was cautiously optimistic "that together we should be able to
  save INRA and prevent it from being scuttled."
      Without INRA, he added, prices of natural rubber would
  become more volatile.
      Calling on delegates to show a sense of purpose and
  reality, he said, "There is no reason why we could not put aside
  differences and come up with a successor agreement."
  

USAIR &lt;U> AND UNIT REMAIN UNDER MOODY'S REVIEW
  Moody's Investors Service Inc said the
  212.75 mln dlrs of debt of USAir Group Inc and its USAir Inc
  unit remain under review for possible downgrade.
      The rating agency cited USAir Group's proposed acquisition
  of Piedmont Aviation Inc &lt;PIE>, as well as Trans World Airlines
  Inc's &lt;TWA> proposed cash merger with USAir.
      However, the status of TWA's bid for USAir Group is
  currently uncertain. The U.S. Transportation Department has
  rejected TWA's application to acquire USAir on deficiency
  grounds, but TWA has said it will file a revised application,
  Moody's noted.
      Under Moody's review for possible downgrade are USAir
  Group's Baa-1 senior debt and Baa-2 subordinated debentures,
  along with the USAir unit's A-3 senior debt and Baa-1
  subordinated debentures.
      Moody's said it would examine the effects of the proposed
  mergers on USAir Group's financial measurements, as well as
  potential damage to the company's financial flexibility because
  of the probability of increased debt-service requirements.
  

FED SETS 2.5 BILLION DLR CUSTOMER REPURCHASE, FED SAYS

  FED SETS 2.5 BILLION DLR CUSTOMER REPURCHASE, FED SAYS
  

BALLY &lt;BLY> TO TAKE 17.3 MLN DLR 1ST QTR CHARGE
  Bally Manufacturing Corp said it
  expects a charge to earnings in the first quarter of this year
  of 17.3 mln dlrs as a result of its deal to buy back 2.6 mln of
  its common shares from real estate developer Donald Trump.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  the Chicago-based hotel, casino, gambling and amusement concern
  also said the anticipated charge against first quarter earnings
  will not be deductible for federal income tax purposes.
      Under a February 21 deal, Bally agreed to buy 2.6 mln of
  the 3.06 mln shares held by Trump at 24 dlrs a share, or 62.4
  mln dlrs, while Trump agreed not to try to seek control of
  Bally.
      The agreement also calls for Bally to pay Trump another 6.2
  mln dlrs for certain agreements, claims and expenses related to
  his purchase of the Bally common stock, Bally said.
      Trump agreed not to buy any more Bally stock or to try to
  seek control of the company for 10 years, it said.
      Bear, Stearns and Co Inc signed a similar standstill
  agreement with Bally for three years, Bally said. But it can
  still deal in Bally stock as a broker, it said.
      The deal also obligates Bally to buy Trump's remaining
  stake in the company for 33 dlrs a share if the stock price
  does not reach that level by February 21, 1988, it said.
  

SHELL CANADA SAID IT RAISED CRUDE PRICES BY 47 CANADIAN CTS A BARREL TODAY

  SHELL CANADA SAID IT RAISED CRUDE PRICES BY 47 CANADIAN CTS A BARREL TODAY
  

HUDSON BAY MINING CUTS U.S., CANADA ZINC PRICES
  Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Co Ltd
  said it cut prices for all grades of zinc sold in North America
  by one U.S. cent a pound and by one Canadian cent a pound,
  effective immediately.
      The new price for high grade zinc is 37 U.S. cents and
  49-1/2 Canadian cents a pound, the company said.
      Special high grade, prime western and continuous
  galvanizing grade with controlled lead now costs 37-1/2 U.S.
  cents and 50 Canadian cents a pound. The new price for
  continuous galvanizing grade alloyed with controlled lead and
  aluminum additions is 37-3/4 U.S. cents and 50-1/4 Canadian
  cents a pound.
  

FED ADDS RESERVES VIA CUSTOMER REPURCHASES
  The Federal Reserve entered the U.S.
  Government securities market to arrange 2.5 billion dlrs of
  customer repurchase agreements, a Fed spokesman said.
      Dealers said Federal funds were trading at 6-3/16 pct when
  the Fed began its temporary and indirect supply of reserves to
  the banking system.
  

COURT REJECTS BUITONI APPEAL OVER IRI FOOD UNIT
  An appeal by Buitoni SpA against a court
  ruling that an accord under which it was to acquire Italian
  state food firm SME - Societa Meridionale Finanziaria was not
  contractually binding has been rejected, court officials said.
      An appeal court rejected Buitoni's claim that the 497
  billion lire accord with the state industrial company IRI -
  Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale was a binding
  contract. The decision upholds a court ruling of last July.
      Buitoni is controlled by CIR - Compagnie Industriali
  Riunite, an investment company itself controlled by Ing C
  Olivetti EC SpA (OLIV.MI> chairman Carlo De Benedetti.
  

ALLEGHENY &lt;AG> AIMS TO DIVEST MORE BUSINESSES
  Allegheny International Inc,
  the consumer products concern that today announced a merger
  agreement with a First Boston Corp &lt;FBC> affiliate in a deal
  worth about 500 mln dlrs, said it intends to divest more units
  as a way to increase profits.
      "We're going to reduce AI to a size consistent with our
  financial resources," said Chairman Oliver S. Travers.
      "We have made a conscious, strategic choice to become a
  smaller, financially sound, consumer products company which
  operates predominantly in the stable political and economic
  environment of North America," he said.
  
  

HAMILTON OIL &lt;HAML> SAYS RESERVES RISE
  Hamilton Oil Corp said reserves at the
  end of 1986 were 59.8 mln barrels of oil and 905.5 billion
  cubic feet of natural gas, or 211 mln barrels equivalent, up 10
  mln equivalent barrels from a year before.
  

ESTIMATED DROP IN JAPAN CORPORATE PROFITS TRIMMED
  The combined profits of Japan's major
  corporations, excluding financial institutions, are forecast to
  fall 19.2 pct in the 1986/87 year ending March 31, compared to
  the 19.9 pct decline projected in late November, Wako Research
  Institute of Economics said.
      The private research body also said in a statement that 437
  of the 1,084 firms listed on the first section of the Tokyo
  Stock Exchange foresee an 11.6 pct fall in sales in the year
  against an 11.4 pct fall estimated last November.
      Current profits are projected to fall 4.4 pct in 1987/88 on
  sales seen increasing by 4.2 pct, it said.
      Rationalisation measures taken by manufacturing industries
  to cope with the yen's sharp rise are beginning to brighten
  their business outlook, the institute said.
      It said lower interest rates, which are expected to reduce
  corporate borrowing costs, are also behind the improved
  performance outlook.
      Earnings performance in the non-manufacturing sector will
  be supported by firm demand in the real estate and construction
  businesses, it said.
      The forecast was based on average exchange rate estimates
  of 160 yen to the dollar in 1986/87 and 155 yen in 1987/88.
  

GRAHAM-MCCORMICK &lt;GOP> SELLS OIL AND GAS STAKE
  Graham-McCormick Oil and Gas
  Partnership said it completed the sale of interests in two
  major oil and gas fields to &lt;Energy Assets International Corp>
  for 21 mln dlrs.
      The company said it sold about one-half of its 50 pct
  interest in the Oak Hill and North Rucias fields, its two
  largest producing properties.
      It said it used about 20 mln dlrs of the proceeds to prepay
  principal on its senior secured notes. Semi-annual principal
  payments on the remaining 40 mln dlrs of notes have been
  satisfied until December 1988 as a result, it said.
      The company said the note agreements were amended to
  reflect an easing of some financial covenants, and an increase
  of interest to 13.5 pct from 13.0 pct until December 1990.
      It said the noteholders exercise price for 1,125,000
  warrants was also reduced to 50 cts from 1.50 dlrs.
      The company said Energy Assets agreed to share the costs of
  increasing production at the Oak Hill field.
  

ADVANCED TOBACCO &lt;ATPI> MERGER TALKS END
  Advanced Tobacco Products Inc
  said it has ended talks on being acquired by Sterling Drug Inc
  &lt;STY> but has resumed acquisition talks with other parties.
      The company had previously announced that a "major U.S.
  based company" that it did not identify was evaluating its
  nicotine technology.
      Advanced said Sterling's board has decided not to enter the
  nicotine product market.
      It said it received a 200,000 dlr payment to deal
  exclusively with Sterling through March Six.
      Advanced said it had suspended merger talks with other
  parties as a result of the exclusivity agreement.
  

T.H.E. FITNESS &lt;RFIT> BUYS LIVINGWELL UNIT
  T.H.E. Fitness INc said it
  agreed to buy Livingwell Inc's manufacturing unit, Powercise
  INternational Inc, for 11.0 mln T.H.E. Fitness shares valued at
  about 30 mln dlrs.
      This acquisition includes all of Livingwell's rights to its
  recently announced Powercise fitness equipment.
      IN a separate transaction, Livingwell INc, an operator of
  300 health clubs, placed a six mln dlrs order with Powercise
  INternational to install the Powercise equipment in all of its
  clubs.
  

EXXON &lt;XON> RAISES HEATING OIL PRICE, TRADERS
  Oil traders in the New York area said
  Exxon Corp's Exxon U.S.A. increased the price it charges
  contract barge customers for heating oil in New York harbor by
  1.5 cts a gallon, effective Saturday, March 7.
      They said the increase brought Exxon's contract barge price
  to 50 cts a gallon.
      Traders said the price hike followed higher spot and
  futures market prices for heating oil.
  

HUDSON BAY MINING CUTS U.S., CANADA ZINC PRICES
  &lt;Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Co Ltd>
  said it cut prices for all grades of zinc sold in North America
  by one U.S. ct a pound and by one Canadian ct a pound,
  effective immediately.
      The new price for high grade zinc is 37 U.S. cts and 49-1/2
  Canadian cts a pound, the company said.
      Special high grade, prime western and continuous
  galvanizing grade with controlled lead now costs 37-1/2 U.S.
  cts and 50 Canadian cts a pound. The new price for continuous
  galvanizing grade alloyed with controlled lead and aluminum
  additions is 37-3/4 U.S. cts and 50-1/4 Canadian cts a pound.
  

BANKAMERICA &lt;BAC> COMPLETES MORTGAGE UNIT SALE
  BankAmerica Corp's Bank of America
  unit said it completed the previously announced sale of
  BankAmerica Finance Ltd to &lt;Bank of Ireland> for an expected
  pre-tax gain of 23 mln dlrs.
      BankAmerica Finance provides residential mortgages in south
  east England.
      Its total assets at the end of 1986 were about 1.2 mln
  dlrs.
  

SUPERMARKETS GENERAL GETS UNSOLICITED BID FOR 41.75 DLRS/SHR CASH

  SUPERMARKETS GENERAL GETS UNSOLICITED BID FOR 41.75 DLRS/SHR CASH
  

BRAZIL TREASURY TO RELEASE COFFEE BUYING FUNDS
  The Treasury Department is due to
  release funds for the Brazilian Coffee Institute, IBC, to pay
  for the coffee purchased from local producers, the IBC said in
  a statement.
      IBC production director Oripes Gomes said in the statement
  that payment would be made within the official guarantee
  prices.
      The statement said the IBC is sending a document to the
  National Monetary Council asking the government to set a budget
  for the purchase by the Institute of up to five mln bags of
  coffee until June 30.
      Gomes said in the statement there have been no problems in
  the concession of funds by the Treasury for payment of the
  coffee delivered to the IBC warehouses by the producers.
      He said producers have already delivered 2.2 mln bags, of
  which 1.5 mln bags have been paid for.
      In the future, according to an agreement to be signed with
  the Treasury, the Institute will no longer need to seek
  approval by the Treasury to seek the release of additional
  funds to buy coffee, the statement said.
  

SHELL CANADA &lt;SHC> RAISED CRUDE OIL POSTINGS
  Shell Canada, a wholly owned subsidiary
  of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group &lt;RD> said that it raised crude
  oil prices by about 47 Canadian cts a barrel today.
      The increase riased its posted price for Light sweet crude
  oil to 21.95 dlrs a barrel from its march one level.
      Light sour crudes were raised to 19.95 dlrs a barrel, the
  company said.
  

GHANA COCOA PURCHASES 1,323 TONNES IN  LATEST WEEK, CUMULATIVE 216,095 TONNES - OFFICIAL

  GHANA COCOA PURCHASES 1,323 TONNES IN  LATEST WEEK, CUMULATIVE 216,095 TONNES - OFFICIAL
  

MGE CORN SYRUP FUTURES CONTRACT CLEARS HURDLE
  The staff of the Commodity Futures
  Trading Commission, CFTC, recommended that the regulatory
  agency approve the Minneapolis Grain Exchange's application to
  trade high fructose corn syrup-55, HFCS-55, futures contracts.
      The commission is expected to approve the application at a
  meeting tomorrow.
      The proposed contract would provide for the delivery of
  48,000 lbs, plus or minus two pct, of bulk HFCS-55, a liquid
  food and beverage sweetener produced through processed corn
  starch by corn refiners.
      Under proposed rules, a shipping certificate has a limited
  life, as it expires 30 days following the last day of trading
  of the expiring contract month. A premium charge of 14.40 dlrs
  per contract per day would be assessed under the proposal.
  

WORLD BANK TO BRING BORROWING FORWARD THIS YEAR
  The World Bank intends to bring
  borrowing forward into the first half of 1987 because it
  expects global interest rates to rise by year end, World Bank
  vice president and treasurer Eugene Rotberg said.
      He told a news conference that rates in the U.S., Japan,
  West Germany and Switzerland were near their lows. "The weight
  of opinion is (that in a year from now) there is a higher
  probability there will be one pct higher than one pct lower
  interest rates," he said.
      The World Bank had not issued floating rate notes so far
  this year because of the expectation of higher interest rates.
      The policy of the World Bank was to maintain liquidity at a
  level that gave the bank flexibility to decide when, where and
  how much to borrow, Rotberg said.
      Cash in hand was now about 50 pct of the next three years'
  anticipated net requirement and comprised 25 pct of outstanding
  debt and 66 pct of its debt maturing within five years.
      Although the World Bank had pioneered the swap market, it
  did not intend to launch new financial instruments just for the
  sake of innovation, Rotberg said.
      Of a total of 74.5 billion dlrs debt outstanding, only some
  eight billion had been swapped into another currency.
      Many recent innovations were either unfair to investors or
  unfair to borrowers. Until the World Bank was confident that
  this was not the case, it would not adopt new instruments.
      The World Bank would raise 90 pct of the funds needed over
  the next year with methods used before, Rotberg said. However,
  for some 10 pct of new requirements the bank would try out new
  instruments such as bonds with warrants.
      The World Bank had publicly offered 60 bonds in Germany
  since the first issue was launched in 1959, he said.
  
  

SERVICEMASTER &lt;SVM> SETS QUARTER DISTRIBUTION
  ServiceMaster L.P. approved
  a second quarter cash distribution of 58 cts, payable April 10,
  record March 23.
      Previously, ServiceMaster said it would pay in 1987 an
  indicated cash distribution of 1.50 dlrs a share, including  95
  cts a share which would be paid before April 15, 1987.
      In other action, the company set May eight as the date of
  its annual shareholders' meeting.
  

WALL STREET STOCKS/CHRYSLER &lt;C>, AMC &lt;AMO>
  The proposed 757 mln dlr deal under
  which Chrysler Corp would acquire American Motors Corp was
  described by analysts as a reasonable deal for both companies.
      Ronald Glantz of Montgomery Securities said AMC common
  stock could be fairly valued at "just under five dlrs a share"
  given changes brought by tax reform and that Chrysler's offer
  to pay four dlrs a share of Chrysler stock to AMC holders other
  than Renault as a "a good price for Chrysler.
      AMC common shares opened at four dlrs this morning after
  the Renault-Chrysler announcement, up 3/8, while Chrysler
  shares lost 1/4 to 52-1/4.
      Though AMC issued a statement saying that it was studying
  the proposed buyout and had no other comment, Glantz said he
  regarded the proposal as a "done deal" because "I can't believe
  anybody else would make a bid."
      "It's a reasonable deal for both sides," the analyst told
  Reuters.
      "Chrysler gets the jeep franchise and the (new AMC)
  Bramalea, Ontario, plant and the (new Renault) Premier
  (mid-sized car) and AMC's sales will go up because buyers will
  have more confidence that the manufacturer will still be around
  to service the products," Glantz said.
      Analyst Thomas O'Grady said Chrysler would be getting more
  manufacturing capacity, including a brand-new plant in Canada,
  for a bargain price and Renault would be getting some return
  after its prolonged loss-making investment in AMC.
  

KOREANS TO BUY 1.8 BILLION DLRS IN U.S. GOODS
  South Korean Foreign Trade Minister
  Rah Woon Bae said his country's firms have agreed to buy 1.8
  billion dlrs worth of U.S. goods during his two-week buying
  trip to the United States.
      Rah said most of the purchases represented shifts from
  Japanese firms to U.S. firms as part of South Korea's effort to
  reduce its seven billion dlr trade surplus with the United
  States.
      South Korea has a five billion dlr trade deficit with
  Japan.
  

INDIA BUYS 46,000 TONNES OF VEGETABLE OILS
  The Indian State Trading Corporation
  purchased 46,000 tonnes of vegetable oils at its import tender
  on Friday, market sources said.
      The business was for April shipments and comprised 20,000
  tonnes of European rapeseed oil at 318 dlrs, 20,000 tonnes of
  soyoil, believed South American origin, at 314, and 6,000
  tonnes of Malaysian rbd palm olein at 347 dlrs, all per tonne
  cif.
      Palm oil sellers were disappointed at the light purchase of
  rbd olein and early trading saw the market ease nearly 10 dlrs
  under Malaysian refiner and dealer selling. April shipments
  traded down to 326 dlrs per tonne, fob.
  

FITZWATER SAYS REAGAN STRONGLY AGAINST TAX HIKE
  White House spokesman Marlin
  Fitzwater said President Reagan's record in opposing tax hikes
  is "long and strong" and not about to change.
      "We're opposed to tax increases.... We will fight tax
  increases.... We will deal with it politically in every forum
  possible," said Fitzwater when questioned about whether there
  was any change in the administration's position.
      Fitzwater said Reagan's strong feelings against a tax hike
  included opposition to an oil import fee.
      "The President's position is that he is opposed to it," he
  said.
  

SUPERMARKETS GENERAL &lt;SGL> GETS UNSOLICITED BID
  Supermarkets General Corp said
  it received an unsolicited proposal from a third party to
  acquire the company at 41.75 dlrs per share in cash.
      Supermarkets also said it retained Shearson Lehman Brothers
  Inc to advise its board of directors on the proposal.
      Supermarkets General currently has about 38.5 mln shares
  outstanding.
      Its stock is currently trading at 34-1/4 on the New York
  Stock Exchange.
      The Woodbridge, N.J., supermarket operator of over 180
  supermarkets and other specialty retail stores, convenience
  food stores and drug stores.
      For the nine months ended November 30, Supermarkets
  reported net income of 41.7 mln dlrs.
  

JAPANESE CRUSHERS BUY CANADIAN RAPESEED
  Japanese crushers bought 5,000 to 7,000
  tonnes of Canadian rapeseed in export business over the weekend
  for April shipment, trade sources said.
      Japanese crushers continue to concentrate on rapeseed
  purchases since it converts to a higher percentage of oil than
  other oilseeds, they said. A glut of feed meals makes other
  oilseeds, such as soybeans, less desirable because they would
  add to already large meal stocks.
  

ABMS SAYS U.S. ZINC STOCKS HIGHER IN FEBRUARY
  Total U.S. slab zinc stocks held by
  smelters rose to 24,735 short tons at the end of February  from
  22,120 short tons at the end of January, the American Bureau of
  Metal Statistics reported.
      Zinc production increased to 26,732 short tons in February
  from 25,786 short tons in January.
      Shipments from smelters' plants declined to 23,560 short
  tons in February from 24,564 short tons in January.
  

DIAMOND SHAMROCK OFFSHORE &lt;DSP> IN FIND
  Diamond Shamrock Offshore Partners said
  it has started development drilling on West Cameron 178 block
  off Louisiana in the Gulf of Mexico after a significant natural
  gas find on the block.
      It said the discovery well there encountered 46 feet of net
  natural gas pay. No flow tests have been conducted, it said.
      Diamond Shamrock Offshore said it has a 46.15 pct interest
  in the block, Phillips Petroleum Co 28.85 pct and Santa Fe
  Energy Partners LP &lt;SFP> 25.00 pct. Diamond Shamrock Corp &lt;DIA>
  owns 80.3 pct of Diamond Shamrock Offshore.
  

U.S. LEAD INVENTORIES RISE IN FEBRUARY - ABMS
  Lead stocks held by U.S. refiners rose
  to 37,295 short tons at the end of February from 34,224 short
  tons (revised higher) at the end of January, the American
  Bureau of Metal Statistics reported.
      Production of lead decreased to 33,619 short tons in
  February from 38,759 short tons in January.
      Shipments from plants increased to 30,467 short tons in
  February from 27,041 short tons (revised lower) in January, the
  ABMS said.
  

&lt;SHARON STEEL CORP> EXTENDS EXCHANGE OFFER
  Sharon Steel Corp said it extended
  from March six to March 31 the expiration date for its debt
  exchange offer to allow time to complete the sale of its
  Mueller Brass Co unit and to meet other conditions of the
  offer.
      The exchange offer covers Sharon's outstanding 13.5 pct
  subordinated sinking fund debentures due 2000 and its 14.25 pct
  subordinated sinking fund debentures due 1990.
      Sharon said that as of March six, 31.6 pct of the 13.5 pct
  notes and 20.9 pct of the 14.25 pct notes were tendered. The
  Mueller sale is conditioned on receipt of 80 pct of the notes.
  

FERRY DISASTER CLAIMS COULD TOP 30 MLN STG
  U.K. Insurers could face more than 30 mln
  stg of insurance claims following the Zeebrugge ferry disaster,
  a spokesman for Lloyds of London said.
      It could take weeks before the extent of the compensation
  claims for passengers, crew and cargo was known and also before
  it was known how much, if any, of the ship could be salvaged,
  said David Larner of Lloyds.
      The hull and machinery of the Herald of Free Enterprise
  were valued at 25 mln stg and were insured by Townsend
  Thoresen's parent company Peninsular and Oriental Steam
  Navigation Co Plc &lt;PORL.L>.
      The vessel was in turn reinsured in the London market with
  Lloyds and various other companies, Larner said.
      Passengers, crew and cargo were insured by the Standard
  Steamship Protection and Indemnity Association, one of several
  shipowners' mutual insurance funds worldwide. These were also
  underwritten by Lloyds and other companies.
      Larner said claims from passengers could be expected to
  total at least five mln stg, given the number of deaths and the
  normal level of liability set by the Athens Convention of 1974
  of between 30,000 stg and 50,000 in case of death.
      Shipping sources said, however, that these claims could
  soar if a court found there was negligence or design faults
  involved.
      Larner said estimates of compensation claims "were pure
  guess work" at this time. But if the ship could not be salvaged,
  the claims would total at least 30 mln stg.
      Shares of insurances on the London stock exchange fell
  across the board in a generally weak market.
      General Accident fell 21p to 936, Royal Insurance dropped
  18p to 966 and Prudential fell 9p to 888.
      P and O shares stood at a late 616, 27p lower on the day.
  

CITIBANK FOLLOWS U.K. BASE RATE CUT TO 10.5 PCT
  &lt;Citibank NA> said it has cut its British
  base lending rate to 10.5 pct from 11 pct, with effect from
  tomorrow.
      This move follows similar cuts by four major British
  clearing banks, led by National Westminster Bank Plc &lt;NWBL.L>.
      Lower rates were signalled by the Bank of England this
  morning in an attempt to curb recent upward pressure on the
  pound, market sources said.
  

JAPAN TO PROMOTE INTEREST RATE LIBERALISATION
  The Bank of Japan decided at a policy
  board meeting to promote further interest rate liberalisation
  by lowering the minimum denomination of regulation-free large
  deposits and by raising the interest rate ceiling on money
  market certificates (MMCs), a central bank official said.
      The new guideline will go into effect on April 6, the bank
  said.
      Under the guideline, the minimum denomination of
  regulation-free large deposits will be lowered to 100 mln yen
  from 300 mln.
      The interest rate ceiling of MMCs with maturities of
  between one year and two years will be set at 0.5 percentage
  point below the prevailing certificate of deposit rate, the
  bank said.
      But the ceiling on MMCs with maturities of one year or less
  will remain the same, or 0.75 percentage point below the CD
  rates.
      The minimum denomination of MMCs will be lowered to 10 mln
  yen from 30 mln.
      The bank also said time deposit rates will be lowered by
  0.37 point, effective March 16, in line with the half-point cut
  in the official discount rate on February 23.
      New interest rates on two-year and one-year deposits at
  banks, for example, will be 3.64 pct and 3.39 pct per annum,
  respectively.
      Demand deposit rates, however, will remain the same.
  

BANK OF ZAMBIA PAYS OUT FOREIGN CURRENCY ARREARS
  The Bank of Zambia has paid out foreign
  exchange arrears from three auctions conducted last year, a
  bank spokesman said.
      "We have now cleared three auctions and are left with only
  four, worth eight mln dlrs," the spokesman said without
  specifying the amount paid out.
      The bank had not paid foreign exchange to private firms
  since it suspended the weekly auctions on January 28.
      It has said the auctions were suspended because it planned
  to introduce a modified system after talks with the World Bank
  and the International Monetary Fund.
      President Kenneth Kaunda announced last month that the
  auction would be retained for allocating foreign exchange to
  approved private sector bidders, but would not be used to
  determine the kwacha's exchange rate.
      Last week, he said the auction had run into trouble because
  of a shortage of foreign exchange.
      The government has fixed the exchange rate at nine kwacha
  per dollar, effectively revaluing the kwacha by 67.7 pct.
  

INVESTORS HAVE 5.5 PCT OF DATAREX SYSTEMS &lt;DRX>
  A small investor group led by Melvyn
  Gelch, a Providence, R.I., surgeon, told the Securities and
  Exchange Commission it has acquired 60,840 shares of Datarex
  Systems Inc, or 5.5 pct of the total outstanding common stock.
      The Gelch group said it bought the stake for about 935,000
  dlrs for investment purposes only.
  

GHANA COCOA PURCHASES FALL, CUMULATIVE STILL UP
  The Ghana Cocoa Board said it purchased
  1,323 tonnes of cocoa in the 21st week, ended February 26, of
  the 1986/87 main crop season, compared with 1,961 tonnes the
  previous week and 1,344 tonnes in the 21st week ended March six
  of the 1985/86 season, the board said.
      Cumulative purchases so far this season stand at 216,095
  tonnes, still up on the 201,966 tonnes purchased by the 21st
  week of last season, the Board said.
  

EC SUGAR IMPORT LEVIES
  The following import levies for white
  and raw sugar are effective tomorrow, in European currency
  units (ecu) per 100 kilos.
      White sugar, denatured and non-denatured 49.70 versus 50.05
  previously.
      Raw sugar, denatured and non-denatured 41.35 versus 41.35
  previously.
      The rate for raws is based on 92 pct yield.
  

INVESTOR HAS TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT &lt;TDCX> STAKE
  Leon Greenblatt, a Chicago investor,
  told the Securities and Exchange Commission he has acquired
  89,450 shares of Technology Development Corp, or 5.3 pct of the
  total outstanding common stock.
      Greenblatt said he bought the stock for 350,000 dlrs soley
  as an investment and has no intention of seeking control of the
  company.
  

TAIWAN POWER FIRM PLANS MORE FOREIGN DEBT CUTS
  State-owned (Taiwan Power co) will boost
  its domestic borrowings to further cut its foreign debt in line
  with a government policy to trim the island's huge foreign
  exchange reserves, a company official said.
      The company's foreign debt, mainly from the Japanese and
  U.S. Banks, was cut nearly by half to 66.2 billion taiwan dlrs
  equivalent in calendar 1986 from 124.6 billion in 1985, he
  said.
      Its domestic borrowings however rose to 105.2 billion
  taiwan dlrs from 80.6 billion in the same period, he added.
      Taiwan's foreign exchange reserves now stood at 50 billion
  U.S. Dlrs, due to its 1986 record trade surplus of 15.6
  billion.
  

ANALYST SAYS DART GROUP LIKELY BIDDER FOR SUPERMARKETS GENERAL

  ANALYST SAYS DART GROUP LIKELY BIDDER FOR SUPERMARKETS GENERAL
  

HARRIS CUTS CYCLOPS &lt;CYL> STAKE TO 11.1 PCT
  Harris Associates L.P., a Chicago
  investment advisory firm, said it cut its stake in Cyclops Corp
  to 437,425 shares, or 11.1 pct of the total outstanding common
  stock, from 524,775 shares, or 13.3 pct.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Harris said it sold 87,350 Cyclops common shares between Jan 6
  and March 2 at prices ranging from 65.75 to 91.00 dlrs a share.
      Harris said its dealings in Cyclops common stock were made
  on behalf of its advisory clients.
  

CHRYSLER &lt;C> VALUES AMC &lt;AMO> AT 757 MLN DLRS
  Chrysler Corp said it valued its
  proposed buyout of American Motors Corp at 757 mln dlrs, not
  counting the effect of a contingent payment that could reach
  350 mln dlrs based on AMC's future profits.
      A Chrysler spokesman told Reuters that the letter of intent
  signed with Renault, AMC's controlling shareholder with a 46.2
  pct direct stake, includes a provision for Renault to be paid
  35 mln dlrs in cash for AMC's finance subsidiary and 200 mln
  dlrs in the form of an eight pct note. He said he did not know
  the maturity of the note.
  

DART SAID LIKELY SUPERMARKETS GENERAL SUITOR
  Dart Group &lt;DARTA> is likely seeking to
  buy Supermarkets General &lt;SGL>, analysts said.
      "There's been rumors that they've taken a position in the
  company, said Wood Gundie analyst Edward Comeau.
      Last year, Dart Group, owner of Auto Trak INc and Crown
  Books, competed against Kohlberg, Kravis to acquire Safeway
  Stores INc.
      The company later reached an accord under which it would
  buy 20 pct of the company after Kohlberg Kravis completed its
  leveraged buyout of the company.
      The company later sold its 20 pct stock for about 180 mln
  to 200 mln dlrs, according to analysts.
       Dart Group Corp was not immediately available for comment.
      Jerry Ballan, analyst with Conner Ballan division of Edward
  Viner and Co, said, "They &lt;Dart> has been rumored to be buying
  some other supermarkets as well, such as Stop and Shop."
      "My guess is that Supermarkets General does not want to be
  bought out," said Ballan.
      Analysts, however, said Supermarkets General is facing
  problems due to its Purity Supreme and Rickels operations,
  which might make it difficult to thwart a bid.
      Supermarkets General is expected to report about 1.70 dlrs
  a share compared to a 1.73 dlrs a share reported for 1985 on a
  post stock split basis.
      For the first quarter, Comeau predicts the company will
  earn 39 cts a share from 35 cts a share a year ago, and should
  earn about 2.05 dlrs for 1987.
      "But that estimation could go to a 1.80 dlrs easily, due to
  Purity Supreme in New England," Comeau said.
      He said competition among supermarkets is getting heated in
  that area and that the company has had difficulty with
  integrating Purity Supreme with its Pathmark store operations.
      Rickels, a home center business, has faced problems due to
  the state of that industry, and has reported lower returns as
  an operating unit, according to analysts.
      Analysts said that if Dart buys Supermarkets General it
  would probably divest the company's operations.
      Analyst Comeau said "supermarkets general may seek a
  combination with another supermarket company."
  

ADVO-SYSTEM INC &lt;ADVO> SEES BREAK-EVEN 2ND QTR
  ADVO-System Inc said it could
  report a break even second quarter ending March 28, 1987
  compared with a loss of 1.8 mln dlrs, or 16 cts a share, in
  fiscal 1986's second quarter ended March 29, 1986.
      ADVO said it previously announced it would report a net
  loss for the quarter.
  

FED WATCHERS SEE U.S. ECONOMIC, INFLATION UPTURN
  This year will see a pickup in U.S.
  economic growth and inflation, the Shadow Open Market Committee
  said in its semi-annual policy statement.
      The SOMC, a group of basically "monetarist" private
  economists, said that "economic growth will accelerate in 1987
  in response to powerful stimulative actions by the Federal
  Reserve."
      The group said the Fed's actions have been excessive. As a
  result, it said that "inflation and ultimately another
  recession now loom on the horizon."
      The SOMC said that central bank policies that rely on
  progressively larger swings in monetary expansion will not lead
  to sustainable economic growth and stable prices.
      The group made no specific nominal forecasts of economic or
  inflation growth in its policy statement. However, the
  Committee at its Sunday policy-making meeting said it was
  basically in accord with projections by Jerry Jordan, who is a
  member of the SOMC and economist at First Interestate Bancorp.
      Jordan expects real GNP growth to be about one percentage
  point higher than in the past two years. He expects consumer
  prices to rise about 4-1/2 pct this year.
      The SOMC said in recent months rapid money growth has been
  a principal cause of the devaluation. To avoid another costly
  inflation and disinflation, the SOMC urged the Fed to "abandon
  its inflationary policy and set the growth rate of the monetary
  base on the path toward sustained lower inflation."
      The Fed in February said it would no longer target the
  narrow M-1 money supply because the link between M-1 and
  economic growth has been largely severed.
  
  

CANADIAN PACIFIC LTD 4TH QTR OPER NET 30 CTS VS 20 CTS

  CANADIAN PACIFIC LTD 4TH QTR OPER NET 30 CTS VS 20 CTS
  

DUTCH CURRENT ACCOUNT SURPLUS FALLS IN 1986
  The Dutch current account surplus fell
  5.4 billion guilders last year to a provisional 12.1 billion
  guilders, the Finance Ministry said in a statement.
      The surplus is expected to fall further in 1987, the
  statement said, but gave no details. Earlier today, the
  official planning agency CPB said it expected the surplus to
  fall to six billion guilders during 1987.
      The visible goods surplus excluding energy fell by 5.6
  billion guilders in 1986 to 11.4 billion due to declining terms
  of exchange, while more goods were imported as consumer
  spending and investment increased.
      While the energy trade balance surplus rose by 5.4 billion
  guilders, 4.7 billion of this gain was caused by temporary
  improvements of terms of exchange and was aided by the delay
  between the fall in oil and gas prices.
      The current account showed a 5.2 billion guilder deficit on
  invisibles, compared with a balance in 1985, the Finance
  Ministry said, noting the surplus on transport services was
  reduced substantially due to the lower dollar and oil price
  falls.
      The fourth quarter current account showed a deficit, for
  the first time since 1980, of 700 mln guilders, it said.
  

GRANDVIEW ACQUIRES CONTROL OF U.K. TICKET GROUP
  Consolidated Grandview Inc said it
  acquired a 60 pct stake in &lt;All Ticket Group PLC>, of London,
  for undisclosed terms. The seller was also undisclosed.
      All Ticket is a special events travel company with
  exclusive European rights to UAL Inc &lt;UAL>'s United Airlines
  Apollo system, booking all United Airlines flights in Britain
  and Europe. All Ticket and its subsidiaries will also
  co-sponsor various events this year including the British Open
  golf tournament and rowing's Henley Regatta.
      Its 1986 revenues totaled 12 mln Canadian dlrs.
  

UNITED CITIES &lt;UCIT> MAKES ACQUISITION
  United Cities Gas Co said it
  has acquired Lyle Propane Gas Co, a Cairo, Ga., propane gas
  distributor, for undisclosed terms.
      It said Lyle has sales of about four mln gallons annually
  and serves about 4,000 customers in seven counties in southwest
  Georgia and north Florida.
  

U.S. BILL AUCTIONS SEEN AT 5.63-65, 5.59-61 PCT
  The U.S. Treasury's weekly auction is
  expected to produce an average rate of 5.63-65 pct for
  three-month bills and one of 5.59-61 pct for six-month bills,
  dealers said.
      Shortly before auction time on the new bills, the rate on
  the outstanding three-month bills was unchanged at 5.64 pct
  bid, while the rate on the six-month bills was one basis point
  higher at 5.68 pct bid.
  

MEDICAL PROPERTIES &lt;MPP> SETS MONTHLY DIVIDEND
  The board of Medical Properties
  Inc said it has declared an initial monthly cash dividend of
  11-1/2 cts a share and has adopted a monthly dividend policy.
      The initial dividend will be payable April 10 to
  shareholders of record March 31.
  

LONDON GRAIN FREIGHTS
  wheat Ria Luna 20,000 mt
  Norrkoping and Djuron/EC Mexico 12.50 dlrs option loading
  Uddevalla at 50 cents less 4,000/1,500 16-23/3 Continental.
      Reference New York Grain Freights 2 of March 6, brokers say
  the charterer of the Saturn from US Gulf to Japan is reported
  to be Nordstrom and Thulin, while the Antigone is reported to
  have been arranged from Tilbury to the Black Sea by Soviet
  charterers.
  

IMMUCOR &lt;BLUD> SPLITS STOCK
  Immucor Inc said its board of
  directors has declared a five-for-four stock split in the form
  of a 25 pct stock dividend payable April 15 to shareholders of
  record March 27.
  

BERMUDA STAR LINE &lt;BSL> TO MAKE ACQUISITION
  Bermuda Star Line Inc said it has
  agreed in principle to acquire 815-passenger SS Liberte from
  Barnstead Shipping Ltd for use in its New York/Montreal
  "Northeast Passages" cruises, starting this summer.
      The company said it is working to conclude a lease
  financing or other financing for the purchase of the 23,500 ton
  vessel, which is to be delivered in early April and renamed
  Canada Star.
      Terms were not disclosed.
  

TALKING POINT/CAESARS WORLD &lt;CAW>
  &lt;MTS Acquisition Corp's>
  28-dlr-per-share offering price for Caesars World Inc is
  thought to be much too low and is likely to attract other
  suitors for the hotel/casino company, industry analysts said.
      "I think someone else will probably come in, or they (MTS)
  will have to raise their bid," said Marvin Roffman, an analyst
  at Janney Montgomery Scott Inc.
      MTS, a company formed by Martin Sosnoff, Caesars World's
  largest shareholder, today began a tender offer, valued at
  725.2 mln dlrs, for all shares Sosnoff doesn't already own.
      "I think the offer is too low by at least five points,"
  said Roffman, who described Caesars World as the operator of
  "one of the finest casinos in the world."
      Sosnoff, a New York investor, already owns 13.3 pct of
  Caesars World's 30.3 mln shares.
      Following news of the tender offer Caesars World's shares
  were trading at 27-7/8, up 3-3/8.
      A Caesars World spokesman said the company was declining
  comment on the Sosnoff move for the moment, but Caesars may
  issue a public statement after it has studied the offer.
      Roffman said Caesars World has considerable growth
  potential and he is forecasting fiscal 1988 earnings of two
  dlrs per share.
      Caesars World owns casino hotels in Nevada and honeymoon
  resorts in Pennsylvania's Pocono Mountains. It also controls
  Caesars New Jersey Inc &lt;CJN>, which owns an Atlantic City,
  N.J., casino hotel.
      For its fiscal year ended July 31 Caesars World reported
  net income of 41 mln dlrs, or 1.36 dlrs per primary share.
      The company reported second quarter net income of 12.6 mln
  dlrs, or 41 cts per share, compared with income of 7.5 mln
  dlrs, or 25 cts per share a year earlier.
      Daniel Lee, an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc, said
  that although Sosnoff's relatively low bid may attract other
  suitors willing to pay a higher price for Caesars, there is
  little likelihood that a competing bid would start a battle for
  the company.
  
  
  
  

ALLEGHENY &lt;AG> OFFICERS TO RUN COMPANY
  Allegheny International Inc said its
  chairman and chief operating officer will remain in their
  positions following the merger of the company with an affiliate
  of First Boston Corp.
     "It is expected that Oliver S. Travers will continue as
  chairman, president and Chief executive officer, and Thomas J.
  Albani will continue as chief operating officer," said an
  Allegheny spokesman.
      Allegheny today said it agreed to a buyout from First
  Boston at 24.60 dlrs per share. The transaction was valued at
  500 mln dlrs. Its stock rose 8-5/8 to 24 in active trading.
  

IC GAS MAKES NO RECOMMENDATION ON TRACTEBEL OFFER
  Imperial Continental Gas Association
  &lt;ICGS.L>, IC Gas, said its board is not making a recommendation
  on the partial tender offfer at 710p per share announced by
  &lt;Tractebel SA> and &lt;Groupe Bruxelles Lambert SA>.
      At the same time, however, the board would not recommend a
  general offer for all the shares at a price of 710p, the
  statement added.
      Shareholders wondering whether to tender either to the
  Tractebel consortium or to the rival 700p per share partial
  offer from &lt;SHV Holdings NV> should consult professional
  advisers.
  

NAT'L HEALTHCARE &lt;NHCI> TO SELL FIVE HOSPITALS
  National Heathcare Inc said it
  signed an agreement to sell five rural hospitals to a private
  corporation for about 18 mln dlrs, including the assumption of
  six mln dlrs of debt.
      The company said it plans to complete the sales, which are
  subject to various regulatory approvals, by the end of July.
      National Healthcare said it expects no material gain on
  loss on the sales and that substantially all proceeds will be
  used to reduce debt.
  

USX &lt;X> CHAIRMAN CALLS FOR LOWER DOLLAR
  USX Corp chairman David Roderick called
  for a lower value for the U.S. dollar against other currencies
  to help speed a correction in the U.S. trade deficit, which
  last year reached 170 billion dlrs.
      In remarks prepared for a speech before the Economic Club
  of Detroit, Roderick said, "There should be total resolve that
  the dollar versus other major currencies, as well as the
  currencies of other nations having a substantial trade surplus
  with us, must continue to decline so that the correction in our
  trade deficit starts on the road to recovery."
      Roderick said the U.S. should be understanding of the
  "economic pain" our trading partners experience as a result of
  a falling dollar.
      But, he added, "As painful as the correction may be to our
  trading partners, it is less painful than leaving the problem
  uncorrected because that would lead us into an inevitable,
  lengthy and steep world recession."
      Roderick said between February 1985 and December 1986 the
  dollar fell by more than 40 pct in real terms against major
  industrial currencies and by 30 to 35 pct against a broader
  group of currencies of nearly all developing nations.
      At the end of 1986, he said, the value of foreign assets in
  the U.S. exceeded the value of U.S. assets abroad by 240
  billion dlrs, compared to five years ago when the U.S. had a
  surplus in assets of 141 billion. A company spokesman said the
  data were provided by economic consultants to USX.
      The primary reason for the trade imbalance was the 70 pct
  rise of the dollar between 1980 and 1985, although other
  factors were involved, Roderick said. But it is wrong, he said,
  "to attribute the massive trade deficit to a fundmental
  deterioration of U.S. productivity or of American product
  quality."
      These areas need to be improved but they are not the root
  cause of the trade gap problem, Roderick said. He urged
  American manufacturers to become more competitive so they can
  compete in global markets.
      In the speech, the USX chairman also called for changes in
  securities laws to curb what he called abuses by corporate
  raiders and speculators.
      Among his proposals, which he presented to the Senate
  Banking Committee in testimony last week, were a requirement
  that raiders give 24-hour notice for every one pct of stock
  they acquire in a company.
      Roderick proposed that tender offers must be made for all
  cash to all stockholders on equal terms and that raiders be
  required to have financing in place before a tender is made.
      Further, raiders should be required to make an all-cash
  tender offer once they acquire 10 pct of a target company's
  stock, he said. And payment of greenmail, or a preferential
  price by a target company to buy back a raider's stake, should
  be prohibited under the revised laws.
      Roderick said changes were necessary to curb abuses but
  that he did not want laws that would hurt the financial markets
  or discourage "fair price to all" takeovers.
  

CANADIAN PACIFIC (CP) CONFIRMS EARNINGS
  Canadian Pacific Ltd said fourth
  quarter 1986 operating profit rose to 91.6 mln dlrs, or 30 cts
  a share, from 50.7 mln dlrs, or 20 cts a share, a year ago.
      The statement confirmed released preliminary earnings
  figures the company released in February.
      A 102.6 mln dlr gain on the sale of CP's Cominco Ltd
  interest helped raise final 1986 fourth quarter profit to 193.8
  mln dlrs or 65 cts a share.
      The company said a drop in 1986 full-year operating profit
  to 150.1 mln dlrs from a restated 252.7 mln dlrs in 1985 was
  due mainly to lower world oil prices.
      The company said its CP Rail division reported 1986 net
  income of 119.4 mln dlrs, compared with 133.4 mln dlrs in 1985.
  It said grain traffic recovered from drought-affected levels of
  a year ago but was offset by weakness in other traffic areas
  and increased expenses.
      It said the net loss from its Soo Line increased to 33.5
  mln dlrs loss from 8.7 mln dlrs loss in 1985, mainly due to
  restructuring charges.
      Canadian Pacific said favorable developments during the
  year included reduced bulk shipping losses as a result of a
  recovery in tanker markets and a turnaround in the forest
  products sector.
  

DUTCH ANIMAL FEED USAGE DOWN IN FIRST HALF SEASON
  Dutch animal feed usage in the first
  half of the current season from July through December 1986 fell
  7.6 pct to 6.5 mln tonnes from 7.1 mln in the same period of
  1985, figures in the latest newsletter from the co-operative
  Cebeco-Handelsraad show.
      Tapioca usage fell 9.1 pct to 1.4 mln tonnes from 1.6 mln
  in the first half of the 1985/86 season.
      Grain usage fell 6.1 pct to 1.1 mln tonnes from 1.2 mln,
  while soymeal usage fell 10 pct to 967,000 tonnes from 1.1 mln.
      Cornglutenfeed usage fell 17.8 pct to 729,000 tonnes from
  887,000, but cornfeedmeal usage nearly doubled to 399,000
  tonnes from 201,000.
      Citruspulp usage dropped 62.8 pct to 149,000 tonnes from
  400,000 tonnes, while rapeseed and meal usage rose 9.6 pct to
  217,000 tonnes from 198,000 and sunmeal rose 25.6 pct to
  216,000 tonnes from 172,000 tonnes.
      During the whole of the season from July 1985 to June 1986,
  Dutch soymeal usage fell 12 pct to 1.9 mln tonnes from 2.1 mln
  the previous season, while sunmeal usage rose 25 pct to 408,000
  tonnes from 325,000.
      Rapeseed and meal usage during the season also rose 14 pct
  to 409,000 tonnes from 360,000, but citruspulp fell 37 pct to
  516,000 tonnes from 826,000.
      Meanwhile, the value of exports of agricultural products
  from the Netherlands in calendar 1986 fell 5.4 pct to 48.7
  billion guilders from 51.5 billion in calendar 1985, figures
  from the Ministry of Agriculture show.
      During the same period imports of agricultural products
  dropped 13.1 pct to 31.2 billion guilders from 35.8 billion.
  

FORD &lt;F> SHARES RISE ON HIGHER EARNING ESTIMATE
  Ford Motor Co's stock rose 1-1/4 to
  82-1/4 after analyst Maryann Keller of Furman Selz Mager Dietz
  and Birney raised earnings estimates on the company, traders
  said.
      Keller said that she expects the company's 1987 earnings to
  rise to between 13.50-to-14 dlrs a share as compared to 12.32
  dlrs a share earned last year.
      She said Ford's already good market share is expected to
  remain favorable and earnings from overseas are expected to
  improve.
      In addition, Keller said, the company is selling more of
  its expensive model cars, which are more profitable.
      The non-automotive operations, including Ford Motor Credit,
  are also expected to post improved earnings this year.
      Keller said she expects the company to split its stock and
  raise its dividend to at least three dlrs a share this year.
      She noted that Chrysler Corp's &lt;C> announcement of a merger
  proposal for American Motors Corp &lt;AMO> should have no short
  term effect on Ford but could cut into Ford's share of the
  truck market in the long term.
  

ITALY SHOWS INTEREST IN U.K. NEW CROP WHEAT
  Italy has shown interest in British new
  crop wheat recently but the actual volume booked so far by
  Italian buyers has not been large, traders said.
      They put purchases at around 50,000 tonnes for Sept/Dec
  shipments but said some of the business was transacted at the
  start of the year.
      Italian interior home markets have been active in recent
  weeks and traders said around 200,000 tonnes have traded
  between dealers and home consumers. Some of this has been
  covered in the market here and more possibly will be, traders
  said.
  

DUTCH RETAILER AHOLD SEES UNCHANGED 1987 PROFIT
  Dutch food retailer Ahold
  NV &lt;AHLN.AS> expects unchanged profits in 1987 but said it will
  take advantage of the lower dollar to expand further in the
  U.S.
      Turnover will grow but net profits are expected to remain
  around the 1986 level of 132.4 mln guilders due to higher Dutch
  taxes and a three-year expansion plan, Ahold Chairman Albert
  Heijn told a news conference.
      The profit forecast allows for a dollar rate around current
  levels of just over three guilders.
      Turnover and net profit in 1986 were hit by the dollar,
  which fell to an average 2.46 guilders from 3.35 in 1985.
  

PITT-DES MOINES &lt;PDM> GETS QUALIFIED AUDIT
  Pitt-Des Moines Inc said it will
  receive a qualified opinion from auditors on its 1986 and 1985
  financial statements.
      It said the qualification related to its inability to
  determine the effects, if any, of the final resolution of a
  suit filed against it by &lt;Washington Public Power Supply
  System>.  The 1985 suit was dismissed in a 1986 lower court
  action, but the ultimate outcome of the matter is still
  uncertain since Washington Public Power has appealed to the
  U.S. Court of Appeals.
  

READING &lt;RDGC> TO SELL PHILADELPHIA PROPERTIES
  Reading Co said it has agreed in
  principle to convey properties it owns in and around the
  Philadelphia Convention Center site to the city of Philadelphia
  and the Philadelphia Convention Center Authority.
      It said in exchange it will receive about 23 mln dlrs in
  cash, rights to acquire 22 acres adjacent to the Philadelphia
  International Airport and an option to acquire the development
  rights over the Gallery II shopping mall on Market Street in
  downtown Philadelphia.
      Reading said it will be responsible for the demolition and
  cleanup of certain of the properties, for which a portion of
  the cash proceeds will be escrowed.
      The company said it will continue to own and operate the
  Reading Terminal Market in Philadelphia.
      The land it is giving up amounts to about seven acrease and
  includes part of the Reading Terminal Train Shed, it said.
  

MONTEDISON ACQUIRES ARCO RESEARCH UNIT
  Montedison SpA &lt;MONI.MI> has acquired a 70
  pct stake in &lt;Plant Cell Research Institute - PCRI> of
  California from Atlantic Richfield Co &lt;ARC.N> for "several tens
  of millions of dollars," a senior Montedison executive said.
      Renato Ugo, a member of Montedison's management committee,
  told reporters that &lt;Stanford Research Institute International>
  of Menlo Park, California, had acted as a partner in the
  purchase, itself acquiring a stake in PCRI of under 10 pct.
      PCRI, based in Dublin, California has a biotechnology
  research laboratory.
      Ugo said the price paid included outlays for the laboratory
  technology and staff.
      He said other negotiations were under way with
  biotechnology companies in the health care and diagnostics
  sectors through Montedison's health care subsidiary &lt;Erbamont
  NV>, but gave no details.
      "We hope they will be concluded by the year end," he said.
      Montedison currently invests around 30 billion lire a year
  in biotechnology research and expects to increase this figure
  to around 50 billion lire in the next few years.
  

LMFE TO CONCENTRATE ON CASH SETTLED CONTRACTS
  The London Meat Futures Exchange, LMFE,
  will cease trading in its deliverable pigmeat contract from
  April 3, the LMFE said.
      The move will enable the exchange to concentrate on the
  cash settled contracts introduced last year.
      "This allows the exchange and its members to concentrate our
  marketing on the pig and live cattle contracts," LMFE official
  Peter Freeman said. "These two have already shown their
  effectiveness for hedging, and the trade in both contracts is
  increasing," he added.
      "Using the futures market allows better planning and forward
  price fixing that our industry needs," chairman Pat Elmer said.
      Some 131 pig contracts were settled against the Meat and
  Livestock Commission's Average All Pigs Price in February,
  which represents hedging for over 13,000 pigs, more than twice
  the number cash-settled in January, the LMFE said.
      Cash settlement on the new cattle and pig contracts was
  introduced last June in the expectation that the appeal of the
  futures market to farmers, abattoirs and users of meat would
  increase because of the absence of a delivery requirement.
  

CBT TRADERS SEE LOWER SOYBEAN EXPORT INSPECTIONS
  The USDA's weekly export inspection
  report is expected to show a decline in soybean exports and
  steady to slightly lower corn and wheat exports, according to
  CBT floor traders' forecasts.
      Traders projected soybean exports at 15 mln to 16 mln
  bushels, down from 20.3 mln bushels a week ago and 25.5 mln
  bushels a year ago.
      Corn guesses ranged from 20 mln to 25 mln bushels, compared
  with 21.9 mln bushels a week ago and 28.2 mln a year ago.
      Wheat guesses ranged from 13 mln to 18 mln bushels,
  compared with 14.1 mln bushels a week ago and 17.9 mln a year
  ago.
  

PRIMARY EUROSTERLING MARKET BOOMS DESPITE RATE CUT
  Two new eurosterling bonds were launched
  today, making a total of 10 new deals in the sector so far this
  month, as borrowers rush to cash in on a bull sterling market
  fueled by the strength of the pound and pre-budget euphoria.
      The Bank of England finally gave way to a 1/2 point cut in
  banks' base lending rates earlier today, but dealers said this
  had been largely discounted and was not likely to detract from
  the current popularity of sterling-denominated investments.
      "Sterling, in any shape or form, is flavor of the month and
  we're set to see many more eurosterling deals," one dealer said.
      Today's new eurosterling bonds were a 10-year, 100 mln stg
  deal for Sweden at 9-1/2 pct and priced at 101-1/4 pct, lead by
  Baring Brothers and Co Ltd and a 14 year 60 mln stg convertible
  deal for Storehouse Plc launched by SBCI International Ltd. "We
  thought we saw a proverbial flood of new deals with the 14 we
  had last month but it seems March will beat February hands down
  with 10 already," one eurosterling specialist said.
      "Optically, psychologically, these single figures are much
  more attractive for the borrower. Eurosterling looks like a
  cheap and attractive way to raise your money," he added.
      This accounts for the wide variety of borrowers who have
  tapped the sector recently, ranging from sovereigns such as the
  Kingdom of Sweden today, continental banks including
  Commerzbank and Deutsche Bank and British corporations.
      Another U.K. Merchant bank analyst noted that the current
  vogue for eurosterling enabled several corporate borrowers last
  month to offer paper priced below comparative gilt yields.
      A Storehouse official confirmed that the issue was aimed at
  Swiss and German investors who were showing good interest.
      This is the first entry into the long term international
  capital markets by Storehouse, British designer Terence
  Conran's retail conglomerate which incorporates U.K. Chain
  stores Mothercare, British Home Stores and Habitat.
      "We have been considering the move for quite some time now
  and the current strength of the eurosterling sector provided
  the perfect opportunity and spur for us to finally tap the
  market," Lance Moir, corporate treasurer at Storehouse Plc told
  Reuters.
  
  

EUROPE SHIPPING EXPORTS TO S AFRICA OFF 40 PCT
  The volume of European exports to
  South Africa carried by container line vessels has declined 40
  pct in the last two years, British shipping executive Antony
  Butterwick said.
      Butterwick told reporters that despite the drop and low
  freight rates, the shipping conference he heads will increase
  the frequency of sailings to South Africa as a "very strong act
  of faith and confidence" in the country's future.
      He is chairman of the Europe South and South-East African
  Conference Lines and joint managing director of P and O
  Containers Ltd.
      A statement issued by the conference here said frequency of
  Southern Africa/Europe container service sailings is being
  increased from nine to seven days.
      "This is the most positive development on the shipping front
  between South Africa and its main trading partners in Europe
  for more than four years, when the service last operated
  weekly," it said.
  

MATHEMATICAL APPLICATIONS SETS OPERATIONS SALE
  Mathematical Applications Group
  Inc said it has signed a letter of intent to sell all of its
  operating business and will propose a plan of liquidation
  following the sale.
      If the company is unsuccessful in obtaining the approvals
  needed for the sale and liquidation, it said, the company may
  be required to initiate reorganization proceedings under
  federal bankruptcy law to facilitie the distribution of its
  assets.
      Mathematical Applications said it tentatively agreed to
  sell its direct marketing business to Pagex Inc for 400,000
  dlrs plus an amount equal to the working capital of the
  business at closing as well as a 1.7 mln dlr note payable in
  installments over six years.
      Mathematical Applications said the business' working
  capital is estimated to be about 600,000 dlrs.
      Pagex has been formed by Paul A. Goldner the owner of Pagex
  Systems Inc, which is also engaged in the direct marketing
  computer service business.
      Mathematical Applications said the tentative agreement
  calls for Pagex to buy substantially all of the assets and
  liabilities related to the direct marketing business and
  continue to use the Mathematical Applications name.
      It said the sale is also subject to renegotiation of a real
  estate lease and approval of a definitive agreement by the
  company's board, stock holders and debenture holders.
      The company said it has obtained waivers from holders of
  its six mln dlrs principal amount of debentures due March 31,
  1993, to defer interest payments aggregating 270,000 dlrs
  through March 31, 1987. The company said it will seek waivers
  to defer these interest payments, and those due March 31, for
  enough time to enable the company to accomplish the proposed
  sale of its operations.
      Mathematical Applications said it is talking to debenture
  holders, its landlord, a lessor of equipment to the marketing
  operation and holders of other liabilities not being assumed by
  Pagex to arrange distribution of assets after the proposed
  sale, adding that these assets will be significantly less than
  its liabilities.
      The company said it has obtained waivers from holders of
  its six mln dlrs principal amount of debentures due March 31,
  1993, to defer interest payments aggregating 270,000 dlrs
  through March 31, 1987. The company said it will seek waivers
  to defer these payments, and those due March 31, for enough
  time to accomplish the proposed sale of its operations.
      Mathematical Applications said it is talking to debenture
  holders, its landlord, a lessor of equipment to the marketing
  operation and holders of liabilities Pages is not assuming to
  arrange distribution of assets after the proposed sale, adding
  these assets will be significantly less than its liabilities.
      As part of the distribution of assets, the company said, it
  expects shareholders to receive an amount based on the bid
  price of the company's stock, which was 1/16 on March five.
  

FINANCIAL CORP &lt;FIN> UNIT COMPLETES PURCHASE
  Financial Corp of America's
  American Savings and Loan Association said it completed the
  previously announced purchase of 16 retail savings branches
  from Great Western Financial Corp's &lt;GWF> Great Western
  Savings.
      American Savings said the purchases boost its deposits by
  about 550 mln dlrs, but do not affect its asset base.
  

CENTRAL BANKERS SATISFIED WITH PARIS ACCORD
  Central bankers said they
  were generally satisfied with the response to the Paris accord
  two weeks ago to stabilize currencies at around current levels.
      Speaking after a meeting at the Bank for International
  Settlements (BIS), which reviewed the agreement, they also
  welcomed interest rates cuts in France and today's drop in
  British rates.  One top official said the rate cuts would help
  to stimulate growth generally in Europe and welcomed that
  countries other than West Germany were seen to be helping
  sustain the economy. 
      The central bankers, who spoke on the condition they not be
  named, said the meeting of governors from the Group of 10
  countries also heard a report from Michel Camdessus, the new
  managing director of the International Monetary Fund, on the
  IMF's latest assessment of the debt crisis. In particular, they
  discussed Brazil's debt moratorium.
      But there was no sense of urgency, they said, and Brazil
  had made no appeal for bridging loans from the BIS or central
  banks.
  

JOHNSON PRODUCTS &lt;JPC> SELLS TWO SUBSIDIARIES
  Johnson Products Co Inc said it
  completed the sale of Debbie's School of Beauty Culture Inc and
  the assets of Ultra Precise Beauty Boutique Inc to management.
      It said the sale price of 2,533,000 dlrs consisted of
  700,000 dlrs cash, a secured promissory note for 1,506,000 dlrs
  and the forgiveness of a debt of 327,000 dlrs owed by Johnson
  Products to Debbie's School.
  

USAIR &lt;U> SEEKS TWO BILLION LOAN FOR TAKEOVERS
  USAir Group Inc said it seeking two
  billion dlrs in bank debt to complete its takeover of Piedmont
  Aviation Inc &lt;PIE> and its pending acquisition of PS Group
  Inc's Pacific Southwest Airlines.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission
  that details its proposed 69 dlr a share cash tender offer for
  Piedmont, USAir said Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co &lt;MHC>
  "indicates its willingness" in a March 6 letter to provide up
  to 500 mln dlrs of the financing.
      Manufacturers Hanover would also to act as agent for a bank
  group to raise the rest of the financing, USAir said.
      USAir said a Manufacturers Hanover affiliate is currently
  agent for its 400 mln dlrs revelving credit facility, which
  would be replaced by the proposed two billion dlr financing.
      USAir put its total cost of completing the tender offer at
  1.7 billion dlrs. Its Pacific Southwest takeover, which has
  received federal approval and is due to come up for shareholder
  approval later this month, is for 17 dlrs a share, or 400 mln
  dlrs total.
      USAir said it has already bought 2.3 mln Piedmont common
  shares, or 9.9 pct of the total outstanding from Norfolk
  Southern Corp &lt;NSC> for 161.9 mln dlrs.
      The tender offer, which is being made through a USAir
  subsidiary, USAG Acquisition Corp, would not be valid unless
  USAir is left with more than half of Piedmont's total
  outstanding common stock after the April 3 expiration.
      While negotiations on terms and interest rates of its bank
  loans are not yet complete, USAir said it expects them to be in
  the form of a one billion dlr two-year term loan and a one
  billion dlr seven-year revolving credit facility.
      The company said it expects to repay the two-year loan
  through equity, preferred and debt offerings and possibly
  internal funds and the sale and/or leaseback of aircraft.
  

U.S. EXPORT INSPECTIONS, IN THOUS BUSHELS  SOYBEANS 18,616 WHEAT 16,760 CORN 25,193

  U.S. EXPORT INSPECTIONS, IN THOUS BUSHELS  SOYBEANS 18,616 WHEAT 16,760 CORN 25,193
  

U.K. CONFIRMS JANUARY STERLING M3 RISE
  The Bank of England said the broad
  measure of U.K. Money supply, Sterling M3, rose a seasonally
  adjusted 1.1 pct in January after a 0.2 pct rise in December.
      The unadjusted year-on-year rise was 17.6 pct after 18.1
  pct in the year to December.
      The narrow measure of money supply, M0, fell by a
  seasonally adjusted 0.6 pct in January, and rose by a
  non-adjusted 4.1 pct year-on-year, the Bank said.
      The figures confirm provisional data issued by the Bank two
  weks ago.
      In December, M0 grew by a seasonally adjusted 1.4 pct and
  by a non-seasonally adjusted 5.2 pct year-on-year.
      The Bank said sterling bank lending grew by a
  non-seasonally adjusted 1.75 billion stg in January. This also
  confirmed provisional figures issued in February.
      The measure of private sector liquidity, PSL2, fell 0.2 pct
  in January, but after seasonal adjustment rose 0.6 pct, the
  Bank said.
      The Bank said the public sector contribution to the growth
  in Sterling M3 was contractionary by about 2.3 billion stg.
      Within this, the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR)
  showed a repayment of 3.7 billion stg, while the non-bank
  private sector's holdings of government debt fell by about 1.1
  billion stg.
      There was a fall of 290 mln stg in notes and coin in
  January, a fall of 1.5 billion stg in non-interest bearing
  sight deposits, and a rise of 1.6 billion stg in interest
  bearing sight deposits, the Bank said.
  

JANNOCK ACQUIRES 50 PCT OF INTERCON SECURITY
  &lt;Jannock Ltd> said it acquired a 50 pct
  interest in Intercon Security Ltd for five mln dlrs and
  Intercon founders Brian Legge and Richard Grange will hold the
  remaining 50 pct and will continue to manage the company.
      Intercon Security, employing 850 people, provides a full
  range of security equipment and services, Jannock said.
  

 CANADIAN OIL COMPANIES RAISE CRUDE PRICES
  Petro-Canada, the state-owned oil
  company, said it raised the contract price it will pay for
  crude oil 64 Canadian cts a barrel, effective March six.
      Petro-Canada's posted price for the benchmark light sweet
  grade, Edmonton/Swann Hills at 40 api gravity, now stands at
  21.95 Canadian dlrs/bbl. Their light sour grade is posted at
  19.88 Canadian dlrs/bbl.
      Earlier today, Shell Canada &lt;SHC> said it raised its crude
  postings about 47 Canadian cts/bbl, bringing Edmonton light
  sweet to 21.95 Canadian dlrs/bbl, and the light sour crude to
  19.95 Canadian dlrs/bbl.
      Imperial oil &lt;IMO.A>, a 70 pct owned subsidiary of Exxon
  Corp, said that effective March five it also raised its light
  sweet crude posting to 21.95 Canadian dlrs/bbl.
  

DART GROUP SAID IT OFFERS TO BUY SUPERMARKETS GENERAL AT 41.75 DLRS/SHR

  DART GROUP SAID IT OFFERS TO BUY SUPERMARKETS GENERAL AT 41.75 DLRS/SHR
  

FINAL 50/50 CORN CERTS SEEN AT 1.6 BILLION DLRS
  The Agriculture Department will have
  to release an estimated 1.6 billion dlrs worth of in-kind
  certificates, or certs, to corn farmers this fall if USDA
  decides to maintain an equal split of total 1986 feedgrain
  deficiency payments in cash and certs, USDA officials said.
      Final 1986 crop deficiency payments will be available to
  feed grain producers in October. Wheat deficiency payments for
  the 1986 crop, now complete, were made in a 50/50
  cash-certificate split, and USDA officials have indicated they
  want to do the same for feedgrains.
      Over 3.2 billion dlrs of an estimated 6.0 billion in corn
  deficiency payments have already been announced, with 1.42
  billion dlrs (43 pct) set in certificates. The final payment
  must be 1.6 billion dlrs in certs (57 pct) for a 50/50 split.
      However, the release this month of almost 600 mln dlrs of
  deficiency payments was equally divided in cash and certs,
  doing nothing to bring up the percentage of certs.
      Some USDA analysts said the payments reflected hesitation
  from the Office of Managament and Budget to allow another huge
  release of certs onto the market.
      Bills are pending in Congress to move up the final
  feedgrain deficiency payment to "as soon as five months after
  harvest as possible," rather than the current year lag time.
      Neither Rep. Edward Madigan (R-Ill.) nor Sen. Bob Dole
  (R-Kans.), sponsors of the bills, have brought the legislation
  forward. Aides said timing will depend on budget discussions.
  

BCI HOLDINGS TO SELL BOTTLED WATER DIVISION
  &lt;BCI Holdings Corp>  said its &lt;Beatrice
  U.S. Food Corp> retained Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc to assist
  in the sale of its national bottled water business.
      It said products of the subsidiary, based in Monterey Park,
  Calif., are sold under the Arrowhead brand name in California
  and Arizona, the Ozarka name in Texas and the Great Bear name
  in 11 northeastern states.
  

EXCO BUYS U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES BROKER
  &lt;Exco International Plc>, a subsidiary of
  British and Commonwealth Shipping Co Plc &lt;BCOM.L>, said it had
  agreed in principle to buy an 80 pct stake in &lt;RMJ Holdings
  Corp> for about 79 mln dlrs.
      Exco Chairman Richard Lacy told Reuters the acquisition was
  being made from Bank of New York Co Inc &lt;BK.N>, which currently
  holds a 50.1 pct, and from RMJ partners who hold the remainder.
      Bank of New York and the partners will retain about 10 pct
  each and these stakes will be bought over the next six years.
      RMJ is the holding company of RMJ Securities, one of the
  largest U.S. Government securities brokers.
      It is also involved in broking notes, obligations and other
  instruments sponsored by U.S. Federal agencies.
      Lacy said Exco had been considering buying a U.S.
  Government securities broker for the past four years and had
  made an offer for RMJ when it was sold by Security Pacific Corp
  &lt;SPC.N> in 1985. RMJ was then valued at about 50 mln dlrs.
      B and C managing director Peter Goldie said RMJ would be
  bought at about the same multiple as Exco, suggesting net
  income of around 16 mln dlrs.
      The company's earnings had not been hit by the halving of
  brokerage fees some 14 months ago as volumes had since doubled.
      Lacy said that RMJ employed some 300 people, with 200 in
  the brokerage business and about 70 in its &lt;SMS> unit, which
  provided computer software for the financial services
  community.
      RMJ Securities had offices in New York, where total market
  turnover of U.S. Government securities was 110 billion dlrs a
  day, and in London where it has 15 billion.
      It was also given permission last week to open an office in
  Tokyo where total market turnover had lifted rapidly to about
  five billion dlrs a day.
      The acquisition would contribute between five and 10 pct of
  B and C's share earnings in 1987 on a proforma basis.
  

LCE AND IPE ELECT FIRST TRADED OPTIONS MEMBERS
  The first 23 members have been elected to
  the joint traded options facility of the London Commodity
  Exchange (LCE) and the International Petroleum exchange (IPE),
  the exchanges said in a statement.
      More firms have applied and the final tranche will be
  admitted on April one and trading is planned to start in early
  June on the new trading floor on Commodity Quay.
      Traded options need a volatile and liquid futures base to
  succeed and chairman of the joint formation committee Jack
  Patterson said the existing LCE cocoa, coffee, sugar and IPE
  gas oil contracts should have no difficulty in providing this.
  

USDA ESTIMATES 1986/87 USSR GRAIN IMPORTS  26.0 MLN TONNES VS 23.0 IN FEB, 29.9 IN 1985/86

  USDA ESTIMATES 1986/87 USSR GRAIN IMPORTS  26.0 MLN TONNES VS 23.0 IN FEB, 29.9 IN 1985/86
  

USDA ESTIMATES 1986 SOVIET GRAIN CROP  AT 210 MLN TONNES VS 210 IN FEB, 192 YEAR-AGO

  USDA ESTIMATES 1986 SOVIET GRAIN CROP  AT 210 MLN TONNES VS 210 IN FEB, 192 YEAR-AGO
  

DART &lt;DARTA> MAKES OFFER FOR SUPERMARKETS &lt;SGL>
  Dart Group Corp said it offered to
  buy Supermarkets General Corp for 41.75 dlrs per share in cash.
      Earlier Supermarkets General said an "unsolicited third
  party" had made the offer. Analysts estimated the value at
  about 1.6 billion dlrs, based on 38.5 mln shares outstanding.
      Kidder, Peabody and Co Inc told Dart that Kidder's
  affiliate will be prepared to advance up to 750 mln dlrs on a
  subordinated basis.
  
  
  

USDA ESTIMATES SOVIET WHEAT, COARSE GRAINS
  The U.S. Agriculture Department
  forecast the Soviet 1986/87 wheat crop at 92.30 mln tonnes, vs
  92.30 mln tonnes last month. It put the 1985/86 crop at 78.10
  mln tonnes, vs 78.10 mln tonnes last month.
      Soviet 1986/87 coarse grain production is estimated at
  103.30 mln tonnes, vs 103.30 mln tonnes last month. Production
  in 1985/86 is projected at 100.00 mln tonnes, vs 99.99 mln
  tonnes last month.
      USSR wheat imports are forecast at 15.00 mln tonnes in
  1986/87, vs 14.00 mln tonnes last month. Imports in 1985/86 are
  put at 15.70 mln tonnes, vs 15.70 mln tonnes last month. USDA
  estimated Soviet 1986/87 coarse grain imports at 10.00 mln
  tonnes, vs 8.00 mln tonnes last month, and 1985/86 imports at
  13.70 mln tonnes, vs 13.70 mln tonnes last month.
  
  

USDA ORANGE JUICE YIELD ESTIMATE
  The U.S. Agriculture Department
  projected an average yield of 1.47 gallons of frozen
  concentrated orange juice per box (42.0 degree brix equivalent)
  from Florida's 1986/87 crop.
      That compares with 1.46 gallons per box previously and 1.38
  gallons per box from the 1985/86 crop.
      The crop reporting board said the estimates for the 1986/87
  season are based on maturity and yields tests as of March 1.
  

USDA WINTER/SPRING POTATO ESTIMATES
  The U.S. Agriculture Department
  estimated 1987 winter potato production, based on March 1
  conditions, at 2,788,000 cwts (100 lbs), vs 2,764,000 cwts
  indicated last month and 2,991,000 cwts last year.
      The department estimated winter potato area for harvest at
  11,900 acres, vs 11,900 acres last month and 12,300 acres in
  1986.
      The yield per harvested acre for winter potatoes is
  estimated at 234 cwts per acre, vs 243 cwts last year.
      The department also projected 1987 spring potato crop area
  planted at 79,300 cwts, vs 77,400 cwts last year, and area for
  harvest at 76,700 acres, vs 75,900 acres harvested last year.
  

MEATPACKERS STRIKE MORRELL SIOUX CITY PLANT
  About 800 members of the United Food and
  Commercial Workers Union, UFCWU, struck John Morrell's Sioux
  City, Iowa, pork processing plant at midnight Sunday, a
  spokesman for the UFCWU national said.
      Meatpackers at the plant have been working without a
  contract since the old pact expired January 31, UFCWU spokesman
  John Mancuso said. The plant can slaughter and process about
  13,000 to 14,000 hogs a day, he estimated.
      The UFCWU bargaining committee and full membership rejected
  in late January a contract proposal by John Morrell, a
  subsidiary of United Brands Inc, he said.
  
  

PAKISTAN TO TENDER FOR RBD PALM OIL
  Pakistan will hold an import tender
  tomorrow for 6,000 tonnes of refined bleached deodorised palm
  oil for second half March shipments, traders said.
  

CAESARS WORLD &lt;CAW> BID VALUED AT 907 MLN DLRS
  MTS Acquisition Corp said it will need
  about 907 mln dlrs to acquire the 31,781,461 Caesars World Inc
  shares not owned by its owner, Martin T. Sosnoff.
      The estimate came in MTS Acquisition's proxy statement to
  Caesars World shareholders describing its offer of 28 dlrs a
  share for their stock which was announced this morning.
      In that announcement, MTS Acquisition said its bank and
  investor bankers felt they could provide financing totaling 975
  mln dlrs for the offer.
      Sosnoff is Caesars World's largest shareholders with
  4,217,675 of the company's shares. That is about 11.7 pct of
  the outstanding stock on a fully diluted basis, the proxy said.
      Besides being the sole owner of MTS Acquisition, Sosnoff
  owns 61 pct of Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital Corp's &lt;ATL> stock and
  is chairman of that investment management and brokerage firm.
  

CAROLIN MINES HAS NEW GOLD ASSAY RESULTS
  Carolin Mines Ltd
  said recent assays of tailings at its Hope, British Columbia
  mine ranged from 0.50 to 0.64 ounces of gold per ton. 
      There were only trace amounts of platinum and palladium,
  the company said.
      Carolin said the results sharply disagreed with an earlier
  assay performed by Intergold U.S.A. Inc which showed 1.0 ounce
  of gold per ton and 0.50 ounce of platinum per ton.
      Carolin also said it expects to receive results of further
  tests and assays of the tailings within two to three weeks.
  

CCC WHEAT CREDIT GUARANTEES FOR NORTH YEMEN
  The Commodity Credit Corporation,
  CCC, has authorized 25.0 mln dlrs in credit guarantees to North
  Yemen to cover purchases of U.S. wheat under the Intermediate
  Export Credit Guarantee Program (GSM-103), the U.S. Agriculture
  Department said.
      Under the program credit terms extended must be in excess
  of three yeras, but not more than seven years.
      All sales under the line must be registered and exports
  completed by September 30, 1987, the department said.
  

CCC ACCEPTS EXPORT BONUS BARLEY MALT TO NIGERIA
  The Commodity Credit Corporation,
  CCC, has accepted one bonus offer from an exporter on the sale
  of 4,400 tonnes of barley malt to Nigeria, the U.S. Agriculture
  Department said.
      The department said the bonus awarded was 100.00 dlrs per
  tonne and was made to Rahr Malting Co and will be paid in the
  form of commodities from the inventory stocks of the CCC.
      The barley malt is scheduled for shipment during April,
  1987.
      An additional 76,300 tonnes of barley malt are still
  available to Nigeria under the Export Enhancement Program
  initiative announced December 10, 1986, it said.
  

CAROLIN MINES &lt;CRLNF> HAS NEW ASSAY RESULTS
  Carolin Mines Ltd
  said recent assays of tailings at its Hope, British Columbia
  mine indicated that ounces of gold per ton ranged from 0.64 to
  0.50.
      There were only trace amounts of platinum and palladium,
  the company said.
      Carolin said the results sharply disagreed with an earlier
  assay performed by Intergold U.S.A. Inc which showed one ounce
  of gold per ton and 1/2 ounce of platinum per ton.
      Carolin also said it expects to receive results of further
  tests and assays of the tailings within two to three weeks.
  

SEAMAN'S STRIKE CONTINUES, MARINES UNLOAD SHIPS
  Brazilian marines were today
  working on the unloading of ships at the local port as a
  national strike by 40,000 seamen entered its 10th day without
  signs of an agreement.
      The halt, the first national strike by seamen in 25 years,
  started on February 27, and union leaders said they would not
  return to work unless they received a 275 pct pay rise.
      Shipowners have offered a 100 pct raise, which the seamen
  rejected.
      "Television reported that the port was operating at full
  speed, but that's not true," a striking seaman told Reuters.
      "The marines are doing their best, but they don't have the
  manpower nor the experience to control the situation in such a
  quick period," he said.
      Port officials said the national halt had already caused
  losses estimated at 1.5 mln dlrs.
      Despite the presence of marines, there were no reports of
  incidents.
  

USDA RAISES SOVIET GRAIN IMPORT ESTIMATE
  The U.S. Agriculture Department
  increased its estimate of Soviet 1986/87 grain imports to 26
  mln tonnes from last month's projection of 23 mln tonnes.
      In its monthly USSR Grain Situation and Outlook, USDA said
  the increase reflected the return of the Soviet Union to the
  U.S. corn market and continued purchases of both wheat and
  coarse grain from other major suppliers.
      USSR wheat imports were projected at 15 mln tonnes, up one
  mln from last month's estimate and 700,000 tonnes below the
  preliminary 1985/86 figure.
      Soviet grain for feed use was estimated at a record 129 mln
  tonnes. Record or near-record livestock inventories, along with
  a dry fall which likely reduced late season pasturage, and a
  cold winter have increased feed demand, USDA said.
      USSR meat and egg production in January rose only slightly
  from the previous January's level, while milk production
  increased by nearly six pct.
      Unusually cold weather in January and smaller increases in
  roughage supplies during 1986 than in 1985 kept livestock
  production from expanding as much as it did a year earlier,
  USDA said.
  

ECUADOR QUAKE TO CUT OIL REVENUES 800 MLN DLRS
  up to 300 people were feared dead and more
  than 15,000 people left homeless by thursday's earthquake,
  which will cost Ecuador close to 800 mln dlrs in lost petroleum
  revenues, authorities said.
      They estimated the cost of repairing a damaged oil pipeline
  at 150 mln dlrs.
      "the magnitude of the damages caused by the earthquake is
  gigantic," president leon febres cordero said after inspecting
  the damages in napo, the hardest-hit jungle province, 100 miles
  from here.
      The quake damaged 40 km of an oil pipeline, forcing this
  opec nation to suspend crude exports for four months, president
  febres cordero said in a statement issued today by the
  presidential press office.
      The country would lose an estimated 800 mln dlrs in crude
  exports until the pipeline was repaired, the president said. It
  would cost 150 mln dlrs to repair the pipelline which carries
  oil from jungle oil fields over the andes to Balao, a pacific
  ocean port.
      Crude traditionally accounts for up to two-thirds of
  ecuador's exports.
      the quake triggered landslides, swelling the aguarico river
  which burst it banks carrying away homes and huts in napo
  province, health minister jorge brancho told reuters.
      "we fear that up to 300 people died in napo though there is
  no way of now knowing the exact figure because many people have
  disappeared," he said.
      Other estimates ranged as high as 500 dead.
      So far 20 corpses have been recovered, bracho said.
      Information Minister Marco Lara told reporters: "the number
  of dead and injured is not known ... because we do not know how
  many people lived in the homes hit by the landslides."
      Bracho said at least 15,000 were left homeless in the
  cayambe district.
  

BUSINESS EDITOR THEODORE CROSS OFFERS 34 DLRS SHARE FOR HARPER AND ROW

  BUSINESS EDITOR THEODORE CROSS OFFERS 34 DLRS SHARE FOR HARPER AND ROW
  

USDA ESTIMATES CANADIAN CROPS
  The U.S. Agriculture Department
  estimated Canada's 1986/87 wheat crop at 31.85 mln tonnes, vs
  31.85 mln tonnes last month. It estimated 1985/86 output at
  24.25 mln tonnes, vs 24.25 mln last month.
      Canadian 1986/87 coarse grain production is projected at
  27.62 mln tonnes, vs 27.62 mln tonnes last month. Production in
  1985/86 is estimated at 24.95 mln tonnes, vs 24.95 mln last
  month.
      Canadian wheat exports in 1986/87 are forecast at 19.00 mln
  tonnes, vs 18.00 mln tonnes last month. Exports in 1985/86 are
  estimated at 17.71 mln tonnes, vs 17.72 mln last month.
  

USDA ESTIMATES AUSTRALIA WHEAT CROP
  The U.S. Agriculture Department
  forecast Australia's 1986/87 wheat crop at 17.30 mln tonnes, vs
  17.50 mln tonnes last month. It estimated 1985/86 output at
  16.13 mln tonnes, vs 16.13 mln last month.
      Australian wheat exports in 1986/87 are forecast at 14.50
  mln tonnes, vs 15.00 mln tonnes last month, while exports in
  1985/86 are estimated at 15.96 mln tonnes, vs 15.96 mln last
  month.
  

BUSINESS EDITOR OFFERS 34 DLRS FOR HARPER &lt;HPR>
  Theodore Cross, editor of Business
  and Society Review, a business publication, said an investor
  group he heads has offered to buy Harper and Row Publishers Inc
  for 34 dlrs a share cash.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Cross said he proposed the takeover to the board of the New
  York publishing house today.
      Cross, whose investor group includes his wife, Mary, said
  they already hold 261,650 Harper and Row common shares, or 6.0
  pct of the total outstanding common stock. They said they have
  spent 3.5 mln dlrs on their stake so far.
      Cross said he proposed in a letter to Harper and Row that
  the company be merged into a company Cross is forming.
      Suggesting that the total cost of completing the merger
  would be 190 mln dlrs, Cross said he would use 20 mln dlrs of
  his own money for the deal and up to 170 mln dlrs which would
  be borrowed from the First National Bank of Boston under a
  revolving credit facility the bank has agreed to provide.
  
  

FRANCE TO REQUEST PERMANENT MAIZE REBATES
  French maize producers will ask the EC
  Commission to grant permanent maize export rebates following
  the recent EC/U.S. Accord guaranteeing the U.S. An annual
  export quota of two mln tonnes of maize for Spain over four
  years, the French maize producers association, AGPM, said.
      The Commission has already decided to accord rebates for
  the export of 500,000 tonnes of French maize, of which rebates
  for around 100,000 tonnes have been granted.
      The request will be made when export certificates have been
  granted for all the 500,000 tonnes, the AGPM said.
      The association said that the request would cover exports
  to all destinations, adding that the Soviet Union, which has
  important maize needs, is currently excluded from the list of
  destination countries for the 500,000 tonnes of French maize.
      The U.S. Agriculture Department has forecast Soviet maize
  imports for the 1986/87 campaign at 4.90 mln tonnes against
  10.40 mln in 1985/86.
  

U.S. PAYMENTS GAP TO PERSIST, EX-FED CHIEF SAYS
  The dollar will decline over the next
  two to three years, but this is unlikely to result in a
  complete reduction of the U.S. current account deficit, said
  Anthony Solomon, chairman of S.G. Warburg (USA) Inc and former
  president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
      In a presentation to the Japan Society, Solomon said
  without elaboration that he expects a "significant decline in
  the dollar," within the next three years.
      "The dollar will fall more, but the current account deficit
  will stop being reduced when it reaches its structural core,"
  he said.
      Solomon described the structural core as about one-half of
  the current 150 billion dlr annual deficit. He cited several
  factors which will prevent an elimination of the deficit.
      For one thing, it is unlikely that there will be any new
  investment in those manufacturing industries that shrank when
  the dollar was at uncompetitive levels, he said.
      In addition, he said that the U.S. has an increased
  propensity to import in order to satisify consumer tastes.
      Solomon forecast inflation at 4.5 pct by year-end, but said
  it could be kept below five pct in the medium-term if oil
  prices are stable and commodity values remain low.
  

CCC ACCEPTS EXPORT BONUS DAIRY CATTLE TO MOROCCO
  The Commodity Credit Corporation,
  CCC, has accepted a bonus offer from an exporter on the sale of
  13 head of dairy cattle to Morocco, the U.S. Agriculture
  Department said.
      The department said the bonus awarded was 1,505.00 dlrs per
  head and was made to Brown Swiss Enterprises Inc. It will be
  paid in the form of commodities from CCC inventories.
      The cattle are for delivery during March 9-September 30,
  1987.
      The department said the purchase completes the Export
  Enhancement Program initiative for dairy cattle to Morocco
  announced on April 16, 1986.
  

COLOROLL AGREES TO BUY U.S. WALLCOVERINGS COMPANY
  &lt;Coloroll Group Plc> said it has entered
  into a conditional agreement to acquire the business and assets
  of &lt;Wallco Inc> and related companies for 14.5 mln dlrs.
      Miami-based Wallco manufactures and distributes
  wallcoverings and showed a pretax profit of 1.5 mln dlrs on
  turnover of 37 mln in the year ending June 1986. The total U.S.
  Market was estimated to be worth 840 mln dlrs in 1986, having
  grown by 47 pct in the previous five years, Coloroll said.
      The combined sales and profit of the enlarged Coloroll U.S.
  Business would be 67 mln and four mln dlrs respectively.
  

CCC EXPORT BONUS DAIRY CATTLE FOR CANARY ISLANDS
  The Commodity Credit Corporation,
  CCC, has accepted a bonus offer from an exporter on the sale of
  75 head of dairy cattle to the Canary Islands, the U.S.
  Agriculture Department said.
      The department said the bonus awarded was 1,459.00 dlrs per
  head and was made to T.K. International Inc. It will be paid in
  the form of commodities from the inventory of CCC stocks.
      The cattle are for delivery during March-June, 1987, it
  said.
      An additional 3,925 head of dairy cattle are still
  available to the Canary Islands under the Export Enahcnement
  Program initiative announced July 28, 1986, it said.
  

U.S. CONSUMER CREDIT ROSE 536 MILLION DLRS IN JAN VS 144 MILLION DEC GAIN

  U.S. CONSUMER CREDIT ROSE 536 MILLION DLRS IN JAN VS 144 MILLION DEC GAIN
  

USX &lt;X> UNIT RAISES SOME CRUDE POSTINGS
  Marathon Petroleum Company, a
  subsidiary of USX Corp &lt;X>, said it raised the contract price
  it pays for three grades of crude oil, effective March 6.
      Illinois Sweet and Indiana Sweet are both being raised 50
  cts a barrel to 16.75 dlrs/bbl, and the Southern Michigan grade
  is being raised 25 cts/bbl, also to 16.75 dlrs a bbl.
      The West Texas Intermediate grade was unchanged.
  

UNITED BRANDS INC 4TH QTR SHR PROFIT SIX CTS VS LOSS 11 CTS

  UNITED BRANDS INC 4TH QTR SHR PROFIT SIX CTS VS LOSS 11 CTS
  

NATIONAL FUEL GAS &lt;NFG> SETS SPLIT, HIGHER PAYOUT
  National Fuel Gas Co said its board has
  approved a two-for-one stock split and will consider an
  increased cash dividend at its June meeting.
      The company also said management will recommend, at the
  June board meeting, an increase of 12 cts per share in the
  current annual dividend rate of 2.28 dlrs a share, raising it
  to 2.40 dlrs per share, or 1.20 dlrs a share after the split.
      National Fuel Gas said the split will be paid to holders of
  record May 29.  A spokeswoman said the distribution date for
  the split has not been determined.
      The company said the split is subject to approval of the
  Securities and Exchange Commission under the Public Utility
  Holding Act. The company now has 11,928,871 shares outstanding.
  

SENSORMATIC &lt;SNSR> UPS CHECKROBOT &lt;CKRB> STAKE
  Sensormatic Electronics
  Corp said it upped its investment in CheckRobot Inc in the form
  of 2.5 mln dlrs of convertible preferred stock, raising its
  stake in CheckRobot to 42 pct from 37 pct on a fully diluted
  basis.
  

UNION, SHIPPERS AGREE TO CUT N.Y. PORT COSTS
  The New York Shipping Association and
  International Longshoremen's Association said they agreed to
  cut cargo assessments at the Port of New York and New Jersey by
  more than 50 pct on some labor intensive cargos.
      The charges on cargo handled by union workers will be
  reduced to 2.85 dlrs a ton from 5.85 dlrs a ton, effective
  April one, according to the agreement between the union and
  shippers. The assessments are used to fund workers' benefits.
      "What were doing is lowering the price to get more bulk
  cargo flowing through here," a spokesman for the New York
  Shipping Association said.
  
  
  

TREASURY BALANCES AT FED ROSE ON MARCH 6
  Treasury balances at the Federal
  Reserve rose on March 6 to 3.879 billion dlrs from 3.467
  billion dlrs the previous business day, the Treasury said in
  its latest budget statement.
      Balances in tax and loan note accounts fell to 12.453
  billion drls from 14.350 billion dlrs on the same respective
  days.
      The Treasury's operating cash balance totaled 16.332
  billion dlrs on March 6 compared with 17.817 billion dlrs on
  March 5.
  

CSX &lt;CSX> UNIT SETS IMPROVED SHIPPING SERVICE
  CSX Corp's Sea-Land Corp unit
  said it will offer improved containership services between
  Puerto Rico and the East Coast and Gulf Coast of the United
  States, beginning March 16.
      The carrier said it will provide shorter door-to-door
  transit times, more convenient cargo availability and better
  rail connections for traffic moving between Puerto Rico and
  North America.
  

WORLD BANK REPORT CRITICISES PERU ECONOMIC PLAN
  a confidential world bank report on the
  peruvian economy said the government's strategy does not offer
  good prospects for medium and long-term growth and is likely to
  quickly lead to inflation.
      The report, published today by an economic monthly, the
  peru report, said the success of president alan garcia's
  government in stimulating output last year to achieve eight pct
  gross domestic product growth "represents gains in the short
  term at the expense of the long."
      Government officials had no immediate comment on the
  report, which advised a reduction in the overall size of the
  public investment programme and greater emphasis on the
  preservation of peru's export potential.
      The report said that although the government had succeeded
  in cutting inflation 50 pct a year in the first half of 1985 to
  under 70 pct, its stabilisation and reactivation programme was
  encountering increasing difficulties.
      "an early renewal of inflationary pressures, linked to
  monetary expansion, exchange rate devaluation and an easing of
  price controls, appears not improbable," it added.
  
  

MINISTERS FEEL EC FORECASTS TOO PESSIMISTIC
  European Community finance ministers
  discussed the economic outlook for the 12-nation bloc and many
  said a recent gloomy forecast by the EC Commission was too
  pessimistic.
      The Commission, the EC's executive authority, two weeks ago
  cut its forecast for economic growth in the Community to 2.3
  per cent for this year from 2.8 per cent predicted last autumn.
      It said economic prospects had been less promising over the
  past few months because of a sharp fall in the value of the
  dollar and a slowing of world trade -- factors which would
  restrain Community exports.
      But diplomats said several member states, led by West
  Germany, Britain and France, felt the forecast was too gloomy,
  especially since it was drafted before a recent agreement
  between the leading Western economic powers to stabilise
  currencies around current levels.
      "Many delegations feel the (Commission's) report is rather
  too pessimistic," said Belgian Finance Minister Mark Eyskens,
  who chaired the meeting.
      The Commission, which slashed its growth forecast for West
  Germany to two per cent from 3.2 per cent, has made clear it
  feels Bonn has room to introduce additional measures to
  stimulate its economy that would benefit the rest of Europe.
      But two top German officials, State Secretaries Otto
  Schlecht and Hans Tietmeyer, told reporters Bonn saw no need at
  the moment for action to bolster the EC's biggest economy.
      The diplomats said they were backed by Britain and France,
  while Italy, Greece and Denmark supported the Commission's view
  that Bonn should bring in new measures to aid EC growth.
  

U.S. CONSUMER CREDIT ROSE 536 MLN DLRS IN JAN
  U.S. consumer instalment credit rose
  a seasonally adjusted 536 mln dlrs in January after a revised
  rise of 144 mln dlrs in December, the Federal Reserve Board
  said.
      The annual rate of growth in January was 1.1 pct, up from
  0.3 pct in December. Previously the Fed said consumer credit
  rose 105 mln dlrs in December.
      Among the credit categories, auto credit fell in January to
  1.02 billion dlrs from 2.06 billion dlrs in December, the Fed
  said.
      Revolving credit in January fell by 366 mln dlrs after
  rising by 552 mln dlrs in December.
      Mobile home credit was up by 130 mln dlrs after falling by
  21 mln dlrs in December.
      The category referred to as "other," covering bank and credit
  union loans, fell by 250 mln dlrs in January after declining by
  2.44 billion dlrs in December, the Fed said.
      Before seasonal adjustment, consumer credit outstanding
  totaled 580.37 billion dlrs at the end of January, compared
  with 531.29 billion dlrs at the end of January, 1986.
  

CONOCO RAISES CRUDE OIL PRICES UP TO ONE DLR BARREL, WTI AT 17.50 DLRS

  CONOCO RAISES CRUDE OIL PRICES UP TO ONE DLR BARREL, WTI AT 17.50 DLRS
  

VIACOM &lt;VIA>, NAT'L AMUSEMENTS SEEK FAST MERGER
  The chiefs of Viacom International Inc
  and &lt;National Amusements Inc> said they met and agreed to work
  together to complete the previously announced merger of the two
  companies "as expeditiously as possible."
      A spokeswoman for Viacom declined to say if the executives
  had set a timetable for closing the deal.
      Viacom last week agreed to be acquired by National
  Amusements for a combination of cash and stock with an
  estimated value of 53 dlrs a share, or a total of about 3.4
  billion dlrs.
  

ASCS BUYS PROCESSED PRODUCTS FOR DOMESTIC USE
  The Agricultural Stabilization and
  Conservation Service (ASCS) bought 25.7 mln pounds of wheat
  flour at a cost of 2.8 mln dlrs for domestic shipment April
  1-15 and April 16-30, an ASCS spokesman said.
      ASCS also bought 11.1 mln pounds of bakers flour for 1.1
  mln dlrs, 1.9 mln pounds of pasta for 408,258 dlrs, 1.4 mln
  pounds of processed cereal products for 304,043 dlrs, 4.8 mln
  pounds of corn products for 474,944 dlrs, and 16.3 mln pounds
  of milled rice for 2.0 mln dlrs.
  

GENERAL CINEMA CORP 1ST QTR OPER SHR 43 CTS VS 47 CTS

  GENERAL CINEMA CORP 1ST QTR OPER SHR 43 CTS VS 47 CTS
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET SHORTAGE FORECAST REVISED DOWN
  The Bank of England said it revised its
  forecast of the shortage in the money market down to around 700
  mln stg from its original estimate of 800 mln.
  

BANK BOARD SAYS MORTGAGE RATES DOWN IN FEBRUARY
  The Federal Home Loan Bank Board said
  interest rates on both fixed rate and adjustable rate home
  mortgage loans were down substantially in early February.
      The bank board said the average effective commitment rate
  for fixed mortgages with a maturity of at least 15 years for
  new home purchases dropped to 9.54 pct in early February, a 30
  basis point decline from early January.
      The commitment rate on adjustable rate mortgages declined
  by 16 basis points in the same period bringing the average rate
  to 8.5 pct, the bank board said.
      The average effective interest rate on all loans closed by
  major lenders declined 27 basis points from early January to
  9.26 pct in early February, the lowest rate since March 1978,
  the bank board said.
      The average effective rate for fixed mortgages was was 9.51
  pct, down 30 basis points from the early January level. The
  average effective rate for adjustable rate mortgages declined
  22 basis points to 8.61 pct, the bank board said.
  

NORANDA TO SPIN OFF FOREST INTERESTS INTO SEPARATE COMPANY

  NORANDA TO SPIN OFF FOREST INTERESTS INTO SEPARATE COMPANY
  

API PRESIDENT SEES OPTIONS TO AVERT OIL CRISIS
  American Petroleum Institute President
  Charles DiBona said no options should be rejected to combat 
  growing U.S. dependence on foreign oil.
      "No action should be ruled out--import fees or quotas,
  floor prices, tax incentives or other alternatives--while a
  national dialogue on the issue continues," DiBona said at a 
  paper institute conference in New York today.
      DiBona said there is no unanimity within the industry on
  how to stimulate energy production but there is consensus on
  removing several government policies that hinder investments in
  new prospects.
      DiBona said the windfall profit tax should be abolished
  immediately and current proposals for increased environmental
  regulations on acid rain and waste disposal should be not
  adopted. He also suggested that the Arctic National Wildlife
  Refuge in Alaska should be opened up for leasing to oil
  companies, DiBona said.
      "This is a battle the industry cannot afford to lose if the
  nation is to continue to benefit from Alaskan oil," DiBona
  said. Since 1986 U.S. oil production has fallen while
  consumption rose and that has raised dependence on imported
  oil, particularly from OPEC, DiBona said.
  

U.S. SELLS 3-MO BILLS AT 5.63 PCT, STOP 5.64 PCT, 6-MO 5.59 PCT, STOP 5.60 PCT

  U.S. SELLS 3-MO BILLS AT 5.63 PCT, STOP 5.64 PCT, 6-MO 5.59 PCT, STOP 5.60 PCT
  

NATIONAL DISTILLERS &lt;DR> CLOSES ALMADEN SALE
  National Distillers and
  Chemical Corp said it completed the sale of Almaden Vineyards
  Inc to Heublein Inc for about 128 mln dlrs.
      Heublein, a former subsidiary of RJR Nabisco Inc &lt;RJR>, was
  recently acquired by &lt;Grand Metropolitan PLC>.
      Almaden, based in San Jose, Calif., makes and sells table
  wines, champagnes and brandies as well as some premium wines
  under the Charles Lefranc Cellars label.
  

CEASARS WORLD SAYS IT IS STUDYING UNSOLICITED 28 DLR-PER-SHR OFFER BY MARTIN SOSNOFF

  CEASARS WORLD SAYS IT IS STUDYING UNSOLICITED 28 DLR-PER-SHR OFFER BY MARTIN SOSNOFF
  

U.S. BILL AUCTION RATES AVERAGE 5.63, 5.59 PCT
  The U.S. Treasury said its weekly
  auction of three-month bills produced an average rate of 5.63
  pct, with a 5.59 pct rate on six-month bills.
      These rates compared with averages of 5.47 pct for the
  three- and 5.51 pct for the six-month bills sold last week.
      The bond-equivalent yield on three-month bills was 5.81
  pct. Accepted bids ranges from 5.61 pct to 5.64 pct and 29 pct
  of the bids at the high, or stopout rate, were taken. For six
  months, the yield was 5.85 pct and the bids ranges from 5.56
  pct to 5.60 pct with 30 pct of the bids accepted.
      The Treasury said it received 30.9 billion dlrs of bids for
  the three-month bills, including 1.0 billion dlrs in
  non-competitive bids from the public. It accepted 6.6 billion
  dlrs of bids, including 2.2 billion dlrs from the Federal
  Reserve and 9.1 mln dlrs from foreign and international
  monetary authorities.
      Some 25.7 billion dlrs in bids for six-month bills were
  received, including 785 mln dlrs in non-competitives. The
  Treasury accepted 6.6 billion dlrs, including 1.9 billion dlrs
  from the Fed and 942 mln dlrs from foreign and international
  authorities.
      The average price for the three-month bills was 98.577 and
  prices ranged from 98.574 to 98.582.  The average price for the
  six-months bills was 97.174, and prices ranged from 97.169 to
  97.189.
      The average yield on the three-month bills was the highest
  since 5.66 pct on Feb 17. The average yield on the six-month
  bills was the highest since 5.70 pct on Feb 17.
  

CANADA MULLING SELLING PETRO-CANADA - MULRONEY
  Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said the
  government was considering selling Petro-Canada and the sale
  would proceed if it were in the national interest to do so.
      Mulroney told the House of Commons assets of the huge oil
  company would be examined before a decision was made, just as
  other state-run companies were studied before being sold under
  Ottawa's privatization program.
      "The government is going to examine assets of this nature
  to ascertain if they continue to play an appropriate role in
  public policy and we will make a determination as we have in
  other cases," Mulroney told the daily question period.         
      Asked by opposition members to clairify Finance Minister
  Michael Wilson's statement on Friday that Petro-Canada no
  longer has any pubilic policy role, Mulroney said his
  government has long promised to sell off companies that could
  be better run by the private sector.
      Outside the House, Energy Minister Marcel Masse said
  Petro-Canada would be worth between three and four billion dlrs
  and, because of the size, could be difficult to sell.
      He also said he would prefer to see Canadians participating
  in any privatization, but would not give any details on timing
  of a sale.          
  

NEWS CORP &lt;NWS> COMPLETES PURCHASE OF NEWSPAPER
  The News Corp said the South China
  Morning Post Ltd of Hong Kong become a wholly-owned subsidiary
  March 7 as previously announced.
  

RICHMOND HILL&lt;RICH>, RIVERHEAD END MERGER TALKS
  Richmond Hill Savings Bank and
  &lt;Riverhead Savings Bank FSB> said they terminated their
  previously announced merger negotiations.
      The banks gave no reason for ending the talks, which began
  on January 14.
  

SWEDEN TO GO AHEAD WITH S. AFRICAN TRADE SANCTIONS
  Sweden's ruling Social Democratic
  Party gave full power to the government to decree unilateral
  trade sanctions against South Africa, Prime Minister Ingvar
  Calrsson said.
      Carlsson told a news conference the party decided the fight
  against apartheid took priority over Sweden's traditional
  policy of only adopting sanctions with the backing of the U.N.
  Security Council.
      The government will decide later what form the trade
  boycott will take and when it will come into force.
  

GENERAL CINEMA &lt;GCN> POOR SEASON LOWERS NET
  General Cinema Corp said
  lower attendence at its theatres against last year's record
  Christmas season lowered its first fiscal quarter operating
  earnings nine pct to 15.9 mln dlrs.
      "While we are not off to as good a start in fiscal 1987 as
  we would like, business has picked up in the last few weeks,"
  chairman Richard Smith said.
      He said that the company expected net pricing to be higher
  and unit volume to improve in the remaining quarters of the
  fiscal year.
      The company added that operating earnings in its theatre
  unit will be higher in fiscal 1987 if the important summer
  season film releases perform well.
      In addition, its other key business, General Cinema
  Beverages, is expected to achieve record operating results for
  the full year, Smith said.
      The company's superstar video business which rents video
  cassettes in supermarkets continues to operate at an expected
  loss, the company added.
      General Cinema said the financing costs associated with its
  purchase of 3.5 mln Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc &lt;CHH> shares
  for 177.9 mln dlrs, and its 89.7 mln sterling investment in
  &lt;Cadbury Schweppes PLC>, lowered first quarter net.
      But it said the loss was offset by a 2.5 mln dlr gain on
  the sale of common shares of Sea-Land Corp, a unit of CSX Corp
  &lt;CSX>.
  

CEASARS WORLD &lt;CAW> STUDYING SOSNOFF OFFER
  Ceasars Wold Inc said its board is
  studying the unsolicited and conditional tender offer for all
  its common shares at 28 dlrs per share from Martin T. Sosnoff.
      A company spokesman said the board expects to make a
  recommendation "shortly", but could not specify a time period.
      Ceasars World Chairman Henry Gluck in a statement urged
  shareholders not to take any action with respect to the offer
  prior to the board's recommendation.
      Sosnoff made the offer directly to shareholders in a
  newspaper advertisement through a company he formed, called MTS
  Acquisition Corp. It expires April 3.
  

AMERICUS TRUST &lt;BYU> &lt;BYP> INITIAL QTRLY DIV
  Americus Trust For Bristol Myers shares
  announced an initial dividend of 68.75 cts payable May 12 for
  shareholders of record April 3.
  

UNITED SECURITY &lt;UNSE> TO BUY ROBERT BROWN UNIT
  United Security Financial Corp of
  Illinois said it has signed a letter of intent to buy Robert
  Co. Brown and Co Inc's &lt;RCBI> MAGIC Insurance Group unit.
      Robert C. Brown and Co would receive newly issued United
  Security stock. United Security said it is anticipated that
  such stock would represent a substantial majority of the shares
  outstanding after the merger.
      United Security's principal subsidiary is United Security
  Life Insurance Co of Illinois. The MAGIC Group owns Pilgrim
  Life Insurance Co of America and Middle Atlantic Life Insurance
  Co.
  

GRAIN SHIPS LOADING AT PORTLAND
  There were three grain ships loading
  and two ships were waiting to load at Portland, according to
  the Portland Merchants Exchange.
  

WARRINGTON SELLS SHOE DIVISIONS
  (Warrington Inc) said it sold its shoe
  divisions to Montreal-based (Taurus Footwear Inc) for
  undisclosed terms.
      The divisions manufacture and distribute Greb, Hush
  Puppies, Kodiak, and Santana brand shoes and had revenues of
  about 69 mln dlrs last year, Warrington said. It said the sale
  of the shoe divisions and the previous sale of its ski boot
  businesses will result in an unspecified net gain.
      Warrington said it plans to concentrate on its Canstar
  Sports Group Inc skate and athletic footwear division, the
  largest ice skate manufacturer and distributor in the Western
  world.
      Warrington said it decided to rationalize the balance of
  its ski businesses, which is expected to result in a divestment
  loss which could outweigh the net gains on the sales of its
  shoe and ski boot divisions.
      Taurus said the acquisition is expected to increase its
  annual sales to about 100 mln dlrs and make it Canada's largest
  footwear manufacturer.
  

DUPONT &lt;DD> UNIT RAISES CRUDE OIL PRICES
  Conoco Inc, a subsidiary of DuPont
  Corp, said it was increasing its contract prices for crude oil
  between 10 cts and one dlr a barrel, effective today.
      Conoco said the increase brings its price for the U.S.
  benchmark crude West Texas Intermediate to 17.50 dlrs a barrel,
  up one dlr.
      South Louisiana Sweet, also up one dlr, is now 17.85 dlrs.
  West Texas Sour was up 10 cts to 16.60 dlrs a barrel.
      Conoco was the last company to raise prices following a
  series of increases initiated last week by Sun Co &lt;SUN>, which
  reversed the posted price cuts made at the end of February.
  

CBT DISCUSSES MAJOR CHANGES FOR RENOVATION
  Chicago Board of Trade (CBT)
  agricultural and financial futures markets could be in for a
  period of major upheaval later this year if the exchange goes
  ahead with planned renovation.
      A CBT spokesman told Reuters the exchange was looking at a
  number of options to identify the most cost effective and
  efficient way to proceed, including one which would involve
  moving the entire grains floor out of the building and into the
  nearby MidAmerica Commodity Exchange.
      "One of (CBT Chairman) Karsten Mahlmann's agenda items has
  been to proceed with renovation in the financial futures room,"
  the spokesman said.
      Another CBT official, executive vice president George
  Sladoje, said the issue would be discussed this Friday at a
  special meeting on the exchange floor.
      A number of presentations have been made with regard to
  renovating the financial futures room, Sladoje said. "We've
  looked at five or six different alternatives, involving such
  things as flip-flopping the trading rooms," he added.
      It is conceivable that under a couple of these plans, we
  might use the MidAmerica Exchange temporarily for some CBT
  markets, Sladoje said.
      "If we move out of one floor entirely, then the
  construction period will be about a year," he said, adding that
  the issue was likely to go to a membership vote first and then
  be on the drawing board for eight months to a year.
      The CBT spokesman stressed that discussions were very
  preliminary at this stage and nothing was likely to begin until
  this summer at the earliest.
      In order to renovate the crowded financial futures pits,
  exchange officials have discussed providing them a temporary
  home next door in the present grains-dominated area.
      This could involve moving CBT markets in U.S. Treasury Bond
  futures, Treasury Notes, Muni-bonds, and options on T-Bonds and
  T-Notes through an adjoining corridor, while utilizing the
  MidAmerica floor for such CBT futures contracts as corn, wheat,
  soybeans, soybean products and agricultural options.
      Any such moves could meet with opposition among some CBT
  members.
      One senior floor trader said the financial futures room
  badly needs renovating.
      "There is talk the grains floor will shift to the MidAm and
  the financials will move to the grains area," he said.
      The CBT spokesman said another option being discussed was
  to renovate the financial floor in quadrants, one quarter at a
  time. "The first step, after deciding the most effective way to
  proceed, would be to get architectural and engineering
  drawings," he said.
      He added that it was difficult at present to determine an
  exact time frame for any possible moves. "This is a major
  undertaking and a process that would spread out over next
  year," he said.
      Floor traders at the MidAmerica Commodity Exchange, which
  merged with the CBT about a year ago, said they were preparing
  to vacate their floor at the end of this month.
      Space has recently been cleared for them at the CBT by
  moving its Major Market Index pit into the area once reserved
  for lightly-traded CBT gold and silver futures, which now share
  their trading area.
      The MidAm specializes in mini-contracts in grains,
  livestock, metals, financials and foreign currencies as well as
  some options contracts.
      "Rumor has it that the CBT grains are coming over here
  because the bonds are too crowded," one MidAm trader said.
      Another source at the MidAm said this change could take
  place by July or August.
  

GROUP SEEKS PRIME MEDICAL &lt;PMSI> HOLDER LIST
  A group of investment firms led by
  Far Hills, N.J., investor Natalie Koether said it is seeking
  information about the shareholders of Prime Medical Services
  Inc, over which it has said it is seeking control.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  the group, which includes Shamrock Associates, included a March
  6 letter to Prime which asks for a complete list of all
  shareholders and their addresses.
      The group said it wants the information so it can contact
  shareholders on issues, including election of an opposition
  slate of directors to the board and other proxy contests.
      The Koether group's letter gives the company five days to
  respond to its request. If there is no response from Prime
  Medical, the group said it would consider the demand refused
  and would take "other proper steps" to get the information.
      The group said it already holds 1,483,886 Prime Medical
  shares, or 17.5 pct of the total. It said it has taken legal
  action to try to force the company to set an annual meeting and
  require all directors to stand for election.
      In a previous SEC filing, the group has said it has decided
  to try to seek control of Prime Medical through a tender offer,
  exchange offer, proxy contest or other ways.
  

&lt;GRAND METROPOLITAN PLC> UNIT TO SELL BUSINESS
  Grand Metropolitan PLC said its
  Grandmet USA Inc unit decided to sell its physical fitness and
  exercise equipment business.
      The company said Morgan Stanely and Co Inc is advising it
  on the sale of the business.
  

CHRYSLER &lt;C> AMC BUYOUT VALUED AT 1.55 BILLION
  Chrysler Corp's proposed acquisition of
  American Motors Corp is valued at about 1.55 billion dlrs,
  including the cost of acquisition and the 767 mln dlrs in
  American Motor' debt that Chrysler will assume, analysts said.
      They said Chrysler's cost of acquisition was valued at  782
  mln dlrs, paid in cash, notes and Chrysler shares.
      The analysts told Reuters that at a New York briefing
  Chrysler treasurer Fred Zuckerman outlined his company's
  agreement with Renault to assume AMC's debt as well as 332 mln
  dlrs in unfunded pension liabilities, though the latter is not
  included valuing the transaction.
      Analysts were generally positive on Chrysler's proposed
  purchase of its much-smaller rival, but said they expected the
  transaction would carry with it a short-term dilution in
  Chrysler's earnings.
      A Chrysler financial source, speaking anonymously, told
  Reuters that the proposed purchase price was smaller than it
  would have been had a deal been struck last year because the
  impact of the new U.S. tax law removes Chrysler's ability to
  assume AMC's large reserve of tax-loss carryforwards
  accumulated from its losses since 1980.
      "There were very serious discussions last fall but we
  didn't pull it off," the source said in a reference to the
  assassination in November of former Renault chairman Georges
  Besse.
      "It's too bad because the tax benefits fell on the floor.
  And Renault could have gotten a much better price if we'd done
  it before the end of last year."
      In addition to AMC's debt and its pension liabilities, the
  source said Chrysler would also assume any liability from
  lawsuits over the safety of Jeeps, which he called "an overhang
  to the company."
      Analysts quoted Chrysler officials as having told them that
  the deal includes payment to Renault of 200 mln dlrs principal
  in the form of a 10-year note at eight pct interest, 35 mln
  dlrs cash for Renault's equity in AMC's finance subsidiary, 25
  mln dlrs in cash for "transaction fees" in connection with the
  acquisition and 522 mln dlrs worth of Chrysler stock to be paid
  AMC shareholders.
      "The big number is the 767 mln dlrs in debt assumption,"
  analyst Jack Kirnan of Kidder Peabody and Co told Reuters.
       Moody's Investors Service Inc said it may downgrade 12
  billion dlrs of Chrysler Corp and unit debt due to the deal.
       But the Chrysler source said that in assuming AMC's
  liabilities, his company will refinance at a lower rate any AMC
  debt that is being carried at "non-market" rates.
      He said there were difficulties in negotiating with the
  previous Renault management on the acquisition because they
  were committed to the group's business plan of which AMC was an
  integral part.
      "The new management didn't have that problem - AMC wasn't
  their baby," he said.
  

WASHINGTON NAT'L &lt;WNT> BUYS UNITED PRESIDENTIAL
  Washington National Corp's
  Washington National Insurance Co said it bought the remaining
  15 pct of United Presidential Corp's &lt;UPCO> outstanding shares
  at 19 dlrs a share cash.
      The acquisition of the shares is part of a plan of exchange
  approved by United Presidential shareholders at a special
  meeting March 6.
      The purchase of the remaining United Presidential stake
  follows Washington National's buying 85 pct of United
  Presidential in a 19 dlrs a share tender offer which terminated
  December 12.
  

CONAGRA &lt;CAG> COMPLETES MERGER WITH TRIDENT
  Conagra Inc said it completed the
  merger of its Sea-Alaska Products Co unit and &lt;Trident Seafoods
  Corp.>
      Conagra said the new company, in which it holds a 45 pct
  stake, will be called Trident Seafoods Corp. Charles Bundrant,
  president of Trident before the merger, was named president of
  the new company, Conagra said.
      Conagra said it also completed the previously announced
  acquisition of &lt;Bristol Monarch Corp> and that Trident
  completed the purchase of the remaining 50 pct stake of &lt;San
  Juan Seafoods Inc.>
  

MARKET DISCOUNTS HIGHER SOVIET GRAIN IMPORTS
  Grain analysts said the increase of
  three mln tonnes in 1986/87 Soviet grain imports is unlikely to
  affect the market Tuesday.
      They said the market already has discounted higher Soviet
  imports, partly on news last month that the Soviet Union bought
  one mln tonnes of U.S. corn, and on rumors that the Reagan
  administration is pushing for authority to sell the Soviets
  U.S. wheat under the Export Enhancement Program.
      In its supply-demand report, the USDA raised its estimate
  for 1986/87 Soviet grain imports to 26 mln tonnes from 23 mln.
      "That was business already done, for all practical
  purposes," said Drexel Burnham analyst Dale Gustafson,
  reflecting similar statements made by other analysts.
  

&lt;ATCO LTD> SEES GAIN FROM SALE
  Atco Ltd said its Atco
  Development unit agreed to sell the Canadian Utilities Center
  in Edmonton, Alberta and the Canadian Western Center in
  Calgary.
      The sales, together with the previously-announced sale of
  Atco's Australian operations, will gross 114 mln dlrs and
  result in an after-tax gain of 31 mln dlrs, which will be
  reflected in Atco's fiscal year results.
      Its fiscal year ends March 31, the company said. In
  addition, the sales will produce 47 mln dlrs cash after debt
  reduction of 67 mln dlrs, Atco said.
  

LINDNER TELLS SEC HE HAS HAD TALKS WITH TAFT ON SEEKING CONTROL OF COMPANY

  LINDNER TELLS SEC HE HAS HAD TALKS WITH TAFT ON SEEKING CONTROL OF COMPANY
  

BANCROFT &lt;BCV> FILES SUIT AGAINST ZICO
  Bancroft Convertible Fund Inc said it
  filed a lawsuit in federal court in Newark, N.J., seeking to
  block a hostile 30 dlr a share takeover offer by &lt;Zico
  Investment Holdings Inc.>
      Bancroft said the suit also names Michael B. Javett,
  principal officer of Zico, and First Fidelity Bancorp's &lt;FFB>
  First Fidelity Bank unit, the depositary for Zico's offer.
      Bancroft said the suit also names &lt;Georgeson and Co Inc>,
  Zico's information agent, and &lt;Luthie Intercontinentale Inc>, a
  Panamanian corporation.
      Bancroft said its complaint alleges that Zico's tender
  offer materials include false and misleading information and
  that the offer violates the Investment Company Act of 1940.
      The company said its stockholders approved proposals that
  will insure that it remains independent.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET RECEIVES 37 MLN STG ASSISTANCE
  The Bank of England said it had provided
  the money market with 37 mln stg assistance in the morning
  session. This compares with the Bank's downward revised
  estimate of the shortfall in the system today of around 700 mln
  stg.
      The central bank purchased bank bills outright comprising
  four mln stg in band one at 10-7/8 pct and 33 mln stg in band
  two at 10-13/16 pct.
  

WORLD BANK REPORT CRITICISES PERU ECONOMIC PLAN
  A confidential World Bank report on the
  Peruvian economy has said the government's strategy does not
  offer good prospects for medium and long-term growth and is
  likely to lead to an early renewal of inflationary pressure.
      The report, published today by the economic monthly, The
  Peru Report, said the success of president Alan Garcia's
  government in stimulating output last year to achieve a growth
  in gross domestic product of over eight pct "represents gains in
  the short term at the expense of the long."
      Government officials had no immediate comment on the
  report, which advised a reduction in the overall size of the
  public investment program and greater emphasis on the
  preservation of Peru's export potential.
      The report said that although the government had succeeded
  in cutting inflation from 250 pct a year in the first half of
  1985 to under 70 pct, its stabilisation and reactivation
  program was encountering rising difficulties.
      "An early renewal of inflationary pressures, linked to
  monetary expansion, exchange rate devaluation and an easing of
  price controls, appears not improbable," it added.
      The world bank report said the government's policies had
  reduced inflation and short-term increases in consumption at
  the apparent cost of price distortions, overvaluation of the
  currency, balance of payments disequilibrium, reserve losses,
  and sharply diminished creditworthiness.
      It said unless the government took action quickly to fix a
  competitive exchange rate and control the public sector
  deficit, "the higher the probability will be that the government
  will eventually have to resort to drastic curtailment of
  domestic demand and either sharp devaluation or still further
  controls on imports in order to stem inflation and support the
  balance of payments."
      It said the bank would place more emphasis on the
  preservation of peru's export potential, external links and
  overall economic efficiency.
      The government's incentive policies towards the mining and
  petroleum sectors, among its main traditional exports,
  suggested that it did not accord high priority to their
  economic viability, it added.
  

LINDNER SAYS HE DISCUSSED CONTROL OF TAFT &lt;TFB>
  Financier Carl Lindner, who holds a
  16.2 pct stake in Taft Broadcasting Co, told the Securities and
  Exchange Commission he has discussed with the company the
  possibility of seeking control of it.
      Lindner, the Cincinnati, Ohio, investor who controls
  American Financial Corp, said his talks with some of Taft's
  managers and directors have been aimed at "achieving an
  increased ownership position" in the company.
      Lindner said his increase in ownership would be made either
  by making an offer to acquire control of Taft or taking part in
  a group to acquire the company.
      Lindner, who holds his Taft stake through American
  Financial and its subsidiaries, said he is also considering
  buying more Taft stock on the open market or in private deals.
      He did not say whether the talks with Taft officials led to
  any agreements or understandings.
      But Lindner said he intends to review his investment in
  Taft and may be involved in further talks or take other steps
  regarding the future control and direction of Taft.
      Lindner's investor group recently raised its Taft stake to
  1,489,298 shares, or 16.2 pct from 1,439,498 shares, or 15.6
  pct, after buying 49,800 shares for a total of 5.8 mln dlrs.
      Although he recently received clearance from the Federal
  Trade Commission to raise his stake in the company to 24.9 pct,
  Lindner in previous SEC filings has always stressed that his
  interest in Taft was for investment only and not was not
  seeking to control the company.
      An investor group headed by members of the wealthy Bass
  family of Fort Worth, Texas, also holds about 24.9 pct of
  Taft's common stock.
  

INVESTORS SET DEADLINE FOR JAPAN FUND &lt;JPN>
  An investor group that includes T.
  Boone Pickens III said it set a deadline of 1600 EST on March
  11 for its offer to acquire Japan Fund Inc.
      The group, which also includes &lt;Sterling Grace Capital
  Management Inc LP> and &lt;Anglo American Security Fund LP>, said
  it was willing to deposit in escrow 100,000 Japan Fund shares,
  worth about two mln dlrs, to insure its ability to obtain
  financing if Japan Fund approves its offer.
      The group said Japan Fund has not responded to its offer,
  worth about 525 mln dlrs at current market prices.
  

INVESTOR FIRMS HAVE 25.5 PCT OF SYMBION &lt;SYMB>
  A group of affiliated firms led by
  Warburg, Pincus Capital Co L.P., a New York venture capital and
  investment partnership, said it has acquired 1,920,527 shares
  of Symbion Inc, or 25.5 pct of the total outstanding.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  the Warburg Pincus group said it bought the stake for
  investment purposes.
      Although the group said it is considering buying more
  shares of Symbion, it said it has no plans to seek control of
  the company.
  

OFFSHORE INVESTOR HAS 5.9 PCT OF HAUSERMAN&lt;HASR>
  Kindness N.V., a Bahamas-based firm
  owned by U.K. investor and Bahamas resident John Templeton,
  said it has acquired 137,900 shares of Hausereman Inc, or 5.9
  pct of the total outstanding common stock.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Templeton said he bought the shares for investment purposes
  only and has no intention of seeking control of the company.
  

INVESTMENT FIRMS UP STAKE IN MCGILL MFTG &lt;MGLL>
  A group of affiliated investment
  firms led by Bermuda-based Fidelity International Ltd and
  Boston-based FMR Corp, told the Securities and Exchange
  Commission it raised its stake in McGill Manufacturing Co Inc.
      The group said it raised its stake to 88,580 shares, or 6.2
  pct of the total outstanding common stock, after buying 14,135
  McGill common shares between Jan 19 and March 2 at prices
  ranging from 33.57 to 34.57 dlrs a share.
  

U.S. INTERVENED TO BUY 50 MLN DLRS AGAINST YEN ON JANUARY 28, FED SAYS

  U.S. INTERVENED TO BUY 50 MLN DLRS AGAINST YEN ON JANUARY 28, FED SAYS
  

JAPAN, U.S. SET TO BEGIN HIGH-LEVEL TRADE TALKS
  Japan and the U.S. Kick off top-level
  trade talks tomorrow amid signs officials from both sides are
  growing increasingly irritated with each other.
      The talks, held annually at sub-cabinet level to review the
  whole gamut of U.S./Japan economic relations, will pave the way
  for American Secretary of State George Schultz's one day
  stop-over here at end-week on his way home from China.
      Faced with growing Congressional protectionist pressure,
  the U.S. Administration is pressing Japan for speedy action to
  reduce its still huge trade surplus, U.S. Officials said.
      "We appreciate their frustration," a senior Japanese
  government official said. "But we are also frustrated."
      The official said the 40 pct rise of the yen over the last
  18 months has hit Japan hard, forcing exporters to slash
  spending and lay off workers to make up for lost sales abroad.
  That has not yet shown up in dollar-based statistics on trade,
  but it will, he said.
      He said the U.S. Administration was ignoring the progress
  that has been made and instead emphasizing the problems that
  remain when it talks with Congress.
      "It would only take five minutes to list their
  accomplishments," a senior U.S. Official replied.
      The talks begin tomorrow with high-level discussions on the
  economic structures of both countries and how they affect the
  bilateral trade imbalance, which last year amounted to 51.48
  billion dlrs in Japan's favour.
      On the following two days, the topics will range from
  multilateral trade talks under the auspices of the General
  Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to such bilateral trade
  problems as super computers.
      The structural talks are intended to be free-wheeling
  discussions among senior officials. Tomorrow's topics include
  savings and investment issues such as consumer credit and
  housing, and the implications of government budget deficits.
      These talks come at a particularly delicate time for the
  Japanese government, which is facing increasing domestic
  pressure to abandon its tight-fisted fiscal policy and
  stimulate the sagging economy by spending more.
      Some U.S. Officials complained Japan has no intention of
  boosting domestic demand and imports, as Washington wants.
      Japanese officials in turn pointed the finger at the huge
  U.S. Budget deficit as one of the main culprits for the trade
  imbalance. That budget deficit has meant that the U.S. Is
  buying more imports.
      Japan seems particularly peeved at being singled in a draft
  trade bill before the Senate as a nation following adverserial
  trade practices. "It condemns Japan without due process," one
  Japanese official said.
      That reference spoils what is otherwise a well-thought-out
  bill introduced by Democratic Senator Lloyd Bentsen, he said.
      Japan is also not totally happy with the administration's
  trade bill, particularly its proposal to establish reciprocal
  access to foreign markets as one criteria for retaliatory trade
  action by the U.S., Officials said.
      Nevertheless, Japanese officials said they remain in a weak
  bargaining position, especially with the threat of a trade bill
  overhanging them.
      "We have no leverage," one official admitted.
      As a result, Tokyo is striving to meet U.S. Complaints
  about its trade practices in a variety of fields, including
  super computers.
      The U.S. Is pressing for greater access to the Japanese
  super computer market.
      The Japanese government has sent a long questionnaire to
  public institutions like universities which buy the
  sophisticated machines in hopes of eventually setting up
  informal bidding procedures easily understood by all potential
  sellers, officials said.
  

CTS &lt;CTS> INCREASES 1986 LOSS
  CTS Corp said it increased its
  1986 loss from continuing operations to 26.6 mln dlrs from the
  previously announced 23.8 mln dlrs loss.
      The 1986 figure was increased to include expenses involved
  with its settlement of a dispute with Dynamics Corp of America
  &lt;DYA>.
      The settlement involved a takeover bid for CTS by Dynamics
  Corp, which had offered to buy the shares of CTS that it did
  not already own.
      CTS made a profit of 7.9 mln dlrs from continuing
  operations in 1985.
      CTS said it charged an additional 2.8 mln dlrs in special
  expenses to its 1986 operations as a result of the Dynamics
  Corp settlement.
      The additional expenses include the obligation to reimburse
  Dynamics Corp, subject to approval of CTS shareholders, a total
  of 2.1 mln dlrs for Dynamics Corp's expenses and other costs
  relating to CTS.
  

U.S. INTERVENED TO AID DLR IN JANUARY, FED SAYS
  U.S. authorities intervened in the
  foreign exchange market to support the dollar on one occasion
  during the period between the start of November 1986 and the
  end of January, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said in a
  report.
      The Fed's quarterly review of foreign exchange operations
  said that the U.S. bought 50 mln dlrs through the sale of yen
  on January 28. This operation was coordinated with the Japanese
  monetary authorities and was funded equally by the Fed and the
  U.S. Treasury.
      The Fed's intervention was on the morning after president
  Reagan's State of the Union message and was "in a manner
  consistent with the joint statement" made by U.S. Treasury
  secretary James Baker and Japanese finance minister Kiichi
  Miyazawa after their January 21 consultations.
      At that meeting, the two reaffirmed their willingness to
  cooperate on exchange rate issues.
      The Fed's report did not say at what level the intervention
  occurred. But on January 28, the dollar closed at 151.50/60 yen
  after dipping as low as 150.40 yen earlier in the session. It
  had closed at 151.05/15 yen the previous day.
      The dollar had plumbed a post-World War II low of 149.98
  yen on January 19 and reached a seven-year low of 1.7675 marks
  on January 28. It ended that day at 1.7820/30 marks.
      The Fed noted that, after trading steadily throughout
  November and the first half of December, the dollar moved
  sharply lower until the end of January.
      It closed the three-month review period down more than 11
  pct against the mark and most other Continental currencies and
  seven pct lower against the yen and sterling. It had fallen
  four pct against the Canadian dollar.
      During the final days of January, pressure on the dollar
  subsided. Reports of the U.S.-Japanese intervention operation
  and talk of an upcoming meeting of the major industrial
  countries encouraged expectations for broader cooperation on
  exchange rate and economic policy matters, the Fed said.
      Moreover, doubts had developed about the course of U.S.
  interest rates. The dollar's swift fall had raised questions
  about whether the Fed would let short-term rates ease.
      Thus the dollar firmed to close the period at 1.8320 marks
  and 153.70 yen. According to the Fed's trade-weighted index, it
  had declined nine pct since the beginning of the period.
      The dollar had risen as high as 2.08 marks and 165 yen in
  early November.
      The Fed last intervened in the foreign exchange market on
  November 7, 1985 when it bought a total of 102.2 mln dlrs worth
  of marks and yen.
      The Fed's action followed the September 1985 Plaza
  agreement between the five major industrial nations under which
  they agreed to promote an orderly decline of the dollar.
  

INVESTMENT FIRM RAISES CERTRON &lt;CRTN> STAKE
  Louart Corp, a Los Angeles investment
  firm, said it raised its stake in Certron Corp to 237,000
  shares, or 7.8 pct of the total outstanding common stock, from
  164,000 shares, or 5.4 pct.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Louart said it bought 73,000 Certron shares between Sept 9 and
  March 6 at a total of 109,315 dlrs a share.
      It said its dealings in Certron were for investment only,
  but said it might increase its stake. It said it has no plans
  to seek control of the company.
  

HOGAN SYSTEMS &lt;HOGN> IN ACQUISITION
  Hogan Systems Inc said it acquired
  &lt;Systems 4 Inc> of Durango, Colo., for 1.7 mln dlrs.
      Hogan said Systems 4 provides integrated applications
  software and processing services to about 30 community banks.
      Systems 4 has revenues of 1.5 mln dlrs a year, Hogan said.
  

USSR SEEN LIKELY TO HONOR CORN COMMITMENT
  The Soviet Union will likely honor
  its commitment with the United States to buy a minimum of four
  mln tonnes of corn this year, an Agriculture Department
  official said.
      "They have always honoured the agreement, and there's no
  reason now to think they won't this year," he told Reuters.
      "They have an aggressive buying campaign from the European
  Community, from Canada, from the U.S. They're active buyers
  from all sources at this point," the official said in
  explaining why the Department raised its Soviet grain imports
  estimate today by three mln tonnes to 26 mln tonnes.
      This is a dramatic shift from just a few months ago when
  analysts were saying the USSR might not buy any U.S. corn for
  the first time in 15 years.
      A drawdown of corn supplies in China and Argentina, concern
  over Soviet winter crops, and increasing competition for U.S.
  corn were all cited as possible factors in creating Moscow's
  recent interest.
      Lower corn production prospects in some major supplying
  countries have stirred activity from big buyers such as Japan,
  and the Soviets are also closely watching the situation, the
  official said.
      "The Soviets will try to out-capitalize the capitalists"
  and buy corn before prices get too high, the official said. "As
  soon as they need corn, they'll buy it," he added.
      USDA has confirmed one mln tonnes of corn sold to the
  Soviet Union, but both U.S. and Soviet analysts have said the
  purchases stand at 1.5 mln tonnes.
      The USDA official would not speculate on when the Soviets
  would enter the U.S. market again.
      "There has definitely been an evolving mind set -- from the
  situation of slow grain buying a couple months ago to one of
  frenetic buying now," the official said.
      However, the situation in wheat is "a different story," he
  said. Greater world supplies of wheat, heavier Soviet purchase
  commitments and less competitive U.S. wheat prices make Soviet
  purchases of U.S. wheat less likely, he said.
      Speculation has continued for several days that the U.S.
  is considering making an export bonus wheat subsidy offer to
  the Soviets, but U.S. officials have provided no confirmation.
  

INDIA TO HOLD WHITE SUGAR BUYING TENDER
  India will hold a buying tender on
  Wednesday, March 4, for two to three cargoes of white sugar for
  March/April shipment, traders said.
  

PICKENS SEES CONTINUED SLUMP IN WORKING RIGS
  T. Boone Pickens, the Texas oilman and
  financier, said he believes the heady days the oil service
  industry had in the early 1980s, when over 4,500 oil rigs were
  once reported operating, will not return in his lifetime.
       Pickens told Reuters he expects the rig count to drop to
  below 600 before recovering. He added that oil prices will
  eventually rise to 35 dlrs, then to 50 dlrs after 1990.
       Currently, some 700 oil rigs are operating in the U.S.,
  down sharply after oil prices slipped from 30 dlrs in late 1985
  to around 10 dlrs in 1986. Prices are now around 18 dlrs. The
  highest number of working rigs was 4,500 in December 1981.
       "The rigs won't go back to work until the price of oil
  gets above 30 dlrs," he said, adding that while he expects to
  see 50 dlr a barrel oil, he does not expect to see 2,000 rigs
  operating in his lifetime. Pickens is 58.
       Pickens, who is currently touring the country promoting
  his autobiography "Boone," said he does not believe the U.S.
  should impose an oil import fee in order to stimulate the
  domestic oil industry.
  

MIYAZAWA SAYS PARIS ACCORD HELPING STABILISE RATES
  Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa said the
  Paris currency accord has contributed to the stability of
  exchange rates.
      Miyazawa told a press conference the agreement reached last
  month in Paris by six major industrial nations to cooperate in
  bringing about currency stability has prevented speculative
  concerns from being active in money centres.
      The decision in Paris is being understood by the market, he
  said. The yen-dollar exchange rate has been moving in a narrow
  range since finance ministers of Britain, Canada, France,
  Japan, the U.S. And West Germany reached the accord.
  

AUSTRALIAN RESERVE BANK IN BUYING INTERVENTION
  The Reserve Bank said at 1230 local time
  it was offering to buy short-dated government securities in the
  short-term money market.
      The bank's action followed its purchase of short-dated
  government stock and six-day repurchase agreements earlier in
  the session.
      Money market traders said the move was aimed at easing cash
  market interest rates which had risen on demand for funds to
  meet PAYE tax and treasury note settlement commitments.
  

RUBBER LEAF DISEASE SEEN AFFECTING SUPPLY/PRICES
  The leaf disease corenes pora,
  which has affected some rubber trees in Sri Lanka and
  Indonesia, is likely to force a cut in supply and push up
  depressed prices, a Malaysian rubber disease researcher said.
      Trees with leaves hit by the fungus disease cannot be saved
  and must be felled, Chee Kheng Hoy, Head of the Crop Protection
  and Microbiology Division in the Rubber Research Institute of
  Malaysia (RRIM), told Reuters.
      He was commenting on a Reuter report which said corenes
  pora had hit seven pct of Sri Lanka's plantations and may cause
  output to drop below its 1987 target of 143,000 tonnes.
      The report said the Sri Lankan Rubber Research Institute
  may ask estates to remove trees seriously affected by the
  disease and added that most estates affected belong to the
  State Plantations Corp and Janatha Estates Development Board.
      Chee said corenes pora is an old disease which only affects
  certain rubber clones in Sri Lanka and Indonesia and that
  further use of such clones must be discontinued.
      Clones not resistant to the disease are the Rubber Research
  Institute of Sri Lanka clone 103, Indonesia's PPN 2058, 2444,
  2447 and PR 265 and Malaysia's RRIM 725, he said.
      Chee said corenes pora affected trees from the RRIM 725
  clone planted in Malaysia several years ago but had been curbed
  after use of such clones were discontinued.
      Fungicide may be used to curb the disease, which also
  affects leaves of 30 other species of plants, but experience
  has proven that it is uneconomical and expensive, he added.
      "The disease is extremely difficult to control. If it is not
  curbed in the two affected countries their rubber output may
  drop and prices can rise," he said.
      He added that the RRIM was aware of the disease outbreak in
  Sri Lanka and was monitoring the situation.
  

SEARCH FOR BRITISH FERRY'S TOXIC CARGO CONTINUES
  The search continued for a
  cargo of poisonous chemical substances loaded on the Herald of
  Free Enterprise Ferry which capsized in Zeebrugge harbour
  Friday.
      A total of 72 drums of various toxic materials which were
  loaded on trucks in the ship's hold have been recovered, but
  Belgian authorities warned it was essential to recover a
  further 61 containers of a cyanide-based solution.
      A net has been thrown over the gaping loading doors at the
  front of the ship to prevent any more drums floating out.
      Salvage workers have moved cranes into place alongside the
  wreck of the 7,951 ton roll-on, roll-off ferry which now lies
  partly submerged on a sandbank outside the harbour.
      The ferry's owner is &lt;European Ferries Plc>, majority owned
  by Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co Plc &lt;PORL.L>.
      The operation to right the vessel began yesterday after
  divers abandoned their search for more bodies. Experts said it
  could take months to refloat the ship and free the 80 bodies
  estimated to be trapped amid debris.
      "The problem is that in these waters you can normally expect
  one working day out of four," said Daan Kaakebeen of Dutch
  Salvage experts Smit Tak International of Rotterdam. He
  estimated the job itself would require 35 working days.
      Using reinforced cables, salvage experts intend to raise
  the ship and set it down into a trench dug alongside.
      Salvage work could pinpoint the exact cause of the loss of
  the ferry, one of three sister vessels plying cross-Channel
  routes from England to continental Europe.
      Suspicion at present is focused on the ferry's main vehicle
  loading doors, set close to water level.
      In London, Transport Secretary John Moore told parliament
  yesterday that the ship keeled over after water gushed in
  through the bow doors. He said a major government inquiry into
  the disaster will be held, all similar ferries sailing from
  Britain will be inspected and owners will be asked to fit
  lights to give warning if bow doors are not properly closed.
      Experts carrying out tank and computer tests to determine
  how the accident occurred will focus attention on the ship's
  doors, its ballast system and crew procedures, he added.
      Two other investigations into the disaster have also begun,
  one Belgian and one by the ferry's owners.
  

SOVIET ECONOMIST SEES FEW 1987 GAINS IN U.S. TRADE
  There is little chance Soviet exports
  to the United States will rise in 1987, but Moscow's current
  trade reforms should result in more trade in manufactured goods
  in future, a Soviet economist said.
      Sergey Frolov, chief economist at Amtorg Trading Corp, an
  agent for Soviet trade organisations and industries, told a
  U.S.-USSR business meeting the Soviet Union produces few items
  that western nations want.
      But reforms, including upgrading the quality of goods and
  allowing joint ventures with foreign firms, will encourage
  modest export gains in future.
      Frolov said the Soviet Union exported 500 mln dlrs worth of
  goods to the United States in 1986 and imported 1.5 billion
  dlrs worth. He gave no trade forecast for 1987.
      But he said that even if all obstacles were removed, total
  trade between the two countries would remain between two and
  three billion dlrs a year.
      "The post-detente embargoes have taught the USSR to limit
  its trading with the U.S.," he said.
  

CHINA ALLOWS NATIONWIDE FOREIGN EXCHANGE SAVING
  People throughout China can now open
  foreign exchange accounts at the Bank of China, the official
  Shenzhen Economic Zone Daily said.
      Previously only residents of Guangdong and Fujian provinces
  could do this.
      The paper also said the minimum for opening a fixed deposit
  account had been cut to 50 yuan equivalent, from 150 yuan. The
  minimum for a current account is 20 yuan equivalent.
      The paper said depositors could now withdraw all or part of
  their account, subject to a branch's reserves, instead of only
  a fixed amount as previously.
      The paper said deposits may now be opened in French francs
  as well as the already available U.S. Dollar, Hong Kong dollar,
  sterling, yen and marks.
      Bank of China branches in Hainan island also accept
  deposits in Singapore dollars, and those in Wenzhou, Zhejiang
  province, accept deposits in Dutch guilders, the paper said.
      It gave no further details.
  

SICHUAN BRACED TO FIGHT DROUGHT
  The Sichuan government has ordered that
  any work or meeting which interferes with the fight against
  drought must be cancelled or postponed to save time, energy and
  manpower, the People's Daily domestic edition said.
      Sichuan is one of six provinces threatened by drought.
      Wen Wei Po, a Hong Kong daily, said the drought, the worst
  for more than 20 years, is affecting nearly two mln hectares in
  100 counties in Sichuan, the country's biggest agricultural
  producer.
      Sichuan has experienced temperatures three degrees
  Centigrade higher than normal and rainfall up to 70 pct less
  than normal since early February, affecting wheat, oil-bearing
  crops, rice planting and dryland cash crops, it said.
      The paper said 43,000 hectares in Meixian county in
  Guangdong are seriously short of water.
      The People's Daily said Henan, Shaanxi, Gansu and Hebei are
  also suffering from drought.
      Henan's grain output fell by 2.5 mln tonnes last year from
  the 1985 level because of drought which has been affecting the
  province since May.
  

ECONOMIC SPOTLIGHT - JAPAN PUSHES ITS CHIPMAKERS
  Japanese microchip makers are being
  strong-armed into compliance with a U.S.-Japan pact on
  semiconductors halting predatory pricing and opening Japan's
  market to foreign chips, industry analysts said.
      But doubts remain over whether the Ministry of
  International Trade and Industry (MITI), which is pressuring
  the firms, can successfully battle market forces and whether
  the U.S. Industry is geared up to take advantage of any
  breathing space, they said.
      U.S. Threats to scrap the agreement signed last September
  have pushed MITI to try harder to get recalcitrant Japanese
  chipmakers to abide by the pact, the analysts said.
      "MITI has been moving hot and heavy throughout the industry
  to get things done," said Bache Securities (Japan) associate
  vice president Peter Wolffe.
      Last month, MITI told chipmakers to cut production for the
  January to March period by 10 pct to help dry up inexpensive
  chips that have escaped from Japan to grey markets not subject
  to the pact's price controls.
      The ministry also asked electronics firms to provide
  distributors with certificates designating them as authorised
  exporters, in an effort to close loopholes through which grey
  marketeers sneak chips out of Japan, market analysts said.
      U.S. Trade negotiators here last week said the pact was in
  jeopardy because of continued dumping in non-American markets
  and little sign of increased foreign sales in Japan.
      But major Japanese firms appear to have agreed to the
  production cuts, several analysts said. Last week, NEC Corp
  said it would cut production in line with MITI's request.
      "NEC has been the most aggressive in resisting MITI's
  demands," said David Keller, analyst at James Capel and Co. "Once
  NEC cuts production, it means they all have."
      Still, pressures remain to keep production high. Japanese
  firms need high output to cut unit prices for U.S. Sales that
  the Commerce Department assigns them under the pact.
      "The best way to lower cost is to produce more," said Salomon
  Brothers Asia Ltd analyst Carole Ryavec.
      Preparations for a possible upturn in demand could also
  spur higher production next quarter, Merrill Lynch analyst Matt
  Aizawa said.
      Grey marketeers may also be able to outfox any new
  restrictions, some industry officials said.
      "It's like tax avoidance schemes," said Steve Donovan, head
  of MMI Japan K.K. "As soon as you close one route, another
  opens."
      MITI's pressure has annoyed some makers, who had earlier
  shrugged off MITI guidance.
      "It's getting to be like communism," said one.
      But analysts said output cuts could help by making it
  easier to increase prices as planned on April 1 and forcing
  firms to stop extending market share by selling at a loss.
      "They're going to have to start running their businesses
  like businesses," Bache's Wolffe said.
      MITI has also been conducting a highly public campaign
  urging chip users to buy foreign-made chips, but U.S. Industry
  officials said response has been mixed at best.
      "There has been some change, but it's not across the board,"
  said one U.S. Spokesman. "The companies have a varying degree of
  urgency."
      The ultimate impact of all these efforts by MITI on the
  troubled U.S. Industry remains in doubt, analysts added.
      Pressure to cut production of 256 kilobit DRAM (dynamic
  random access memory) chips could merely speed the transition
  to one megabit chips, where Japan now leads, analysts said.
      Whether U.S. Firms are able to stage a comeback in memory
  chips, or interested in doing so, also remains unclear, they
  said.
      Analysts are watching with interest the fate of a new U.S.
  Consortium which hopes to challenge Japan by developing the
  most advanced technology for microchip manufacturing.
      Even in the thorny area of access, much depends on U.S.
  Commitment as well as on Japanese openness, some said.
      "The SIA (U.S. Semiconductor Industry Association) doesn't
  even have an office here," a source close to the industry said.
  "You could question just how committed they are."
      In addition, some industry analysts question the
  effectiveness of a bilateral agreement that leaves out third
  country chipmakers such as those in South Korea.
      "(South) Korea's gaining market share," said one analyst.
  "They're the real winners from the agreement."
  

Sumita says little room for Bank of Japan to further ease credit policy

  Sumita says little room for Bank of Japan to further ease credit policy
  

SUMITA SAYS LITTLE ROOM FOR BANK TO EASE POLICY
  Bank of Japan governor Satoshi Sumita
  said there is little room left for the central bank to further
  ease its credit policy as interest rates levels are now
  approaching their lower limit.
      "The government should instead seek ways of making the best
  use of its fiscal policy," he told a press conference.
      His remarks were concerned with a comprehensive economic
  stimulative package the government plans to adopt in the coming
  days.
      At the recent talks among the six major industrialised
  nations in Paris, Japan promised to work out a comprehensive
  economic package to boost domestic demand, which in turn would
  help increase its imports and reduce its trade surplus.
      Sumita also said the economy will show a gradual upturn in
  the second half of the year if the yen remains stable.
      He said there is caution in the foreign exchange market
  against a further rise of the yen and mark and this explains
  the recent stability in the currency markets. Conflicting
  economic indicators from the U.S. Have also been dampening
  market activity, he added.
  

CARLTON COMMUNICATIONS OPTIMISTIC FOR 1987
  &lt;Carlton Communications Plc> has started
  the current financial year well, with accounts for the first
  four months showing a healthy increase on the same period last
  year, and Chairman M.P. Green told the annual meeting he looked
  forward to 1987 with optimism.
      The issue of 4.6 mln shares in ADR form had now been
  successfully completed, he added.
      Carlton intended to increase its presence in the U.S. Which
  represented 50 pct of the world television market. Conditions
  worldwide in the television industry continued to look buoyant,
  the Chairman noted.
  

IRANIAN OIL MINISTER IN UAE TALKS
  Iranian Oil Minister Gholamreza
  Aqazadeh is in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) to discuss oil
  prices and the general market situation, Iranian officials
  accompanying him said.
      He will meet UAE President Sheikh Zaid bin Sultan
  al-Nahayan and Oil Minister Mana Said al-Oteiba.
      Aqazadeh arrived last night after a brief stopover in
  Riyadh, where he met Saudi Arabia's Oil Minister Hisham Nazir.
      The official Saudi Press Agency quoted him as saying his
  talks at Riyadh with Nazir had been constructive and good.
      Aqazadeh said Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries
  (OPEC) members were agreed on holding production stable and he
  reiterated the importance of maintaining oil prices.
      OPEC members agreed in December to limit production to 15.8
  mln barrels per day for the first half of this year and on a
  benchmark price of 18 dlrs a barrel from February 1.
      Aqazadeh also visted OPEC members Gabon, Algeria and Libya.
  The Iranian news agency, IRNA, quoted him as saying before
  leaving Tripoli that OPEC should do everything possible to make
  oil prices permanently stable.
  

JAPAN MAY INCREASE ITS BRAZILIAN SOYBEAN PURCHASES
  Japanese crushers are likely to buy at
  least 200,000 tonnes of Brazilian soybeans this year and
  another 100,000 to 200,000 if quality and shipping conditions
  are good against 128,089 tonnes in 1986, trade sources said.
      A Japanese trading house recently bought about 31,000
  tonnes of soybeans for April 10/May 10 shipment, they said.
      "Because Brazilian soybean prices are now some 10 cents a
  bushel cheaper than U.S. Origin due to the bumper harvest, it
  is highly likely that Japanese crushers will increase their
  buying volume," one source said. Brazilian beans are available
  to Japan for shipment from May to July.
  

AUSTRALIAN METAL TRADER LINKS TO ASTURIANA DE ZINC
  &lt;Metal Traders Australasia Ltd> said a
  newly-formed subsidiary, the &lt;Austmet Ltd> group, has
  negotiated an exclusive long-term contract with Spain's
  &lt;Asturiana de Zinc> to market its zinc metal exports.
      Metal Traders said in a statement the contract would
  underpin the worldwide zinc, copper and lead trading activities
  of Austmet, a wholly-owned London-based company with a U.S.
  Unit in Stamford, Connecticut.
      Austmet has recruited a group of base metal traders,
  currently operating out of Britain and the U.S., Who have
  handled Asturiana's business for the past five years, it said.
      Asturiana has a three-year option to purchase 25 pct of the
  Austmet group, to be priced on an independent valuation at the
  time of exercise, Metal Traders said.
      Austmet will have an initial equity base of one mln stg, a
  turnover of 200 mln Australian dlrs rising to 300 mln in the
  first year, and credit lines of up to 30 mln U.S. Dlrs.
      Austmet should be generating profits from July 1 and a
  1.5-2.5 mln dlr net is envisaged within two years, it said.
      Metal Traders said Asturiana has the largest zinc smelting
  capacity in Europe -- nearly 200,000 tonnes a year of 99.995
  pct high-grade zinc, at Aviles in northern Spain.
      Metal Traders, a listed company, was formerly &lt;Pyrotech
  Resources N.L.> whose chief activity was the development and
  marketing of high-technology smelting processes invented in
  Australia, notably the Siromelt Zinc Fuming Process.
      But in late 1986, control of the company changed and it
  expanded by acquisition into metal trading in Australia and
  Asia. It then changed its name.
      It also has the marketing contract for mineral sands
  produced by &lt;TiO2 Corp N.L.>, of which it holds 17.5 pct.
      In today's statement, Metal Traders also said it is
  reviewing possible acquisition of a mineral producer.
  

SAUDI ARABIA'S KING FAHD WANTS STABLE OIL PRICES
  King Fahd said today Saudi Arabia wants
  oil price stability and he called on non-OPEC producers to
  avoid harmful competition with the 13 nation group.
      His plea, in an interview with Reuters and the television
  news agency Visnews, came ahead of a state visit he will make
  to Britain later this month.
      King Fahd was asked whether Saudi Arabia would be prepared
  to reduce its oil output below its OPEC quota of 4.133 mln
  barrels per day (bpd) to defend the 18 dlr benchmark price
  agreed to by OPEC last December.
      The King replied: "Saudi Arabia doesn't decide prices by
  itself but certainly desires price stability."
      Non-OPEC countries "must help us in a framework of common
  interest so that there is no type of competition which could
  prove harmful to everyone," he said.
      Asked if he saw the 18 dlr per barrel benchmark as a first
  step towards higher world oil prices, King Fahd said it was not
  for Saudi Arabia but for all OPEC countries to determine such
  issues. Iran and Algeria have already called for a higher
  benchmark.
      In recent weeks the 18 dlr level has come under pressure,
  due partly to quota violations by some OPEC members. King Fahd
  said Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil exporter, was
  adhering to decisions made at OPEC's December conference which
  set a 15.8 mln bpd output ceiling for the first half of 1987.
      A major non-OPEC producer, Britain has so far resisted the
  group's pleas to curb its North Sea oil output.
      The King also urged the world community to help the
  Palestinians return to their homeland and called for a peaceful
  end to the Iran-Iraq war. The 6-1/2-year-old war could not be
  resolved on the battlefield, he said.
  

HILLSDOWN HOLDINGS PLC &lt;HLDN.L> 1986 YEAR
  Shr 16.3p vs 12.2p
      Div 2.75p vs 2.25p making 3.8p vs 3.15p adjusted for
      Three-for-one capitalisation
      Pre-tax profit 54.9 mln stg vs 33.4 mln
      Turnover 1.70 billion vs 1.13 billion
      Tax 7.6 mln vs 2.6 mlnProfit attributable 51.9 mln vs 30.1   
   Mln
      Cost of Sales 1.49 billion vs 999.3 mln
      Gross profit 215.9 mln vs 136.2 mln
      Distribution costs 90.3 mln vs 57.2 mln
      Adminstrative expenses 65.9 mln vs 40.8 mln
      Other operating income 3.9 mln vs nil
      Interest payable 8.7 mln vs 4.8 mln
      Minority interests 1.0 mln vs 0.7 mln
      Extraordinary credit (sale of share in S and W Berisford
  Plc) 5.6 mln vs nil
      Operating profit includes -
      Poultry, eggs and animal feed 21.7 mln vs 17.2 mln
      Food processing and distribution 15.4 mln vs 6.9 mln
      Furniture and timber distribution 8.4 mln vs 3.4 mln
      Fresh meat and bacon 8.0 mln vs 4.5 mln
  

JAPAN CRUSHERS START APRIL U.S. SOYBEAN BUYING
  Japanese crushers, starting to buy U.S.
  Soybeans for April shipment, have recently made purchases of
  some 48,000 tonnes, trade sources said.
      The sources said they could not estimate the total volume
  to be purchased for April shipping because Japan's crushing
  program for April and June is unclear.
      They had predicted earlier that crushers' April shipment
  U.S. Bean purchases would drop to 260,000 to 270,000 from the
  monthly average of 300,000 to 330,000 tonnes due to low soybean
  meal prices.
  

KAUFHOF CONSIDERING TAKING STAKE IN HAPAG-LLOYD
  West German retail group Kaufhof AG
  &lt;KFHG.F> is considering taking a stake in shipping and
  transport group Hapag-Lloyd AG &lt;HPLG.F> but has yet to reach a
  final decision, a spokesman said in response to queries.
      Press reports said Kaufhof wanted a stake of up to 12.5 pct
  in Hapag-Lloyd.
      The Kaufhof spokesman noted any decision on purchasing
  shares in the shipping group would have to be approved by the
  supervisory board, which is due to hold a meeting tomorrow.
      Late last year the Gevaert group of Belgium and West
  Germany's VEBA AG &lt;VEBG.F> said they had each acquired a 12.5
  pct stake in Hapag-Lloyd from Deutsche Bank AG &lt;DBKG.F> and
  Dresdner Bank AG &lt;DRSD.F>.
       Industry sources estimate Deutsche and Dresdner,
  Hapag-Lloyd's majority shareholders, held about 75 pct of
  Hapag-Lloyd's share capital before selling portions of it to
  Gevaert and VEBA.
      The two banks have said they eventually wanted to reduce
  their stake in the shipping group to 15 pct each.
  

EC OPENS ANTI-DUMPING ENQUIRY INTO SOVIET MERCURY
  The European Community Commission said
  it has opened an enquiry into allegations that the Soviet Union
  is dumping mercury on the European market at below-cost prices.
      The Commission said its decision follows a complaint from
  EC non-ferrous metals producers that the sales of Soviet
  mercury were harming their business and threatening jobs in the
  European industry.
      According to the complaint, Soviet mercury sales in the EC
  had risen from zero in recent years to 100 tonnes between
  August and October last year and threaten to capture 25 pct of
  the EC market if they continue at the same pace.
      The industry said the mercury was being sold at more than
  40 pct below prices charged by EC producers, forcing them to
  cut their prices to levels that no longer covered costs. The
  imports had caused producers heavy financial losses, it said.
      The Commission said the industry would probably be unable
  to hold prices at current levels and that any increase would
  result in loss of sales and jobs.
      The so-called anti-dumping procedure opened by the
  Commission will allow all interested parties to state their
  cases to the authority.
  

JAPAN AND THAILAND TO JOINTLY EXTRACT RARE METALS
  Japan's Agency of Natural Resources and
  Energy said it will begin experiments with Thailand at the end
  of March to start commercial production of rare metals in 1989
  under a joint project.
      An agency official said it will set up a 500 mln yen pilot
  plant in Bangkok which will extract high quality rare metals
  such as titanium and niobium from sand left over from tin
  production processes in Thailand.
      The plant wilq use about a tonne of sand per day, although
  it is unclear how much rare metal will be extracted, the
  official said.
  

HUNGARY TO DEVALUE FORINT AGAINST WESTERN UNITS
  Hungary is to devalue the forint by an
  average of eight pct against Western currencies, the official
  news agency MTI said.
      MTI did not say when the devaluation would become
  effective, but it expected new rates to be announced later
  today.
      Hungary devalued the forint by a similar amount last
  September 23. Western bankers say the forint is more
  realistically valued than currencies of Hungary's COMECON
  allies.
  

HILLSDOWN SAYS EARLY 1987 RESULTS ENCOURAGING
  Hillsdown Holdings Plc &lt;HLDN.L> said
  early results for 1987 were encouraging, and the combination of
  its investment and acquisition strategies enabled it to look
  forward confidently for an excellent result for the year.
      The company was commenting on 1986 results which showed
  pre-tax profit rising to 54.9 mln stg from 33.4 mln previously
  on turnover that lifted to 1.70 billion from 1.13 billion.
      The figures initially boosted the share price to 286p from
  281p last night, but they then eased back to 283p by 0830 GMT.
      Hillsdown said capital expenditure rose in 1986 to 60 mln
  stg from 31.5 mln and would continue at this high level in
  1987.
      The placing of 82.5 mln shares last year raised 160.7 mln
  stg and enabled shareholders' funds to more than double to 352
  mln at year-end.
      Net borrowings were 20 pct of shareholder's funds and the
  group had listed investments of 47.1 mln.
      The company said it had bought a total of 40 companies
  during the year for a total price of some 180 mln stg. Although
  these had made minor contribution to profits the real benefits
  would come in 1988 and beyond.
  

NIPPON OIL SEES SHARPLY LOWER SALES AND PROFITS
  Nippon Oil Co Ltd &lt;NPOL.T> predicted
  parent company net profit of about nine billion yen in the year
  ending March 31, down 10.4 pct from a year earlier, president
  Yasuoki Takeuchi told a press conference.
      Current profit for the year was estimated at 17 to 18
  billion yen, down 20 to 24 pct from a year earlier, he said.
      Takeuchi said sales are expected to fall 40 pct to 1,700
  billion yen for the fifth consecutive year-on-year drop. This
  year's fall was due to lower selling prices for end-users,
  which more than offset the yen's appreciation. The company will
  retain six yen dividend for 1986/87.
  

TAIWAN TO TENDER FOR 27,000 TONNES U.S. SOYBEANS
  The joint committee of Taiwan's soybean
  importers will tender March 12 for a 27,000 tonne cargo of U.S.
  Soybeans for March 20 to April 5 delivery, a committee
  spokesman told Reuters.
      Taiwan's soybean imports in calendar 1987 are provisionally
  set at 1.81 mln tonnes compared with a revised 1.74 mln tonnes
  imported last year.
      The 1.74 mln tonne figure was revised from 1.76 mln tonnes.
      Taiwan imports all its soybeans from the United States.
  

BEJAM GROUP PLC &lt;BJAM.L> 27 WEEKS TO JANUARY 3
  Shr 5.95p vs 4.41p
      Div 2.25p vs 2.0p
      Pre-tax profit 11.6 mln vs 9.1 mln
      Tax 4.2 mln vs 3.6 mln
      Turnover 256.3 mln vs 185.3 mln
      Note - company said it was unlikely second-half profits
  will show same rate of increase as first. But it had great
  confidence in prospects for future growth.
  

NIPPON STEEL, INLAND DISCUSSING U.S. JOINT VENTURE
  Nippon Steel Corp &lt;NSTC.T> and &lt;Inland
  Steel Co> of the U.S. Are negotiating to set up a joint steel
  venture in Indiana, a Nippon Steel spokesman said, declining to
  give more details.
      Several local newspapers reported the joint venture would
  be capitalised at 150 mln dlrs, owned 60 pct by Inland and 40
  pct by Nippon Steel, and have annual production capacity of one
  mln tonnes of steel to supply car makers.
  

JAPAN'S JOBLESS SEEN RISING TO 3.3 PCT IN 1987/88
  The yen's rise against the dollar is
  expected to boost Japan's unemployment rate to an average 3.3
  pct in the 1987/88 fiscal year beginning April 1 from January's
  record three pct, the private Nomura Research Institute said.
      The official 1987/88 estimate is 2.9 pct.
      The research arm of Nomura Securities Co forecast
  unemployment would exceed two mln by mid-fiscal 1987, against
  an estimated 1.75 mln for the current year.
      Nomura urged the government to take pump-priming measures
  to help redress trade imbalances and boost employment.
      Employment in manufacturing during fiscal 1987/88 was
  predicted to fall 550,000 from the current year due to higher
  job losses in the steel, shipbuilding and heavy electrical
  machinery sectors, Nomura said.
      Employment in the non-manufacturing sector will continue to
  increase, the institute said, without giving figures.
  

WORK AT CHITTAGONG PORT HALTED BY STRIKE
  Cargo handling remains
  halted at Bangladesh's Chittagong port since nearly 7,000
  workers walked out on Monday following a pay dispute, the Port
  Workers Association said today.
      Fourteen ships are stranded at the port.
      Port officials said they would meet Association leaders
  today to try to resolve the dispute.
  

CREDITANSTALT-BANKVEREIN &lt;CABV.V> YEAR 1986
  Cons banking gp net profit 496.7 mln schillings vs 354.5
  mln
      Cons banking gp balance sheet total at year-end 453.4
      Billion schillings vs 425.4 billion
      Parent bank net profit 370.6 mln vs 253.0 mln
      Parent bank balance sheet total 372.5 billion vs 348.2
      Billion
      Parent bank dividend 12 pct vs 10 pct
      Parent bank div payout 363.0 mln schillings vs 247.5 mln
  

 Ultramar 1986 net loss 62.1 mln stg vs 71.6 mln profit

   Ultramar 1986 net loss 62.1 mln stg vs 71.6 mln profit
  

TESCO ASSOCIATE BUYS 4.2 PCT OF HILLARDS
  Tesco Plc &lt;TSCO.L> said that &lt;County
  Ltd> had yesterday bought on its behalf 2.06 mln shares, or
  around 4.2 pct, in &lt;Hillards Plc> for between 302p and 310p a
  share.
      Tesco yesterday launched a 151.4 mln stg bid for the north
  of England supermarket chain, which Hillards promptly rejected.
      Hillards shares were last quoted at 324p, compared with
  last night's close of 313p.
  

ULTRAMAR PLC &lt;UMAR.L> 1986 YEAR
  Shr 8.1p loss vs 26.3p earnings
      Div 3.25p making 5.25p vs 10.5p
      Net loss 62.1 mln stg vs 71.6 mln profit
      Operating profit before tax 73.6 mln vs 273.8 mln
      Turnover 1.47 billion vs 1.74 billion
      Cost of sales 1.22 billion vs 1.39 billion
      Gross profit 241.8 mln vs 357.6 mln
      Distribution costs and administrative expenses 152.2 mln vs
      123.1 mln
      Share of profits in associates 17.1 mln vs 68.2 mln
      Other operating income 15.8 mln vs 16.9 mln
      Financing charges 48.9 mln vs 45.8 mln
      Tax 63.9 mln vs 169.7 mln
      Exceptional items 4.9 mln debit vs 5.5 mln debit
      Net results of discontinued operations 15.6 mln debit vs
      20.9 mln debit
      Loss on ordinary activities before minority interest 10.8
      Mln vs 77.7 mln profit
      Minority interest 11.3 mln vs 6.1 mln
      Extraordinary debits 40.0 mln vs nil
  

GKN 1986 pretax profit 132.4 mln stg vs 132.7 mln

  GKN 1986 pretax profit 132.4 mln stg vs 132.7 mln
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET SHORTAGE FORECAST AT 300 MLN STG
  The Bank of England said it forecast a
  liquidity shortage of around 300 mln stg in the market today.
      Among the main factors, the Bank said bills maturing in
  official hands and the treasury bill take-up would drain 483
  mln stg from the system while below target bankers' balances
  and a rise in the note circulation would take out 50 mln and
  100 mln stg respectively.
      Partially offsetting these, exchequer transactions would
  add around 355 mln stg, the Bank added.
  

BELGIAN CENTRAL BANK BUYS CURRENCY TO REPAY DEBT
  The Belgian National Bank bought
  foreign currencies against francs on the open market in the
  week ended March 9, a Bank spokesman said.
      In line with central bank policy he declined to give any
  details of the amount bought.
      The foreign currency purchased was used by the Treasury to
  repay foreign debt and did not affect the Bank's foreign
  exchange reserves. They slipped 394 mln francs to 37.33
  billion, mostly due to sales of dollars for Special Drawing
  Rights, the spokesman said.
  

GKN PLC &lt;GKNL.L> 1986 YEAR
  Shr 28.5p vs 26.6p.
      Final div 8p, making 13p vs 12p.
      Pre-tax profit 132.4 mln stg vs 132.7 mln.
      Net profit befire minorities  81.0 mln vs 74.4 mln.
      Sales 2.06 billion stg vs 2.20 billion.
      Extraordinary debit 36.5 mln vs 20.4 mln.
      Trading surplus after depreciation 145.7 mln stg vs 158.1
      Mln
      Investment and interest income 5.4 mln vs 3.8 mln
      Interest payable 42.5 mln vs 43.9 mln
      Profits from related companies, less losses, 23.8 mln vs
      14.7 mln
      Tax 51.4 mln vs 58.3 mln
      Profit attributable to outside shareholders' interests 12.6
      Mln vs 11.2 mln
      Note - Extraordinary debit included charge for
  restructuring auto parts distribution in France and loss of 10
  mln stg on sale of steel stock business.
      Trading surplus comprised -
      Automotive components and products 101 mln stg vs 105 mln
      Industrial services and supplies 30 mln vs 21 mln
      Wholesale and industrial distribution 11 mln vs 22 mln
      Steels and forgings four mln vs 10 mln
      By region, Britain contributed 34 mln stg vs 47 mln
      Continental Europe 77 mln vs 56 mln
      U.S.A. 28 mln vs 51 mln
      Rest of world seven mln vs four mln
  

ECONOMIC SPOTLIGHT - CHINA'S FOREIGN DEBT UP
  China's foreign debt reached 27 billion
  dlrs by the end of 1986, but despite an over-exposure to
  short-term credits and yen borrowing, China remains very
  creditworthy with an improved 1987 export outlook, foreign
  bankers and Chinese officials told Reuters.
      Foreign bankers said China's total debt rose sharply from
  an estimated 20 billion dlrs at end-1985 to cover increased
  import commitments but the debt/equity ratio remains low,
  between eight and 10 pct.
      China remains a cautious and popular borrower, they said.
      Zhang Haoruo, vice minister of Foreign Economic Relations
  and Trade, said last Friday that China signed foreign loan
  agreements for 6.94 billion dlrs last year, 96.6 pct up on
  1985, with actual loans amounting to 4.83 billion, up 93 pct.
      Officials said China would borrow 25 to 30 billion dlrs in
  the 1986-90 five year plan period, but foreign bankers said
  they estimate foreign loans at 30 to 40 billion.
      A Western banker said China's portfolio contains too much
  short-term debt and too much of it is denominated in yen as a
  result of aggressive lending by Japanese banks and attractive
  low interest rates in the Japanese market.
      The strong yen appreciation has cost China dearly and is
  likely to make it reduce new yen borrowings, the banker said.
      A Chinese trade official estimated the yen component of the
  country's total debt at about 30 pct.
      The Peking representative of a Japanese securities house
  said the rapid yen rise had caught China and his firm unawares.
      "Interest rates in Japan are at a historical low, but China,
  which will remain an active borrower this year, is likely to go
  elsewhere for capital, to get a better currency spread," he
  said.
      The Western banker said the excess of short-term loans is
  in part a result of China's inexperience in the foreign capital
  markets, which it entered only in the early 1980s.
      "Officials do not think of China but of their own department
  or firm. Some loans that were entered into did not have the
  full backing of the People's Republic of China," he said.
      "The dilemma for China, in foreign borrowing as in other
  areas, is to balance central control with giving reasonable
  autonomy to firms. It is searching for the mechanisms to
  exercise indirect controls," he said.
      The banker said officials have stressed repeatedly over the
  past six weeks that China's foreign borrowing will not be
  affected by a drive against "bourgeois liberalism," a phrase
  meaning Western political ideas, following the dismissal of
  Communist Party chief Hu Yaobang on January 16.
      A U.S. Banker said there is no evidence that China's
  foreign exchange reserves have fallen below the officially
  stated figure of 10 billion dlrs.
      "The Bank of China is both a buyer and a seller in the
  market, which would know quickly if it was buying heavily in
  advance of an announcement the reserves were down," he said.
      The banker said such buying has not been going on. "Things
  are normal. Trade deficits such as China had last year and in
  1985 are normal for a country at its stage of development."
      Customs figures show China had a trade deficit of 11.9
  billion dlrs in 1986, down from 14 billion in 1985.
      A Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade official
  said this year's outlook for exports, which account for more
  than 75 pct of foreign exchange earnings, is much healthier
  than a year ago.
      The renminbi has matched the U.S. Dollar fall, he said. It
  was quoted at 3.72 today, little changed from 3.7 a year ago.
      The official said China has taken measures to improve its
  export performance, including incentive offers to exporters and
  the establishment of export production bases.
      "We expect higher prices for our oil exports this year," he
  added.
      Official estimates put China's 1986 export losses from the
  drop in world oil prices at three billion dlrs.
      A Western diplomat said China's foreign debt needs careful
  management but its debt service ratio remains very low at six
  to eight pct.
      "We base our assessment not on China's foreign exchange
  reserves but on its export performance, just as you assess a
  company on its performance, not its bank account," he said.
      He said China performed very well in the export field last
  year and remains a very creditworthy country which will have
  few difficulties in increasing its borrowing.
  

GULF ARAB DEPUTY OIL MINISTERS TO MEET IN BAHRAIN
  Deputy oil ministers from six Gulf
  Arab states will meet in Bahrain today to discuss coordination
  of crude oil marketing, the official Emirates news agency WAM
  reported.
      WAM said the officials would be discussing implementation
  of last Sunday's agreement in Doha by Gulf Cooperation Council
  (GCC) oil ministers to help each other market their crude oil.
      Four of the GCC states - Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
  Emirates (UAE), Kuwait and Qatar - are members of the
  Organiaation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some
  face stiff buyer resistance to official OPEC prices.
  

ULTRAMAR SAYS FOURTH QUARTER SHOWED IMPROVEMENTS
  Ultramar Plc &lt;UMAR.L> said that while
  its fourth 1986 quarter had improved from the operational point
  of view, several special charges adversely affected results.
      Overall the year had not been a good one, with upstream
  operations dramatically hit by the fall in crude oil prices and
  downstream operations also affected in the first half by large
  losses on inventories.
      But margins improved in the second half and in particular
  refining and marketing in Eastern Canada showed a good
  recovery.
      The company was commenting on results that showed a net
  loss for the year of 62.1 mln stg after a 71.6 mln profit in
  1985.
      The fourth quarter charges included a 20.8 mln stg
  provision on a retroactive price agreement recently initialled
  by Pertamina and Japanese buyers of the company's liquid
  natural gas and 4.7 mln for the early months of its ownership
  of Gulf Canada's marketing assets.
      Ultramar said it had also included the estimated cost of a
  further reorganisation programme, which was partly offset by a
  withdrawal of surplus funds from U.S. Pension schemes, and a
  13.5 mln stg provision for the estimated cost of selling its
  U.S. Flag shipping operation.
      The immediate outlook for crude oil prices was uncertain
  although it was unlikely there would be any sizeable increase
  in the near term. However, Ultramar said it was optimistic
  prices would strengthen over the longer term.
      Its substantial reserves of crude oil and natural gas put
  it in a good position to benefit from any price recovery.
      In the meantime, Ultramar's objectives were to improve
  profitability by selling or restructuring weak operations while
  strengthening core businesses and developing a sound
  operational and financial base.
      Proven, probable and possible reserves at end-1986 totalled
  about 700 mln barrels net on an oil-equivalent basis.
      Ultramar shares firmed on the announcement to 187p from
  181p at last night's close.
  

QUEENSLAND PRESS BOARD RECOMMENDS MURDOCH OFFER
  The &lt;Queensland Press Ltd> (QPL) board
  said it unanimously recommended the one billion dlr takeover
  bid by &lt;Cruden Investments Pty Ltd>, a family company of News
  Corp Ltd &lt;NCPA.S> chief executive Rupert Murdoch.
      The 23 dlrs a share cash-only offer is nearly double the
  market price before News announced its now-completed bid for
  The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd &lt;HWTA.S> in early December and
  no other offer is likely, it said in a statement.
      Independent adviser, &lt;Wardley Australia Ltd>, had also
  concluded the offer was fair and reasonable, it added.
      QPL is already owned 48.3 pct by HWT.
  

EC COMMISSION DECLINES COMMENT ON SUGAR OFFER
  The European Community (EC) Commission
  declined to give an official reaction to reports that a group
  of european operators plan to offer one mln tonnes of sugar
  into intervention in protest at Commission export policies.
      However, a spokesman for the Commission confirmed the
  offers had been made to intervention agencies in various member
  states, and said it would now take up to three weeks for the
  agencies concerned to complete all necessary documentation.
      The spokesman said that under current regulations, the EC
  would have to accept all the offers if there were no technical
  problems.
      The spokesman said the Commission would only have to
  reimburse the member state for the cost of buying-in the sugar
  after the product was sold out of intervention stores at a
  later date.
      He said that at present there was virtually no sugar held
  in intervention stores.
      Last year, 45,000 tonnes were sold into intervention and
  during the 1984-85 campaign 108,000 tonnes.
  

INDONESIAN BANKS RAISE INTEREST RATES
  A tight money market has pushed
  interest rates on three to six month time deposits to between
  15 and 18 pct from 13 to 15 pct a month ago, bankers said.
      March is usually a tight month for the money market because
  of tax payments and banks' need to attract funds for their
  year-end accounts on March 31.
      This year the situation has been made worse by December's
  rush to buy dollars by companies and businessmen who feared
  imposition of exchange controls. Much of that outflow has yet
  to be converted back into rupiah.
      "A lot of small money has come back in, but the big money is
  holding out until after April," one U.S. Banker said.
      The tight money policy of Bank Indonesia, the central bank,
  is helping to keep rates high.
      Short-term lending rates now average 25 pct a year, with no
  prospect they will be lowered soon, the bankers said.
      Central Bank governor Arifin Siregar said earlier this week
  that Indonesia could look forward to better economic prospects
  in 1987/88, but added the "speculators" who led a run on the
  rupiah late last year could again pose problems.
      Indonesia holds general elections on April 23, the first in
  five years, and most businessmen expect no new government
  economic packages or incentives before then.
      "Some people are nervous about what the government will do
  after the election," one banker said. "They normally try to do
  things before the IGGI (Inter-Governmental Group on Indonesia)
  meeting (in June) to prove they are doing something about the
  economy to show they deserve a couple of billion dollars."
      The IGGI, which groups 14 industrialised donor countries
  and four agencies, gave Indonesia 2.5 billion dlrs in soft
  loans and grants last year.
  

HIGHVELD (HGVJ.J) SEES LOWER 1987 EARNINGS
  Highveld Steel and Vanadium Corp
  Ltd said it expects 1987 earnings will be lower than last
  year's previously reported 85 cts a share.
      But profits "will be at a satisfactory level," the company
  said in the annual report without giving a specific estimate.
      Highveld said it expects appreciation of the rand will be
  offset to some extent by increasing U.S. Dollar prices for its
  exports as the year progresses.
      Highveld said measures taken last year by the European
  Economic Community and the United States prohibiting all South
  African steel products "presents a challenge to management to
  place the steel in other areas."
      The company said overall world vanadium consumption in 1987
  is expected to be similar to last year although China's role is
  still an unknown factor in the total supply-demand situation.
      "World vanadium production capacity is still believed to be
  adequate to cater for any foreseeable demand," it added.
  

SAUDI ARABIA BUYS 5,000 TONNES RBD PALM OLEIN
  Saudi Arabia bought 5,000 tonnes of
  refined bleached deodorised palm olein at its import tender
  yesterday for April 16/25 shipment at 353 dlrs per tonne cost
  and freight Jeddah, traders said.
  

 Belgium cuts discount rate to 8.0 pct from 8.50 - official

   Belgium cuts discount rate to 8.0 pct from 8.50 - official
  

PREUSSAG SAYS PAYMENT OF A 1986 DIVIDEND NOT CERTAIN
  A spokesman for Preussag
  AG &lt;PRSG.F> said it was not yet certain whether the company
  would pay a dividend on 1986 results
      He was commenting on a Preussag statement which said
  results in 1986 were lower than in 1985. Preussag has
  frequently said its results came under further pressure in 1986
  following a difficult year in 1985.
      Managing board chairman Guenther Sassmannshausen said in
  December the board would prefer to stick to its policy of not
  dipping into reserves to pay dividends. The spokesman noted the
  final dividend decision rests with the supervisory board.
      The Preussag statement said results fell in 1986 compared
  with 1985 because declines in earnings in metals, oil and
  shipping were not entirely compensated by positive trends in
  the group's other divisions.
      The spokesman said it was not clear whether the domestic
  group would show a net profit in 1986, adding this would depend
  partly on the level of provisions.
      Preussag cut its 1985 dividend to eight marks from nine
  marks on 1984 results after parent company net profit dropped
  to 65.0 mln marks from 103.0 mln the year before.
      The Preussag world group made a net loss of 13.1 mln marks
  in 1985 after a net profit of 154.5 mln the year before.
  Domestic group net profit fell to 77.9 mln from 122.2 mln.
      The statement said its results in 1986 were affected by
  unsatisfactory selling prices for metals and oil as well as by
  poor use of capacity in the supply ship sector.
      The reduction in natural gas prices in the fourth quarter
  of 1986 to reflect earlier falls in oil prices was an
  additional factor behind the drop in results.
      Preussag said rationalization measures already introduced
  would not begin to take full effect until this year.
      Preussag's domestic group turnover rose to 4.48 billion
  marks in 1986 from 4.29 billion in 1985, helped by the first
  time consolidation of 951.8 mln marks of turnover from its
  majority-owned oil and gas subsidiary C. Deilmann AG.
      Domestic group turnover in the 1986 fourth quarter alone
  was 1.1 billion marks, it said without giving comparison
  figures.
      Preussag said its domestic crude oil production fell 4.0
  pct to 94,400 tonnes in 1986, while foreign oil production rose
  to 182,900 tonnes from 174,500 tonnes.
      Preussag said its Amalgamated Metal Corporation Plc (AMC)
  subsidiary, whose results are included in the world group
  accounts, made an unspecified profit in the fourth quarter of
  last year.
      AMC's large losses in 1985, caused principally by the
  international tin crisis, were the reason behind the world
  group losses that year.
  

OIL FIRMS CUT 1987 INDONESIAN EXPLORATION SPENDING
  Foreign oil companies will spend less
  on exploration in Indonesia this year than last, budgeting 2.7
  billion dlrs for calendar 1987 against 1986 spending of 2.8
  billion dlrs, the state oil company Pertamina said.
      Actual spending last year fell short of the budgeted figure
  of 3.2 billion dlrs, as oil companies slashed expenditure
  because of the crash in world oil prices.
      Jumardi Jukardi, head of Pertamina's coordinating board for
  foreign contractors, said foreign companies will drill 110
  exploration wells and 431 development wells this year, against
  108 and 330 last year.
  

INDONESIA OIL CONTRACT NEGOTIATIONS END THIS MONTH
  Negotiations between Indonesia's state
  oil company Pertamina and foreign oil contractors on extension
  of the standard 30-year production sharing contract will be
  concluded by the end of this month, a Pertamina official said.
      Jumardi Jukardi, head of Pertamina's foreign contractors
  coordinating board, gave no details about the outcome of the
  talks.
      But Pertamina President Abdul Rachman Ramly has said
  priority will be given to extending contracts for companies
  whose exploration and production contracts expire within the
  next seven to 10 years.
      Jukardi, speaking to Indonesian reporters, said the
  negotiations would determine whether the 85-15 production
  sharing split in favour of Pertamina would be adhered to or
  altered in some cases as oil companies are asking for.
      Hardjoko Seputro, spokesman for the Mines and Energy
  Ministry, has said that President Suharto has agreed in
  principle to extension of the standard 30-year production
  sharing contract to reflect better current depressed conditions
  on the international oil market.
  

TRADE SAYS EC SUGAR TENDER HARD TO FORECAST
  Traders here and in Paris said the
  results of today's EC white sugar tender are hard to forecast
  because of plans by a group of French, West German, Dutch and
  Belgian operators to sell one mln tonnes of sugar into
  intervention.
      London traders said bids for licences have been reported
  between 43.00 and 44.00 Ecus per 100 kilos and if any licences
  are granted they are likely to be towards the lower end of that
  range, possibly 43.30/43.50 Ecus.
      Traders in Paris said they expect maximum rebates of
  between 43 and 43.50 Ecus.
      Other than the Commission releasing no sugar for export,
  the likely tonnage is expected to be very small, the London
  traders said, while the French sources declined to estimate
  volume in view of the psychological impact of the planned sales
  into intervention in protest against EC export policies.
      Last week licences for 60,500 tonnes were awarded at a
  maximum rebate of 43.147 Ecus.
  

KOREA PLANS TO OPEN MARKETS TO EASE WON PRESSURE
  South Korea will further open its market
  to help cut its trade surplus with the U.S. And to fight off
  pressure to revalue the won against the dollar, a government
  spokesman said.
      The spokesman said Korean trade minister Rha Woong-Bae's
  stand in Washington yesterday against pressure from industrial
  nations to revalue the won underlined the government's
  determination to stand firm.
      Rha told the U.S. Chamber of Commerce "Demands that Korea
  carry out a drastic and sudden currency revaluation of five or
  10 pct are, I believe, extremely ill-advised."
      Deputy prime minister Kim Mahn-Je told a meeting of local
  businessmen "The government's policy on the question of
  revaluing the won is to maintain a steadfast position."
      Kim said South Korea was ready to move slowly to raise the
  won's value because of its heavy foreign debt which stood at
  44.5 billion dlrs at the end of 1986.
      Six industrialised nations agreed in Paris last month that
  newly industrialising countries, such as South Korea and
  Taiwan, should allow their currencies to appreciate.
      But local businessmen have said won/dollar parity has
  already reached "a crisis level."
      An official of the Korea Traders' Association (KTA) said if
  the won strengthened another five pct, this would mean the loss
  of profitability for nearly half of all South Korean exporters.
      "We are determined not to go the way of Latin American
  debtor nations which have suspended interest payments of their
  debts," the spokesman said. "The only way to keep our good record
  is to maintain our exports.+
      The trade minister said yesterday should Seoul revalue the
  won suddenly Korea would run "a tremendous trade deficit and
  could degenerate into a country, like many other developing
  countries, which is reneging on its international obligations."
      The spokesman said South Korea had been gradually
  appreciating its currency, ruling out a major revaluation. So
  far this year, the won has gone up by 0.8 pct against the
  dollar after a 3.34 pct revaluation in 1986.
      He said South Korea was selecting "many" of 122 items on
  which Washington recently asked Seoul to lower tariffs to help
  narrow its trade surplus with the U.S. No further details were
  given.
      Seoul announced in January the lifting of bans on 158
  items, including sensitive agricultural products and large
  cars, effective from July.
      South Korea posted its first ever current account surplus
  last year, due largely to a trade surplus with the U.S. Of 7.1
  billion dlrs, against a 4.3 billion deficit in 1985. It earlier
  forecast that its current account surplus could reach eight
  billion dlrs this year.
      But the government official said the surplus would be held
  at around five billion dlrs to avoid further pressure by
  industrialised nations to push up the value of its currency.
  

GERMAN CALL MONEY EASES AFTER LIQUIDITY INJECTION
  Call money eased to 3.75/80 pct from
  3.80/85 yesterday following a net injection of 6.7 billion
  marks at a rate of 3.80 pct in fresh funds from this week's
  securities repurchase agreement, dealers said.
      But rates were expected to rise toward the end of the week.
      A major tax payment period by banks on behalf of customers,
  payments for the federal railways loan stock and repayments of
  mark liabilities incurred by foreign central banks with the
  Bundesbank in the framework of the European Monetary System
  (EMS) are likely to significantly burden the system. Banks
  built up minimum reserves today, ahead of the expected outflow.
      The Bundesbank credited banks with a gross 15.2 billion
  marks, but some 8.5 billion left the system at the same time as
  an earlier securities repurchase pact matured.
      Dealers estimated the EMS related outflow as high as six
  billion marks.
      The Bundesbank declined to comment, but a spokesman said
  yesterday although the funds now due may be allowed to roll
  over, the possibility that other central banks may choose to
  redeem them meant a net infusion was needed.
      Dealers forecast tax payments of 25 and 30 billion marks,
  but much of it is expected to burden the system only next week.
      Banks' minimum reserve holdings at the Bundesbank totalled
  53.6 billion marks on Monday, averaging 54.0 billion over the
  first nine days of March.
      Dealers said although the figure was well above an expected
  requirement of around 51 billion marks, the expected outflow of
  funds was so large that banks might find it difficult to meet
  the requirement toward the end of March.
      No securities repurchase agreement is expiring next week,
  but dealers said the Bundesbank could offer fresh liquidity if
  conditions significantly tighten. "The Bundesbank wants to keep
  rates around 3.80 pct," one dealer said.
  

BTR PLC &lt;BTRX.L> 1986 YEAR
  Shr 21.2p vs 16.0p
      Div 4.75p making 8.25p vs 5.83p
      Pretax profit 505 mln stg vs 362 mln
      Turnover 4.02 billion vs 3.88 billion
      Tax 128 mln vs 85 mln
      Operating profit 527 mln vs 421 mln
      Operating profit includes -
      Other income 30 mln vs 41 mln
      Financial costs 52 mln vs 100 mln
      Minorities 25 mln vs 16 mln
      Earnings 352 mln vs 261 mln
      Extraordinary credit 78 mln vs 34 mln debit.
  

SAUDI ARABIA REITERATES COMMITMENT TO OPEC ACCORD
  Saudi Arabian Oil Minister Hisham Nazer
  reiterated the kingdom's commitment to last December's OPEC
  accord to boost world oil prices and stabilize the market, the
  official Saudi Press Agency SPA said.
      Asked by the agency about the recent fall in free market
  oil prices, Nazer said Saudi Arabia "is fully adhering by the
  ... accord and it will never sell its oil at prices below the
  pronounced prices under any circumstance."
      Saudi Arabia was a main architect of December pact under
  which OPEC agreed to cut its total oil output ceiling by 7.25
  pct and return to fixed prices of around 18 dollars a barrel.
  

JAPAN'S JOBLESS SEEN RISING TO 3.3 PCT IN 1987/88
  The yen's rise against the dollar is
  expected to boost Japan's unemployment rate to an average 3.3
  pct in the 1987/88 fiscal year beginning April 1 from January's
  record three pct, the private Nomura Research Institute said.
      The official 1987/88 estimate is 2.9 pct.
      The research arm of Nomura Securities Co forecast
  unemployment would exceed two mln by mid-fiscal 1987, against
  an estimated 1.75 mln for the current year.
      Nomura urged the government to take pump-priming measures
  to help redress trade imbalances and boost employment.
      Employment in manufacturing during fiscal 1987/88 was
  predicted to fall 550,000 from the current year due to higher
  job losses in the steel, shipbuilding and heavy electrical
  machinery sectors, Nomura said.
      Employment in the non-manufacturing sector will continue to
  increase, the institute said, without giving figures.
  

SPAIN EXTENDS RESERVE REQUIREMENT
  The Bank of Spain has extended the
  reserve requirement for banks to their convertible peseta funds
  in an attempt to curb speculation in short-term capital which
  is currently fuelling money supply growth.
      In a statement issued late last night, the central bank
  said convertible peseta accounts, funds which are not subject
  to exchange controls, would also be subject to a 19 pct reserve
  requirement with effect from Friday.
      Convertible peseta funds had been previously exempt from
  reserve requirements.
      The measure comes one week after the central bank raised
  reserve requirements on domestic deposits by one percentage
  point to 19 pct, also with effect on Friday.
      Banking sources say the high real interest rates on offer
  now -- around eight pct for overnight funds -- have attracted a
  large influx of speculative foreign capital which is
  threatening the government's monetary targets.
      They say this influx is largely responsible for Spain's
  principal measure of money supply, the broad-based liquid
  assets in public hands (ALP), to have grown by an estimated 17
  pct annualised rate in February, compared with January's 8.3
  pct rise and an 11.4 pct rise during the whole of 1986. The
  target for 1987 is eight pct.
      The Bank of Spain today did not provide assistance funds to
  banks in a move to drain excess liquidity from the money
  market. Liquidity will be further tightened by the fortnightly
  Treasury Bill auction tomorrow and Friday's hike in reserve
  requirements, expected to absorb over 200 billion pesetas from
  the system.
      The immediate reaction was a hike in interbank interest
  rates today to 13.75/14.00 pct from yesterday's 13.46 pct
  average for deposits.
      Bank of Spain officials said this was an understandable
  response "given that the market is short of funds."
      But banking sources noted that a continued rise in interest
  rates would neutralize the central bank's attempts to curtail
  short-term speculation with foreign funds by making the Spanish
  money markets more attractive.
  

HUNGARY TO DEVALUE FORINT AGAINST WESTERN UNITS
  Hungary is to devalue the forint by an
  average of eight pct against Western currencies, the official
  news agency MTI said.
      MTI did not say when the devaluation would become
  effective, but it expected new rates to be announced later
  today.
      Hungary devalued the forint by a similar amount last
  September 23. Western bankers say the forint is more
  realistically valued than currencies of Hungary's COMECON
  allies.
  

SUMITA SAYS LITTLE ROOM FOR BANK TO EASE POLICY
  Bank of Japan governor Satoshi Sumita
  said there is little room left for the central bank to further
  ease its credit policy as interest rates levels are now
  approaching their lower limit.
      "The government should instead seek ways of making the best
  use of its fiscal policy," he told a press conference.
      His remarks were concerned with a comprehensive economic
  stimulative package the government plans to adopt in the coming
  days.
      At the recent talks among the six major industrialised
  nations in Paris, Japan promised to work out a comprehensive
  economic package to boost domestic demand, which in turn would
  help increase its imports and reduce its trade surplus.
      Sumita also said the economy will show a gradual upturn in
  the second half of the year if the yen remains stable.
      He said there is caution in the foreign exchange market
  against a further rise of the yen and mark and this explains
  the recent stability in the currency markets. Conflicting
  economic indicators from the U.S. Have also been dampening
  market activity, he added.
  

KUWAIT MINISTER SAYS NO EMERGENCY OPEC TALKS SET
  Kuwait's oil minister said in a newspaper
  interview that there were no plans for an emergency OPEC
  meeting after the recent weakness in world oil prices.
      Sheikh Ali al-Khalifa al-Sabah was quoted by the local
  daily al-Qabas as saying that "none of the OPEC members has
  asked for such a meeting."
      He also denied that Kuwait was pumping above its OPEC quota
  of 948,000 barrels of crude daily (bpd).
      Crude oil prices fell sharply last week as international
  oil traders and analysts estimated the 13-nation OPEC was
  pumping up to one million bpd over its self-imposed limits.
  

AUSTRALIA LEADING INDEX CONTINUES RISE IN DECEMBER
  Westpac Banking Corp and the
  Melbourne University Institute of Applied Economic and Social
  Research said their leading index of Australian economic
  activity rose for the ninth successive month in December.
      The index rose to 134.1 (base 1980) from 129.8 in November
  and 122.8 a year earlier, the Westpac-Institute report said.
      Annualised, it rose 13 pct in December against seven pct in
  November and one pct a year earlier, based on the ratio of the
  latest index to the average over the previous 12 months.
      The report said the index is now 12 points or 9.8 pct above
  its trough in March 1986.
      Westpac's chief economist Bob Graham said the consistent
  upward trend in the leading index emphasised the need for a
  tough mini-budget in May. "An untoward increase in consumption
  spending before the balance of payments improves would have
  disastrous consequences," he said.
      The coincident index also rose an annualised three pct in
  December against zero movement in November and a seven pct rise
  a year earlier, Westpac and the Institute said.
      They said this index continued to show the current
  recession is shallow and is more likely to involve a slowing in
  real growth than an absolute fall in economic activity.
  

JAPAN CANNOT BEAR FURTHER YEN RISE, MINISTER SAYS
  Japan cannot bear a further rise of the
  yen, Foreign Minister Tadashi Kuranari said.
      "A further stronger yen would be a misfortune for Japan and
  the Japanese people would not be able to bear such a burden," he
  told reporters.
      The minister said he wants to tell U.S. Political leaders
  of the sacrifices Japan is making to cut its trade surplus.
      Kuranari was widely expected to fly to Washington tomorrow
  for talks focussing on trade. But departure remains uncertain
  because of the continuing parliamentary boycott by opposition
  parties protesting plans for a new sales tax.
      If the boycott is lifted tomorrow, Kuranari would probably
  have to remain in Japan to attend parliamentary discussions on
  the government's 1987/88 budget, Japanese officials said.
      Kuranari said both the U.S. And Japan should approach the
  trade imbalance in a calm, unemotional manner.
      But, he added, "If the issue of rice is to be raised...I
  would mention the feelings of the Japanese people."
      Japanese politicians have said repeatedly the country
  cannot bow to U.S. Pressure to liberalize rice imports because
  the issue is too sensitive.
  

BANK OF ENGLAND DOES NOT INTERVENE IN MONEY MARKET
  The Bank of England said it did not
  operate in the money market during the morning.
      Initially, the bank forecast a liqudity shortage of some
  300 mln stg for the market today.
      Overnight interbank sterling traded at the 11-1/4 1/8 pct
  level for most of the morning while period rates have eased on
  the strength of sterling, dealers said. At 1200 gmt, sterling's
  trade-weighted index was up 0.6 at 72.7.
  

U.S. URGES BANKS TO WEIGH PHILIPPINE DEBT PLAN
  The U.S. is urging reluctant
  commercial banks to seriously consider accepting a novel
  Philippine proposal for paying its interest bill and believes
  the innovation is fully consistent with its Third World debt
  strategy, a Reagan administration official said.
      The official's comments also suggest that debtors' pleas
  for interest rate concessions should be treated much more
  seriously by the commercial banks, in cases where developing
  nations are carrying out genuine economic reforms.
      In addition, he signaled that the banks might want to
  reconsider the idea of a "megabank," where Third World debt would
  be pooled, and suggested the administration would support such
  a plan, even though it was not formally proposing it. At the
  same time, however, the official expressed reservations that
  such a scheme would ever get off the ground.
      The Philippine proposal, together with Argentine
  suggestions that "exit bonds" be issued to end the troublesome
  role of small banks in the debt strategy, would help to
  underpin the flagging role of private banks within the plan,
  the official said in an interview with Reuters.
      "All of these things would fit within the definition of our
  initiative as we have asked it and we think any novel and
  unique approach such as those should be considered," said the
  official, who asked not to be named.
      In October 1985, Washington outlined a debt crisis strategy
  under which commercial banks and multilateral institutions such
  as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
  were urged to step up lending to major debtors nations.
      In return, America called on the debtor countries to enact
  economic reforms promoting inflation-free economic growth.
      "The multilaterals have been performing well, the debtors
  have been performing well," said the official. But he admitted
  that the largest Third World debtor, Brazil, was clearly an
  exception.
      The official, who played a key role in developing the U.S.
  Debt strategy and is an administration economic policymaker,
  also said these new ideas would help commercial banks improve
  their role in resolving the Third World debt crisis.
      "We called at the very beginning for the bank syndications
  to find procedures or processes whereby they could operate more
  effectively," the official said.
      Among those ideas, the official said, were suggestions that
  commercial banks create a "megabank" which could swap Third World
  debt paper for so-called "exit bonds" for banks like regional
  American or European institutions.
      Such bonds in theory would rid these banks of the need to
  lend money to their former debtors every time a new money
  package was assembled, and has been suggested by Argentina in
  its current negotiations for a new loan of 2.15 billion dlrs.
      He emphasised that the "megabank" was not an administration
  plan but "something some people have suggested."
      Other U.S. Officials said Japanese commercial banks are
  examining the creation of a consortium bank to assume Third
  World debt. This plan, actively under consideration, would
  differ slightly from the one the official described.
      But the official expressed deep misgivings that such a plan
  would work in the United States.
      "If the banks thought that that was a suitable way to go,
  fine. I don't think they ever will."
      He pointed out that banks would swap their Third World
  loans for capital in the megabank and might then be reluctant
  to provide new money to debtors through the new institution.
      Meanwhile, the official praised the Philippine plan under
  which it would make interest payments on its debt in cash at no
  more than 5/8 pct above Libor.
      "The Philippine proposal is very interesting, it's quite
  unique and I don't think it's something that should be
  categorically rejected out of hand," the official said.
      Banks which found this level unacceptably low would be
  offered an alternative of Libor payments in cash and a margin
  above that of one pct in the form of Philippine Investment
  Notes.
      These tradeable, dollar-denominated notes would have a
  six-year life and if banks swapped them for cash before
  maturity, the country would guarantee a payment of 7/8 point
  over Libor.
      Until now, bankers have criticised these spreads as far too
  low. The talks, now in their second week, are aimed at
  stretching out repayments of 3.6 billion dlrs of debt and
  granting easier terms on 5.8 billion of already rescheduled
  debt. The country, which has enjoyed strong political support
  in Washington since Corazon Aquino came to power early last
  year, owes an overall 27.8 billion dlrs of debt.
      But the official denied the plan amounts to interest rate
  capitalisation, a development until now unacceptable to the
  banks. "It's no more interest rate capitalisation than if you
  have a write down in the spread over Libor from what existed
  before," the official said in comments suggesting some ought to
  be granted the rate concessions they seek. "Some people argue
  that (cutting the spread) is debt forgiveness... What it really
  is is narrowing the spread on new money," he added.
      He said the U.S. Debt strategy is sufficiently broad as an
  initiative to include plans like the Philippines'.
  

POUND AND CANADIAN DOLLAR CAPTURING ATTENTION
  Interest in the currency futures market
  has shifted to the soaring British pound and the potentially
  explosive Canadian dollar, and away from the dull Continental
  and Japanese currencies, analysts said.
      The June pound, which added 6.3 cents over the past
  week-and-a-half to reach a new contract high of 1.5930 to the
  dollar on Monday, has spawned a new-found speculative boom.
      "Brokers have to push their clients somewhere...and
  technically, the pound is in the best shape," PaineWebber
  analyst Jason Gillard said.
      "We've tried to take a bullish approach to the pound, and
  we're going to stay with that, there's no reason to change,"
  Smith Barney analyst Craig Sloane said.
      Many traders took on long pound/short West German mark
  futures positions, although some of those cross-trades were
  liquidated yesterday, Sloane said.
       The fundamental keys to the pound's rise have been
  relatively high U.K. interest rates and a vague optimism
  surrounding the British economy, analysts said.
      "Money seems to be chasing yields," William Byers, of Bear
  Stearns, said of the 10-1/2 pct U.K. base lending rate.
      Many analysts are skeptical about further gains in the
  pound, on the inference that the Bank of England will seek to
  relieve upward pressure on the currency by pushing down
  interest rates after the nation's budget is released March 17.
      The budget itself could have an impact, depending on how
  well it is received, but analysts say relative interest rates
  and oil income remain the main influences on the currency.
      However, the market may be able to absorb lower U.K.
  interest rates, as it has done when other countries have cut
  their discount rates, and extend the pound's rally, Sloane
  said.
      The Canadian dollar has not been rising like the pound, but
  Sloane and other analysts cautiously predicted a big move soon.
      The sideways price pattern in the June contract, with
  smaller and smaller price ranges, has formed a "bull flag" on
  price charts, technically-oriented analysts said.
      "It makes for an explosive type of situation that often
  leads to a breakout," in this case to the upside, Sloane said.
      Byers agreed there was potential for the June Canadian
  dollar to rally above the 77.00 cent level from the most recent
  close at 74.80 cents to the U.S. dollar.
      "At this stage of the game I'd call the market long-term
  positive, but for the technical burden of proof you need a
  close above (the previous contract high of) 75.25," Byers said.
      As to the traditionally more active currencies, stability
  was the catchword and reluctance the watchword among analysts.
      Sloane said it was important that June Swiss francs and
  June German marks held above support at 0.6400 and 0.5400,
  respectively, closing at 0.6438 and 0.5430.
      Yesterday's rebound showed the market was still very
  respectful of the Paris accord, and the threat of central bank
  intervention by the G-5 nations plus Canada.
      "We may still probe to see what the parameters are," Byers
  said, "but people are very reluctant because they don't know
  where the central banks will be (to intervene)."
      Gillard said the mark could drop to a previous price
  consolidation area around 0.5250 based on the profoundly
  sluggish West German economy, but that he would be a buyer at
  that level.
  

NEW WORLD PICTURES TO HAVE GAIN FROM SALE OF FIVE PCT OF TAFT BROADCASTING

  NEW WORLD PICTURES TO HAVE GAIN FROM SALE OF FIVE PCT OF TAFT BROADCASTING
  

JAMAICA AGREES DRAFT BANK DEBT RESCHEDULING
  Jamaica agreed in principle with its
  bank advisory committee on a rescheduling of 181 mln dlrs of
  foreign commercial bank debt falling due between 1987 and 1989,
  the Jamaican Information Service said.
      Repayments on the debt will be stretched out over 12 years
  with 8-1/2 years' grace at 1-1/4 percentage points over the
  London Interbank Offered Rate, Libor. The margin on previously
  restructured debt also will be cut to 1-1/4 point from 2-1/2.
      The package should save Jamaica about 3.3 mln dlrs a year.
      Prime Minister Edward Seaga, who led the Jamaican
  delegation, called the terms very favourable to his country.
      The agreement in principle with the bank advisory committee
  led by the Bank of Nova Scotia &lt;BNO.TO> comes five days after
  Jamaica successfully concluded a 125.5 mln dlr rescheduling
  accord with the Paris Club of creditor nations.
      That pact in turn followed the International Monetary Fund
  (IMF)'s approval on March 5 of a 85 mln special drawing rights
  standby arrangement and a 40.9 mln sdr drawing under the
  compensatory financing facility.
      Of Jamaica's foreign debt of 3.3 billion dlrs only 12 pct
  is owed to commercial banks, and Seaga yesterday reaffirmed the
  government's policy of not seeking new bank loans.
  REUTER...^M
  

TAIWAN PLANS NEW TARIFF CUTS
  Taiwan plans another round of deep tariff
  cuts this year to help narrow its trade surplus with the U.S.,
  A senior economic planner said.
      Wang Chao-Ming, vice-chairman of the council for economic
  planning and development, told Reuters Taiwan would further
  reduce import tariffs on 1,700 products sometime in the second
  half of this year.
      Cuts of up to 50 pct on those items were made last year and
  Wang said further cuts would go much deeper.
      "We have to speed up liberalisation and cut import tariffs
  faster and more substantially," he said.
      The United States, Taiwan's main trading partner, has said
  the island's import tariffs, still ranging from a high of
  almost 60 pct, were unacceptable. It has criticised the cuts as
  too selective.
       Taiwan's trade surplus with the United States hit 13.6
  billion dlrs last year. The surplus has boosted foreign
  exchange reserves to 50 billion dlrs, which Wang said made
  Taiwan a target for U.S. Protectionism.
      Wang said the trade surplus and the reserves weakened
  Taiwan's position in talks with Washington over export quotas,
  particularly for shoes, textiles and machine tools which are
  among the island's main export-earners.
      A special Taiwanese trade delegation leaves for Washington
  tomorrow to try to renegotiate an agreement signed last year
  limiting exports of Taiwan textiles.
      Under the accord, Taiwan's textile export growth was
  limited to 0.5 pct each year until 1988. Taipei has said it is
  losing markets to South Korea and Hong Kong which were given
  more generous terms.
   REUTER...
  

VEGETABLE OILS MAY TIGHTEN DESPITE SEED SURPLUS
  Lower production of coconut
  and palm oils could lead to a decline in vegetable oil stocks
  this year despite growing supplies of oilseeds, senior oilseeds
  analyst for Merrill Lynch Capital Markets Mario Balletto said.
      Balletto told a conference of Canadian farmers at Alberta
  Agriculture's annual farm outlook conference that the world
  vegetable oil situation is one of potentially tight supplies.
      "Prices for edible oils appear to have more upside
  potential reflecting strong world demand and an unprecedented
  decline in the production of tree oils," Balletto said.
      Balletto estimated production of palm, coconut and palm
  kernel oils this year at 8.5 mln tonnes, down from 9.1 mln
  tonnes last year, enough to offset higher oilseed output.
      He estimated total vegetable oil production this year at
  33.4 mln tonnes, up from 33.0 mln last year, and disappearance
  at 34.0 mln tonnes, up from 32.6 mln.
      Unless oilseed crushing increases sharply, he said,
  disappearance of vegetable oils could exceed production by
  600,000 tonnes, the largest deficit since 1976.
      "If world protein meal demand stagnates, thus limiting the
  crush of soybeans ... the need for serious supply rationing in
  the edible oils sector could develop," he said.
      "This would be relatively favorable for the prices of high
  oil yielding seeds," Balletto said.
      Oilseeds, on the other hand, remain at depressed prices
  because of burdensome supplies, he said.
      World ending stocks of oilseeds are estimated to increase
  for the fourth straight year to a record 28.4 mln tonnes,
  compared with 25.4 mln last year.
      The increase should result from lower disappearance, as
  production is expected to fall to 184.0 mln tonnes from 185.7
  mln last year, he said.
      World soybean production in 1987 totalled a record 98.9 mln
  tonnes, up from 90.6 mln the previous year, Balletto said,
  while production of other oilseeds was lower.
      Higher soybean production in South America and Europe made
  up for lower production in the United States, he said.
      Soybeans account for the bulk of the surplus, and U.S.
  stocks make up most of those, Balletto said.
      The Commodity Credit Corporation owned 12.7 mln tonnes,
  about half of the world soybean surplus, he said.
      Since 1983-84, he said, world oilseed stocks have increased
  13.1 mln tonnes.
      "During the same period, U.S. soybean stocks increased 12.1
  mln tonnes, becoming the dumping ground of the entire world
  surplus, courtesy of the CCC and highlighting the artificially
  high prices caused by the U.S. loan program."
      "Soybean prices and, to a great extent, world oilseeds
  prices are likely to be dominated by the loan program, as long
  as the U.S. soybean surplus continues.
      For the 1987 crop, he said, prices are likely to hover in a
  range tied to the U.S. loan program.
      "Upside potential for prices is limited by the huge supply
  overhang while strong underlying support is provided by the
  U.S. loan rate."
      The problem is likely to become worse as the artificially
  high prices encourage producers in South America, Canada and
  Australia to shift from grains to oilseeds, Balletto said.
  

PORTUGUESE TRADE DEFICIT NARROWS IN 1986
  Portugal's trade deficit narrowed in
  1986 to 336.5 billion escudos from 354.8 billion in 1985,
  according to provisional National Statistics Institute figures.
      Imports totalled 1,412.6 billion escudos and exports
  1,076.1 billion compared with 1,326.5 billion and 971.7 billion
  in 1985.
      Expressed in terms of dollars, imports rose 21.2 pct and
  exports 26.1 pct and the trade deficit increased by 7.8 pct.
      In its first year as a member of the European Community,
  Portugal recorded a deficit of 98.1 billion escudos in its
  trade with the other Community states compared with a deficit
  of 2.4 billion escudos in 1985.
      Imports from the EC in 1986 totalled 830.2 billion escudos,
  while exports to the Community were 732.1 billion, compared
  with 609.5 billion and 607.1 billion the previous year.
      Portugal's deficit with Spain was 83.2 billion escudos
  against 57.7 billion in 1985, with Italy it was 70.4 billion
  against 30.3 billion, and with West Germany 40.5 billion
  against 19.1 billion.
  

BRAZIL'S GROS TO MEET BANKS ON TRADE LINE ISSUE
  Brazil's central bank governor
  Francisco Gros will meet senior commercial bankers here today
  in a new attempt to defuse the anger generated by the country's
  unilateral suspension of interest payments on 68 billion dlrs
  of foreign commercial bank debt, bankers said.
      Gros will meet representatives of Citibank, the head of
  Brazil's bank advisory committee, and of co-heads Morgan
  Guaranty Trust Co and Lloyds Bank Plc.
      High on the agenda will be banks' complaints about Brazil's
  accompanying freeze on some 15 billion dlrs of short-term trade
  and interbank lines, the bankers said.
      Brazil's several hundred creditor banks worldwide agreed
  last March to extend the credit lines until March 31, 1987, as
  part of a 31 billion dlr financing package.
      Bankers said the looming expiry of this commitment, coupled
  with Brazil's freeze, raised a spate of technical and legal
  questions that the banks want to discuss with Gros.
      They said they face problems because of the freeze
  requirement that any payment due to be made by a Brazilian bank
  under the trade facility must be deposited instead with the
  central bank. This means foreign bankers cannot easily switch
  their credit lines from one borrower to another.
      The requirement to deposit with the central bank has also
  meant Brazilian banks have been able to negotiate lower
  interest-rate spreads, because foreign banks would rather
  accept a reduced margin than see their money deposited with the
  central bank.
      "It's caused a lot of ill-will with the banking community,"
  one banker said.
      Gros is also expected to brief the banks on the results of
  a 10-day tour of Europe and Japan that he and finance minister
  Dilson Funaro have just completed to seek official support for
  Brazil's debt stance.
  

SERVICE RESOURCES CORP &lt;SRC> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr profit five cts vs loss 1.71 dlrs
      Oper net profit 196,000 vs loss 2,388,000
      Sales 40.5 mln vs 43.2 mln
      Avg shrs 2,212,000 vs 1,482,000
      Year
      Oper shr profit 71 cts vs loss 6.24 dlrs
      Oper net profit 1,799,000 vs loss 8,991,000
      Sales 154.5 mln vs 145.0 mln
      NOTE: Net excludes losses from discontinued operations of
  712,000 dlrs vs 2,843,000 dlrs in quarter and 1,972,000 dlrs vs
  10.6 mln dlrs in year.
      1986 net excludes extraordinary loss 1,167,000 dlrs in
  quarter and gain 628,000 dlrs in year.
      1986 year net includes gain one mln dlrs from sale of
  building and gain 3,200,000 dlrs from termination of pension
  plan.
  

TELEPHONE AND DATA SYSTEMS INC &lt;TDS> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr 22 cts vs 22 cts
      Oper net 2,058,000 vs 2,129,000
      Revs 44.5 mln vs 35.7 mln
      Avg shrs 9,589,000 vs 9,348,000
      Year
      Oper shr 94 cts vs 94 cts
      Oper net 8,889,000 vs 8,570,000
      Revs 155.0 mln vs 123.4 mln
      Avg shrs 9,450,000 vs 9,174,000
      NOTE: Net excludes discontinued operations gain 1,637,000
  dlrs vs loss 720,000 dlrs in quarter and gain 4,679,000 dlrs vs
  loss 720,000 dlrs in year.
      1986 net both periods includes charge 865,000 dlrs from
  repal of investment tax credits.
  

NEW WORLD PICTURES &lt;NWP> SELLS TAFT &lt;TFB> STAKE
  New World Pictures Ltd said it sold
  456,900 shares or about five pct of Taft Broadcasting Co common
  stock for a gain of 17.8 mln dlrs.
      The company said in a brief statement that it acquired the
  stock in late 1986.  It gave no further details and company
  officials were not immediately available for comment.
      On Friday, Taft vice chairman Dudley S. Taft and
  Narragansett Capital Inc &lt;NARR> offered to acquire Taft for 145
  dlrs per share.  Dudley Taft and his family have owned 12 pct
  of the company.
      An investment group leds by Robert M. Bass, one of the Bass
  brothers of Fort Worth, Texas, has been reported as owning
  about 25 pct of Taft stock, and &lt;American Financial Corp>
  chairman Carl Lindner has been reported to own about 16 pct. 
  Both Bass and Linder have acquired Taft shares in recent months.
  

SOVIET ECONOMIST SEES FEW GAINS IN U.S. TRADE
  There is little chance Soviet exports
  to the United States will rise in 1987, but Moscow's current
  trade reforms should result in more trade in manufactured goods
  in future, a Soviet economist said.
      Sergey Frolov, chief economist at Amtorg Trading Corp, an
  agent for Soviet trade organisations and industries, told a
  U.S.-USSR business meeting the Soviet Union produces few items
  that western nations want.
      But reforms, including upgrading the quality of goods and
  allowing joint ventures with foreign firms, will encourage
  modest export gains in future.
      Frolov said the Soviet Union exported 500 mln dlrs worth of
  goods to the United States in 1986 and imported 1.5 billion
  dlrs worth. He gave no trade forecast for 1987.
      But he said that even if all obstacles were removed, total
  trade between the two countries would remain between two and
  three billion dlrs a year.
      "The post-detente embargoes have taught the USSR to limit
  its trading with the U.S.," he said.
  

SWISS SIGHT DEPOSITS FALL 2.88 BILLION FRANCS
  Sight deposits of commercial banks at
  the Swiss National Bank fell 2.88 billion Swiss francs in the
  first 10 days of March to 7.65 billion, the National Bank said.
      Foreign exchange reserves rose 3.30 billion francs to 33.94
  billion.
      Sight deposits are a major indicator of money market
  liquidity in Switzerland.
      The National Bank said banks paid back 5.5 billion francs
  of central bank credit taken out at the end of February for the
  end-month liquidity requirement.
      This drain was offset in part by new currency swaps, which
  had the effect of increasing the National Bank's foreign
  exchange holdings.
      Bank notes in circulation fell 309.1 mln francs to 24.49
  billion, and other deposits on call -- basically government
  funds -- rose 1.06 billion to 2.10 billion.
  

ECUADOR CRUDE OIL EXPORTS STOPPED FOR FIVE MONTHS
  Ecuador needs 120 mln dlrs to repair the
  damage to its oil export pipeline caused by last week"s
  earthquake, which will stop crude exports for five months,
  energy and mines minister Javier Espinosa Teran said.
      Espinosa said yesterday the pipeline, which carries crude
  from jungle fields to the Pacific Ocean coast of Balao, would
  be repaired with the help of Texaco Inc &lt;TX.N> and a Mexican
  and an Argentine firm.
      President Leon Febres Cordero said two days ago that
  Ecuador, an OPEC member, would have to suspend crude exports
  for four months due to the quake.
      Oil traditionally accounts for up to two-thirds of
  Ecuador's total exports and as much as 60 pct of government
  revenues.
      Deputy energy minister Fernando Santos Alvite said Ecuador
  would have to import six to seven mln barrels of crude oil to
  meet its needs until the line was repaired.
      The Ecuadorean minister at the Presidency, Patricio
  Quevedo, told reporters that Venezuela will lend Ecuador five
  mln barrels of crude, which would repaid in kind after a
  180-day period.
      He added the Caracas-based Andean Development Corp had
  granted a loan of 11.7 mln dlrs towards repairing the pipeline,
  50 km of which had been damaged in the quake.
      In Quito, Foreign Minister Rafael Garcia Velasco yesterday
  summoned ambassadors from about 40 countries to whom he issued
  appeal for emergency aid for the country. Only three countries,
  the U.S., Colombia and Venezuela, had offered assistance.
  

SOUTHLIFE HOLDING CO &lt;SLHC> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr seven cts vs 20 cts
      Oper net 347,855 vs 787,117
      Revs 6,748,868 vs 6,849,499
      Avg shrs 5,391,666 vs 4,277,157
      Year
      Oper shr 56 cts vs 46 cts
      Oper net 2,617,528 vs 2,003,661
      Revs 27.1 mln vs 27.3 mln
      Avg shrs 4,763,793 vs 3,377,157
      NOTE: Net excludes realized gains on investments of 925,576
  dlrs vs 577,389 dlrs in quarter and 1,776,341 dlrs vs 797,932
  dlrs in year.
  

ALGERIA REGULATES USE OF COFFEE ADDITIVES
  The Algerian authorities have regulated
  the addition of chickpeas and barley used to make imported
  coffee go further, the official APS news agency reported.
      Taking advantage of scarcity, private roasters were selling
  ground coffee mixtures which were 75 pct non-coffee, it said.
  Since the beginning of March, the coffee market has been
  strictly regulated by the state food marketing monopoly Enapal.
      Now a third of imported coffee will be sold as pure beans
  and two thirds as a ground mixture with a choice of 30 pct
  chickpeas or 30 pct barley. In March private dealers will
  handle 2,050 tonnes of pure coffee and Enapal 6,050 tonnes of
  mixtures.
  

HUTCHISON SEES HIGHER PAYOUT, SATISFACTORY PROFITS
  Hutchison Whampoa Ltd &lt;HWHH.HK>
  expects satisfactory profits in 1987 and will pay a higher
  dividend for the year, chairman Li Ka-shing said.
      He did not make any specific projections for the company's
  earnings this year but he said the firm will pay a dividend of
  not less than 32.5 cents per share after a proposed
  four-for-one stock split and a one-for-four bonus issue.
      It paid total dividends of 1.30 dlrs per share last year,
  equal to 26 cents per share, adjusting for the bonus and share
  split.
      Hutchison, which has operations ranging from trading to
  property and container terminals, earlier reported after-tax
  profits of 1.62 billion dlrs against 1.19 billion dlrs in 1985.
      The 1986 total excluded extraordinary gains of 563 mln
  dlrs, partly from the sale of some of its stake in the South
  China Morning Post, the leading English language newspaper,
  compared with 369 mln dlrs the previous year. It said it
  expects another 277 mln dlr gain in 1987 from the sale of the
  remaining shares.
      Li said Hong Kong's property market remains strong while
  its economy is performing better than forecast with its largely
  export-led growth.
      Gross domestic product grew by nearly nine pct last year
  against an initial government projection of 4.5 pct.
      But he said Hong Kong's large trade deficit with the U.S.
  May result in protectionist measures that will adversely affect
  the British colony.
      He said all of the company's major operations showed
  improved results in 1986.
      Hutchison said earlier it will sell its entire 23.5 pct
  interest in Hongkong Electric Holdings Ltd &lt;HKEH.HK> to
  &lt;Cavendish International Holdings Ltd>, itself a spin-off from
  Hongkong Electric.
      Under a reorganisation announced separately, Hongkong
  Electric will spin off all its non-electricity related
  activities into Cavendish, which will be listed on the local
  stock exchange. Hongkong Electric shareholders will receive one
  share in Cavendish for every Hongkong Electric share.
      Cavendish will buy the 348.2 mln Hongkong Electric shares
  from Hutchison by issuing 975 mln new shares.
      The spin-off and the sale of Hongkong Electric shares will
  give Hutchison a 53 pct stake in Cavendish.
      Li said the decision to spin-off Cavendish is to relieve
  Hongkong Electric of public criticism of the power company for
  making risky investments. But he denied there was pressure from
  the government for the spin-off.
      He said Cavendish will have seven billion dlrs of assets
  and will be almost debt free, with 340 mln dlrs of liabilites.
  Its major assets are the Hong Kong Hilton Hotel, property
  development, and interests in Husky Oil Ltd &lt;HYO.TO> of Canada
  and Pearson Plc &lt;PSON.L> of Britain.
  

TALKING POINT/OIL SERVICES TURNAROUND SEEN
  The oil services industry is on the
  verge of a recovery because of rising crude prices, oil
  industry analysts said.
      The analysts, who issued buy recommendations on some
  stocks, said the recovery in oil services should begin in the
  second half of 1987, after drilling activity bottoms out in the
  first half, and continue into the next decade.
       "People, however, cannot afford to wait for drilling to go
  up to start buying," said Sandi Haber Sweeney, senior research
  analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein and Co Inc.
      Among the recommended buys are Schlumberger Ltd &lt;SLB>,
  Halliburton Co &lt;HAL>, Dresser Industries &lt;DI>, Baker
  International &lt;BKO>, and McDermott International Inc &lt;MDR>,
  which may be the target of a takeover by Harold Simmons, a
  Dallas-based investor.
      Analysts said although major oil companies are increasing
  exploration and development overseas, they expect the pickup in
  oil services will begin in the U.S.
      "Activity in the U.S. is so depressed it should move up
  faster," said Vishnu Sharp of Goldman Sachs.
      The number of active oil drilling rigs in the U.S. was 766
  last week compared with 1,212 rigs one year ago, Huges Tool Co
  &lt;HT> figures show.
      The average number of working rigs in the U.S. for 1987 is
  projected at 978 versus 964 in 1986, according to Ike Kerridge,
  vice president of stockholder relations at Hughes Tool. "The
  first significant pickup in drilling activity will occur in the
  second half of 1988," Kerridge said.
      Overseas drilling activity is expected to follow a similar
  pattern, Kerridge said.
      "Halliburton is the best value," said Jeffrey Freedman,
  vice president at Smith Barney, Harris and Upham Inc, adding
  the company controls the greatest amount of liquidity of common
  stock market value, is diversifed in non-oil field businesess,
  and has the lowest multiple of stock price to operating cash
  flow including debt.
      Schlumberger is Freedman's second favorite oil service
  stock.
      "Schlumberger is expected to continue to be the dominant
  technical leader in the industry," Freedman said.
      "Schlumberger's management shift, asset restructuring,
  including a pending merger of Fairchild Semiconductor, and its
  considerable cash horde sets the stage for the company to
  maximize its significant industry advantage and capitalize on
  the project upturn in exploration and development activity,"
  according to a report by George Gaspar, first vice president at
  Robert W. Baird and Co Inc.
      Gaspar estimates earnings per share for Schlumberger at 25
  cts for 1987 and one to 1.75 dlrs in 1988 compared with 20 cts
  in 1986 excluding a fourth quarter special charge of 1.87
  billion dlrs.
      Bernstein's Sandi Sweeney is recommending a group of oil
  service companies and said choosing among them is difficult.
  Her favorite is Baker International, which is involved in a
  possible merger with Hughes Tool Co.
      Dresser Industries will also benefit from the recovery but
  possibly not as much as other companies because it is not a
  pure service company, Sweeney said.
      Dresser is expected to improve profitability owing to cost
  reductions and streamlined operations, including the sale and
  leaseback of its headquarters, said Swarup.
  

CREDITANSTALT SEES HIGHER 1987 DIVIDEND
  Creditanstalt-Bankverein &lt;CABV.VI> is
  likely to raise its 1987 dividend from the 1986 payment of 12
  pct of share capital, deputy general-director Guido
  Schmidt-Chiari said.
      The 1985 dividend was 10 pct, unchanged from the previous
  year and Schmidt-Chiari noted that the parent bank's share
  capital had risen to 3.1 billion schillings at the end of 1986
  from 2.7 billion a year earlier.
      Schmidt-Chiari made the forecast at a news conference when
  the bank announced a 1986 consolidated banking group net profit
  of 496.7 mln schillings for 1986, against 354.5 mln in 1985.
      Schmidt-Chiari did not elaborate on his dividend forecast.
      The banking group's consolidated balance sheet total rose
  to 453.4 billion schillings at year-end from 425.4 billion.
      General director Hannes Androsch said higher investment
  would lead to continuing growth in profits in future. Last
  year's better profits had resulted from improvements in
  services provided by the bank and also in profits on schilling
  lending.
      Schilling lending had grown last year and interest rate
  margins had also improved but remained unsatisfactory when
  compared with those in other countries, he said.
      Increased provisions for possible bad debts at home and
  abroad, particularly in Latin America, had lowered profits,
  Androsch said, but declined to give an exact figure.
      Schmidt-Chiari said that foreign lending business had
  fallen significantly due to exchange rate fluctuations,
  removing some 22 billion schillings from the balance sheet
  total.
      In an attempt to generate more foreign business,
  representative offices would be opened this year in Tokyo, Hong
  Kong, Moscow and Prague. Androsch welcomed government plans to
  abolish legal controls on foreigners buying voting shares and
  drawing dividends.
      Preference shares of state-controlled Creditanstalt rose
  eight schillings on the Vienna Bourse today to 2,008. Brokers
  said improved results had been widely expected by investors.
      Androsch said industrial holdings had performed better in
  1986 than in previous years, giving a return on investment of
  2.6 pct compared with 1.3 pct in 1985. Creditanstalt, Austria's
  largest bank, holds majority interests in 10 medium-sized and
  large Austrian companies.
      But he forecast its biggest industrial subsidiary, Steyr
  -Daimler-Puch AG &lt;SDPV.VI> would return a 1987 result similar
  to the expected 1986 operating loss of 700 mln schillings.
  

CPC &lt;CPC> TO SELL UNIT TO HI-PORT &lt;HIPT>
  CPC International Inc
  said it has agreed in principle to sell its Peterson/Puritain
  Inc subsidiary to Hi-Port Industries Inc.
      CPC said the sale is not expected to have a significant
  impact on its earnings and is subject to approval by boards of
  both companies.  Terms were not disclosed.
      Peterson/Purittan is a contract packager of personal care
  and household products.
  

PULITZER PUBLISHING CO &lt;PLTZC> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 47 cts vs 40 cts
      Net 4,258,000 vs 5,942,000
      Revs 92.6 mln vs 77.1 mln
      Avg shrs 8,977,000 vs 15.0 mln
      Year
      Shr 1.22 dlrs vs 1.34 dlrs
      Net 16.4 mln vs 20.0 mln
      Revs 329.1 mln vs 272.1 mln
      Avg shrs 13.5 mln vs 15.0 mln
      NOTE: Interest expense 4,384,000 dlrs vs 545,000 dlrs in
  quarter and 6,979,000 dlrs vs 2,425,000 dlrs in year.
      1986 year net reflects undisclosed amount of expenses for
  defense of takeover effort.
  

HUGHES TOOL SAYS IT APPROVES REVISED TERMS FOR MERGER WITH BAKER INTERNATIONAL

  HUGHES TOOL SAYS IT APPROVES REVISED TERMS FOR MERGER WITH BAKER INTERNATIONAL
  

OPEC REAFFIRMS COMMITMENT TO FIXED PRICES, CEILING
  OPEC has reaffirmed its commitment to
  fixed crude oil prices of around 18 dlrs a barrel and an
  overall output ceiling of 15.8 mln barrels per day (bpd) to
  defend prices, its president Rilwanu Lukman said.
      He told a news conference here "After due consultation with
  my colleagues in OPEC, I hereby wish to emphasize that Nigeria
  and all member countries of OPEC remain determined to uphold
  the December agreement by adhering strictly to their various
  quotas and official selling prices."
      Lukman added no extraordinary OPEC conference was planned.
      "We are in a position to re-confirm that, despite misleading
  news in foreign media to the contrary, ... OPEC member
  countries as a whole produced below their agreed quota in the
  month of February," Lukman, who is Nigerian oil minister, said.
      Lukman put the overall OPEC output shortfall in February at
  900,000 bpd and said this was as a result of their firm
  determination to defend official selling prices of 18 dlrs
  agreed upon last December in Geneva.
      The December agreement set an overall output ceiling for
  OPEC of 15.8 mln bpd for first half 1987 and restored fixed
  prices as from February 1 around a reference point of 18 dlrs.
      Oil prices rallied immediately after the Geneva accord but
  fell again last month on reports that OPEC was producing more
  than the agreed level.
      "The idea was to suggest that OPEC's agreement would not
  hold and this caused some customers to hold back purchases of
  OPEC oil and resort to destocking to meet their needs," Lukman
  said.
      He said the 900,000 bpd shortfall last February was based
  on the verified figure for 10 out of OPEC's 13 members, adding
  that Nigeria alone had a shortfall in production of 100,000
  bpd.
      Iraq disassociated itself from the December agreement,
  while the production figures of Ecuador and the United Arab
  Emirates needed to be verified, Lukman said.
      "If that is the price we have to pay to make the agreement
  succeed, we are ready ... OPEC is not changing its price level
  of 18 dlrs," the group's president said.
      He said the OPEC price differentials committee meeting
  formerly postponed to April had been put off indefinitely.
      "Furthermore, no extraordinary meeting of the conference is
  at the moment contemplated since most agreements reached in
  December are being adhered to," he said.
      Asked if the committee did not need to meet soon to narrow
  the gaps in the prices of the various OPEC crudes -- fixed in
  relation to the 18 dlr benchmark -- Lukman replied "We consider
  the defence of our prices much more crucial than differentials."
      Lukman said OPEC was aware that consumers had heavily drawn
  on stocks of both crude oil and refined products to levels well
  below this time last year and soon they would return to the
  market in search of crude.
      "We don't see that there is going to be any difficulty in
  maintaining the 18 dlr price throughout the rest of the year,"
  Lukman said.
      The OPEC president praised non-OPEC oil producers, which he
  said had contributed to the group's efforts to stabilise
  prices, but he criticised Britain for maintaining its long-held
  view not to do anything to help the market.
      "We are quite confident, however, that in the long-term with
  two-thirds of the world's reserves in OPEC hands, the future is
  ours. We will use that advantage responsibly," he said.
      Lukman described the disruption in Ecuador's output
  following an earthquake as tragic, but refused to say if the
  South American country would be allowed a higher output quota
  when it recovered from the disaster.
  

DUTCH PORT UNION TO MEET PARLIAMENTARIANS TODAY
  Dutch port and transport union, FNV,
  is presenting its case against 800 planned redundancies in
  Rotterdam's general cargo sector to parliament's standing
  committee on social affairs today, a union spokesman said.
      With 285 of the 4,000-strong workforce on strike, the union
  will tell the committee the government has a duty to help solve
  the dispute that has been disrupting the general cargo sector
  for more than seven weeks, the spokesman added.
      The union will also take its case against the redundancies,
  350 of them planned for this year, to a court in Amsterdam
  tomorrow, he added.
  

QINTEX AGAIN EXTENDS PRINCEVILLE &lt;PVDC> OFFER
  &lt;Qintex America Ltd> said it is again
  extending its offer of 13 dlrs a share for 3.3 mln Princeville
  Development Corp shares until today from yesterday.
      At midnight yesterday, 7,242,117 Princeville shares had
  been tendered, up from 5,887,165 shares 24 hours earlier.
      Qintex said it is extending the offer to allow Princeville
  to comply with federal law restricting the ownership of U.S.
  airlines by non-U.S. citizens and to finalize the terms and
  conditions of the letter of credit or bank guarantee required
  under the previously announced acquisition agreement.
  

ST. JOE GOLD &lt;SJG> TO DEVELOP MINE
  St. Joe Gold Corp said it plans to
  proceed with development of its Golden Patricia gold property
  in northwestern Ontario.
      It said about five mln dlrs will be spent to continue
  underground development and obtain operating permits and
  another 10.2 mln dlrs is expected to be required to complete
  underground development, construct a mill and provide the
  infrastructure needed to put the mine into commercial
  production.
      St. Joe Gold said if the necessary operating permits were
  granted in time, it would start gold production in the second
  half of the year ending October 31, 1988 at an annual rate of
  about 40,000 troy ounces.
      The company said the property is estimated to contain over
  500,000 troy ounces of gold, and the initial mining project
  covers only seven of 192 claims, with drill-indicated reserves
  of 293,000 short tons grading 0.88 troy ounce of gold per ton.
      It said initial mine output is expected to be about 150
  tons of ore daily.
      St. Joe Gold said the Golden Patricia vein has not been
  tested at depth or along strike to the east and west and
  exploration is continuing on the Golden Patricia property and
  the adjacent wholly-owned Muskeg Lake property.
      The company also said its Richmond Hill gold and silver
  deposit in the Carbonate district of western South Dakota has
  been shown by drilling to contain about 3,900,000 tons grading
  0.055 troy ounce of gold and 0.23 troy ounce of silver per ton.
   It said preliminary results are encouraging and a feasibility
  study is nearing completion.
  

NOVELL &lt;NOVL> SETS TWO FOR ONE STOCK SPLIT
  Novell Inc said its board
  declared a two-for-one stock split, payable to holders of
  record at the close of business on MArch 31.
      It said shareholders at the annual meeting approved a
  doubling of authorized common shares to 30 mln from 15 mln and
  a limitation of directors' liability.
  

AGENCY TO REVIEW JOHNSON/JOHNSON &lt;JNJ> SWEETNER
  Johnson and Johnson said the U.S.
  Food and Drug Administration has notified the company its food
  additive petition for a high-intensity sweetener has been
  formally accepted and now will be reviewed by the agency.
      The company said the product, with the generic name of
  sucralose, is made from sugar and tastes like sugar, but is
  about 600 times sweeter.
      It yields no calories and does not promote tooth decay.
  

HEART FEDERAL &lt;HFED> SETS TWO FOR ONE SPLIT
  Heart Federal Savings and Loan
  Association said its board declared a two-for-one stock split,
  payable April 30 to holders of record April 15.
      The company said the split is subject to shareholder
  approval at the April 15 annual meeting of an increase in
  authorized common shares to 10 mln from five mln.
  

NOVO INDUSTRI A/S (NVO.CO) YEAR 1986
  Pre-tax income 788 mln Danish crowns vs 872 mln
      Sales 4.21 billion crowns vs 4.11 billion
      Income after tax 521 mln crowns vs 604 mln
      Earnings per 20-crown share 20.45 crowns vs 23.79
      Dividend 20 pct (unchanged).
  

OVERMYER CORP &lt;OMCO> REGULAR DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 10 cts vs 10 cts in prior qtr
      Payable March 31
      Record March 23
  

UNIFORCE TEMPORARY PERSONNEL INC &lt;UNFR> 4TH QTR
  Shr 18 cts vs 14 cts
      Net 556,036 vs 403,945
      Sales 15.6 mln vs 13.6 mln
      Avg shrs 3,132,555 vs 2,934,285
      Year
      Shr 60 cts vs 48 cts
      Net 1,805,229 vs 1,400,247
      Sales 60.1 mln vs 52.3 mln
      Avg shrs 3,012,917 vs 2,940,219
      NOTE: 1985 share data adjusted to reflect three for two
  stock split effective June 30, 1986
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN 106 MLN STG ASSISTANCE
  The Bank of England said it gave the
  money market assistance worth 106 mln stg this afternoon,
  buying bank bills at the rates established on Monday.
      The Bank bought 11 mln stg of band one bills at 10-3/8 pct
  and 95 mln stg of band two paper at 10-5/16 pct. This is the
  first time that it has intervened today.
      The Bank has revised its estimate of the liquidity shortage
  in the market down to 250 mln stg from 300 mln initially.
  

PIC'N'SAVE CORP &lt;PICN> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 45 cts vs 50 cts
      Net 18.0 mln vs 19.9 mln
      Sales 116.1 mln vs 108.8 mln
      Year
      Shr 1.01 dlrs vs 1.04 dlrs
      Net 39.8 mln vs 41.1 mln
      Sales 304.5 mln vs 278.1 mln
      NOTE: Share adjusted for three-for-two split in June 1986.
  

GOODYEAR TIRE TO RECEIVE 588 MLN DLRS FOR GOODYEAR AEROSPACE FROM LORAL CORP

  GOODYEAR TIRE TO RECEIVE 588 MLN DLRS FOR GOODYEAR AEROSPACE FROM LORAL CORP
  

HUGHES TOOL &lt;HT> BOARD APPROVES MERGER
  Hughes Tool Co said its board voted at
  a special meeting last night to approve a new agreement with
  regulators that would allow the company to complete its
  proposed merger with Baker International Corp &lt;BKO>.
      The agreement, approved by the U.S. Department of Justice
  yesterday, will give the merged company, Baker Hughes, six
  months instead of three to sell certain assets.
      The pact also allows a three-month extension, if warranted,
  and limits the obligation of the new company to give financial
  support to the businesses to be divested, pending their sale.
      The company said its board recommended that shareholders
  approve the merger of the oilfield service companies. A
  previously adjourned meeting of Hughes Tool stockholders will
  be resumed this afternoon, it said.
      "Hughes will work with Baker and the Justice Department
  towards negotiating the final form of the consent decree and
  filing it as soon as possible," the company said in a
  statement. Closing of the merger would occur immediately after
  the filing, it said.
      The assets to be sold under the consent decree consist of
  Baker's domestic oilfield drilling bit business and its
  domestic submersible electric pump business. Baker has an
  agreement to sell the pump business to Trico Industries Inc
  &lt;TRO>.
      The financial terms of the merger are unchanged, a Hughes
  spokesman said. Under those terms, each Baker common share and
  Hughes common share would be converted into one share and 8/10
  of a share, respectively, of Baker Hughes Inc, which would be
  formed as a new holding company.
  

AGENCY TO REVIEW JOHNSON AND JOHNSON SWEETENER
  Johnson and Johnson said the U.S.
  Food and Drug Administration has notified the company its food
  additive petition for a high-intensity sweetener has been
  formally accepted and now will be reviewed by the agency.
      The company said the product, with the generic name of
  sucralose, is made from sugar and tastes like sugar, but is
  about 600 times sweeter.
      It yields no calories and does not promote tooth decay.
      Johnson and Johnson said the sweetner is being jointly
  developed with Tate and Lyle PLC &lt;TATL>.
      Tate and Lyle is seeking approval in Canada, the United
  Kingdom and other European countries, Johnson and Johnson said.
  The company noted its petition covering the product and its
  safety evaluation were submitted to the FDA last month.
      While awaiting FDA approval, the company said, it is
  proceeding with plans for commercialization through its McNeil
  Specialty Products Co subsidiary.
      Johnson and Johnson said it is operating under a licensing
  agreement with Tate and Lyle, whose collaborative research with
  scientists at Queen Elizabeth College in London led to the
  discovery of Sucralose in 1976.
      Patents and licensing agreements control the use of
  sucralose through the year 2001, Johnson and Johnson said.
      Sucralose is a chlorinated derivative of ordinary sugar.
  The carbon-chloride bonds in sucralose are stable and are not
  broken during digestion or metabolism.
      Sucralose is essentially not metabollized by the body. The
  chlorine content enhances sweetness without providing calories.
  

HANSON TRUST PLC UNIT TO SELL KAISER CEMENT TERMINAL AND PLANT FOR 50 MLN DLRS

  HANSON TRUST PLC UNIT TO SELL KAISER CEMENT TERMINAL AND PLANT FOR 50 MLN DLRS
  

TRITON ENERGY &lt;OIL> AFFILIATE IN CANADIAN FIND
  Triton Energy Corp said its 70 pct owned
  &lt;Canadian Worldwide Energy Ltd> affiliate's Lasmo et al
  Tableland 4-36-2-10W2 well in Saskatchewan flowed 567 barrels
  of 37 degree gravity oil through a 17/64 inch choke from depths
  of 8,531 to 8,548 feet and 636 barrels of oil per day through a
  20/64 inch choke from depths of 8,500 to 8,507 feet.
      Triton said because of the well's status as a deep
  exploratory well, production qualifies for a five-year royalty
  holiday under the Saskatchewan drilling incentive products.
      It said the well's initial production is expected to be
  restricted to an allowable level of about 300 barrels a day,
  although it is capable of sustaining much higher rates.
      The company said London and Scottish Marine Oil PLC owns a
  50 pct interest in the well and its spacing unit, Canadian
  Worldwide 25 pct, &lt;Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corp> 10 pct,
  &lt;Interprovincial Pipeline Ltd's> Home Oil Co Ltd 7.5 pct and
  Scurry-Rainbow Oil Ltd &lt;SRB> 7.5 pct.
      Triton said Royal Dutch/Shell Group's &lt;RD> &lt;SC> Shell
  Canada Ltd &lt;SHC> affiliate retains a convertible overriding
  interest in the well.
  

HUNGARY HOPES DEVALUATION WILL END TRADE DEFICIT
  National Bank of Hungary first
  vice-president Janos Fekete said he hoped a planned eight pct
  devaluation of the forint will spur exports and redress last
  year's severe trade deficit with the West.
      Fekete told Reuters in an interview Hungary must achieve at
  least equilibrium on its hard currency trade.
      "It is useful to have a devaluation," he said. "There is now a
  real push to our exports and a bit of a curb to our imports."
      The official news agency MTI said today Hungary would
  devalue by eight pct and it expected the new rates to be
  announced later today. Fekete said the rates would come into
  effect tomorrow.
      He said one reason for the devaluation was that Hungary had
  a higher rate of inflation over the past two years than its
  main partners (around eight pct in 1985 and between five and
  5.5 pct in 1986).
      This was partly an after-effect of action Hungary took to
  prevent inflation from soaring during the oil price shocks of
  the 1970s, he added.
      Hungary devalued by a similar amount last September and by
  between three and four pct early last year.
      But the country's hard currency trade balance nevertheless
  fell into a deficit of 539.4 mln dlrs from a surplus of 295.3
  mln in 1986 and 1.2 billion in 1985.
      Fekete said Hungary was hoping for a hard currency trade
  surplus of between 200 and 300 mln dlrs this year, but that a
  more likely outcome would be closer to equilibrium on total
  hard currency trade of around 10 billion dlrs.
      One Western commercial attache here said: "Devaluation of
  itself will not change anything. It will only be useful if they
  also make efforts to restructure industry and improve the
  quality of their export goods."
      Fekete said he hoped to raise credits on good terms this
  year to invest in restructuring industry.
      It would be his role to persuade international banks to
  cooperate in this process. He noted Hungary had been given an
  AA rating enabling it to raise money on the Japanese Samurai
  bond market.
      Hungary's net hard currency debt soared to 7.79 billion
  dlrs last year from 5.01 billion in 1985, partly because of a
  current account deficit of 1.42 billion dlrs and partly because
  the fall in the dollar increased the dollar value of debt
  denominated in marks or yen.
      He said he feared net debt would also rise slightly this
  year, but he was in favour of borrowing for the purpose of
  modernisation.
      "I am for credits to invest for that purpose," he said. "I am
  against credits for consumption." He forecast gross domestic
  product growth of two pct this year, from one pct in 1986.
     Fekete said Hungary would continue to restructure its debt
  profile by prepaying high interest shorter and medium term
  loans with cheaper long term money for which it was looking
  more and more to the fixed interest rate bond market, where he
  considered rates to be low.
      Hard currency foreign exchange reserves would stay at
  around 3.5 billion dlrs, he said. On the budget deficit, which
  tripled to a provisional 47 billion forints last year after
  quadrupling in 1985, Fekete said the finance ministry was
  working out measures to reduce an approved target deficit for
  this year of 43.8 billion forints to between 30 and 35 billion
  forints.
  

ECUADOR DEPUTY MINISTER SEEKS OIL AID IN VENEZUELA
  Ecuador's deputy energy minister
  Fernando Santos Alvite arrived here last night for talks on
  further Venezuelan assistance to his country's oil industry
  following last week's earthquake, officials said.
      Ecuador was obliged to suspend crude oil exports for an
  expected five months as a result of damage to 25 miles of
  pipeline linking its jungle oil fields with the Pacific port of
  Balao. Oil normally accounts for 60 pct of its exports.
      Fellow OPEC member Venezuela has already agreed to lend
  Ecuador five mln barrels of crude, to be repaid in kind after
  180 days, to help meet its domestic consumption needs.
      The officials could neither confirm nor deny reports that
  Venezuela will temporarily produce Ecuador's entire OPEC quota,
  set at 210,000 barrels per day for first half 1987.
      "All options are open at this moment in the context of
  cooperation on oil production," a Venezuelan energy and mines
  ministry source said.
      Discussions are also under way to arrive at a formula to
  compensate Ecuador for the loss in oil export revenue while the
  pipeline is repaired, officials said.
      Santos Alvite last night met Venezuelan energy and mines
  minister Arturo Hernandez Grisanti and will today hold talks at
  technical level, officials said.
      Industry sources said that among the options are for
  Venezuela to produce Ecuador's entire quota, or for Venezuela
  and non-OPEC Mexico to share it and for the latter to supply
  Ecuador's Far Eastern clients.
      But the ministry source said that no decision has yet been
  reached on the matter, and that an announcement would be made
  in due course.
      Santos Alvite said earlier in Quito that Ecuador would have
  to import six to seven mln barrels of crude oil to meet its
  needs until the line was repaired.
      Ecuador energy and mines minister Javier Espinosa Teran
  said last night his country needs 120 mln dlrs to repair the
  damage to the export pipeline caused by the earthquake.
  

HOG AND CATTLE SLAUGHTER GUESSTIMATES
  Chicago Mercantile Exchange floor
  traders and commission house representatives are guesstimating
  today's hog slaughter at about 295,000 to 308,000 head versus
  305,000 week ago and 308,000 a year ago.
      Cattle slaughter is guesstimated at about 128,000 to
  132,000 head versus 130,000 week ago and 126,000 a year ago.
  

GOODYEAR &lt;GT> TO RECEIVE 588 MLN DLRS FOR UNIT
  Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co said it
  will receive about 588 mln dlrs in cash from Loral Corp &lt;LOR>
  for the business of Goodyear Aerospace Corp.
      Goodyear said the previously announced acquisition by Loral
  is expected to be completed March 13. When Loral announced the
  transaction January 12, the company said it was paying 640 mln
  dlrs for Goodyear Aerospace.
      Goodyear said the price it will receive is after
  adjustments for such items as pension and benefits provision,
  allocation of liabilities and asset valuations. Last year
  Goodyear Aerospace had revenues of 695 mln dlrs.               
  

VEBA'S RAAB KARCHER RAISES 1986 OPERATING PROFIT
  Raab Karcher AG, a trading
  subsidiary of VEBA AG &lt;VEBG.F>, said it increased operating
  profit in 1986 despite a sharp decline in turnover, and added
  there were good chances this profit level could be held in
  1987.
      Operating profit rose to just under 120 mln marks in 1986,
  from around 100 mln in 1985.
      However, the group's third party sales fell sharply to 7.2
  billion marks from 9.4 billion the year before, largely due to
  lower prices for energy products, particularly oil and coal,
  managing board chairman Klaus Giesel told a news conference.
  

HOVNANIAN ENTERPRISES &lt;HOV> SPLITS STOCK
  Hovnanian Enterprises Inc said
  its board of directors has declared a two-for-one split of its
  outstanding common stock.
      The company said shareholders will receive one additional
  share for each share held at the close of business on March 23,
  1987 and additional shares will be distributed on April 13,
  1987.
  

BRITISH AEROSPACE RAISES SYSTEM DESIGNERS STAKE
  British Aerospace Plc &lt;BAEL.L> said it
  has increased its stake in &lt;Systems Designers Plc> to 22.1 pct
  or 25.46 mln ordinary shares following the purchase of 10.45
  mln ordinary shares.
      The British Aerospace Pension Fund holds 2.15 mln ordinary
  shares in Systems, representing a stake of 1.9 pct.
      A spokesman for British Aerospace said it has no present or
  future intention of making a full bid for Systems Designers.
  System Designers shares were nine pence higher at 100 prior to
  the share stake announcement, and have showed little movement
  since.
  

OWENS AND MINOR INC &lt;OBOD> RAISES QTLY DIVIDEND
  Qtly div eights cts vs 7.5 cts prior
      Pay March 31
      Record March 13
  

ESSELTE BUSINESS SYSTEMS INC &lt;ESB> UPS PAYOUT
  Qtly div 18 cts vs 14 cts prior
      Pay March 31
      Record March 25
  

KATY INDUSTRIES INC &lt;KT> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr profit 32 cts vs loss 66 cts
      Oper net profit 2,454,000 vs loss 3,558,000
      Sales 96.1 mln vs 91.4 mln
      Year
      Oper shr profit 72 cts vs loss 63 cts
      Oper net profit 6,495,000 vs loss 1,833,000
      Sales 368.1 mln vs 322.1 mln
      NOTE: Earnings exclude losses from discontinued
  consolidated operations of 460,000 dlrs, or eight cts a share
  vs 5,364,000 dlrs, or 86 cts a share in the quarter and
  11,334,000 dlrs, or 1.82 dlrs a share vs 11,637,000 dlrs, or
  1.88 dlrs a share for the year
      Earnings exclude a loss on the sale of discontinued
  consolidated operations of 200,000 dlrs, or three cts a share
  in the 1986 quarter and a loss of 4,960,000 dlrs, or 80 cts a
  share vs a gain of 4,404,000 dlrs, or 71 cts a share for the
  year
      NOTE: 1985 earnings exclude losses from discontinued
  unconsolidated operations of 5,488,000 dlrs, or 89 cts a share
  in each period
      1985 earnings exclude gain from termination of defined
  benefit pension plan of 490,000 dlrs, or eight cts a share in
  the quarter and 1,438,000 dlrs, or 23 cts a share for the year
  

&lt;PMI FUND INC> SETS MONTHLY DIVIDENDS
  PMI Fund Inc said its board declared
  monthly dividends of six cts for April, four cts for May, five
  cts for June, seven cts for July and six cts for August.
      The fund, which customarily omits dividends in March and
  September, last paid six cts in February.  Dividends declared
  today are payable April Three, May Six, June Four, July Three
  and August Six to holders of record March 23, April 17, May 15,
  June 12 and July 17.
  

MERRY-GO-ROUND ENTERPRISES INC &lt;MGRE> 4TH QTR
  Jan 31 end
      Shr 51 cts vs 38 cts
      Net 3,254,000 vs 2,423,000
      Sales 65.9 mln vs 51.1 mln
      Year
      Shr 1.18 dlrs vs 1.15 dlrs
      Net 7,485,000 vs 7,285,000
      Sales 207.5 mln vs 164.1 mln
  

TENERA LP &lt;TLPZV> SETS INITIAL QUARTERLY
  TENERA LP said it will make an
  initial quarterly distribution of 17 cts per unit on April 15
  to holders of record March 31.
      The partnership said the dividend is greater than it had
  expectd to pay and was warranted by fourth quarter results and
  anticipated results for this year's first quarter.
      TENERA said it expects a comparable distribution for the
  second quarter.  It said about 13 cts per share of the first
  quarter amount will be taxable income.
  

HANSON &lt;HAN> UNIT TO SELL KAISER TERMINAL/PLANT
  Hanson Industries, the U.S. arm of
  Hanson Trust PLC &lt;HAN>, said it has proposed to sell, in
  separate transactions, Kaiser Cement's Northwest Terminals and
  Montana City plant, to Lone Star Industries Inc &lt;LCE> and &lt;Ash
  Grove Cement West Inc>, respectively for a total of 50.2
  mln dlrs.
      Hanson said the deals are subject to normal conditions of
  closing.
      Hanson Industries completed the purchase of Kaiser Cement
  on March 3, for about 250 mln dlrs.
      Hanson said Kaiser Cement is now an indirect wholly owned
  unit of Hanson Trust and forms part of its building products
  group.
      "These sales are a continuation of an asset redeployment
  program at Kaiser Cement and will allow Kaiser to concentrate
  its efforts in the California marketplace, where it is the
  largest cement producer and holds a premiere market position,"
  Hanson Industries chairman Gordon White said.
  

ECUADOR OFFICIAL SEEKS OIL AID IN VENEZUELA
  Ecuador's deputy energy minister
  Fernando Santos Alvite arrived here last night for talks on
  further Venezuelan assistance to his country's oil industry
  following last week's earthquake, officials said.
      Ecuador was obliged to suspend crude oil exports for an
  expected five months as a result of damage to 25 miles of
  pipeline linking its jungle oil fields with the Pacific port of
  Balao. Oil normally accounts for 60 pct of its exports.
      Fellow OPEC member Venezuela has already agreed to lend
  Ecuador five mln barrels of crude, to be repaid in kind after
  180 days, to help meet its domestic consumption needs.
  

SCIENTIFIC MICRO SYSTEMS &lt;SMSI> ACUIRES SUPERMAC
  Scientific Micro Systems Inc said it
  has acquired Supermac Technology, a rapidly growing supplier of
  enhancement products and disc drive subsystems for the Apple
  personal computer market.
      Scientific Micro said it acquired all the common stock of
  Supermac in exchange for 1.05 mln shares of its own common
  stock. The stock closed at 5.50 dlrs bid on Friday.
      Supermac, a privately held firm based in Mountain View,
  California, as is Scientific Micro, reported a net profit of
  300,000 dlrs on revenue of 9.5 mln dlrs in fiscal 1986. It
  expects its revenue to approximately double in 1987.
  

U.S. 4TH QTR BALANCE OF PAYMENTS TRADE DEFICIT WAS RECORD 38.37 BILLION DLRS

  U.S. 4TH QTR BALANCE OF PAYMENTS TRADE DEFICIT WAS RECORD 38.37 BILLION DLRS
  

NY TRADERS SAY E.C. SOLD 71,000 TONNES  OF WHITE SUGAR AT TENDER.

  NY TRADERS SAY E.C. SOLD 71,000 TONNES  OF WHITE SUGAR AT TENDER.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN LATE HELP OF 240 MLN STG
  The Bank of England said it provided the
  money market with unspecified late assistance of around 240 mln
  stg.
      This brings its total assistance on the day to 346 mln stg
  compared with a liquidity shortfall it estimated at a revised
  250 mln stg.
      Overnight interbank sterling was being offered at eight pct
  shortly after the Bank's announcement.
  

OUTOKUMPU RESTRUCTURES COPPER DIVISION
  Finland's mining and metals group
  Outokumpu Oy &lt;OUTO.HE>, which last week reported a 1986 loss of
  83 mln markka after three successive years of profits, said it
  restructured its key copper processing division in an attempt
  to rationalize production and improve profitability.
      Outokumpu's Managing Director Pertti Voutilainen told a
  news conference the reorganization involved a split of the
  division into a new independent division with six profit
  centres.
      Outokumpu group had a 1986 loss before appropriations and
  taxes of 83 mln markka after a profit of 355 mln in 1985. It
  had profits in 1984 and 1983 but a loss, 171.2 mln, in 1982.
      Outokumpu acquired two Swedish copper manufacturers in
  January 1986, &lt;Metallverken Ab> and &lt;Wirsbo Bruks Ab>, that
  were merged into its copper processing division.
      The division had a turnover of 3.2 billion markka last
  year, 42 pct of Outokumpu's group turnover of 7.58 billion.
      The new Outokumpu division, called Copper Products
  Industry, is to incorporate Outokumpu's copper production
  plants, including its two U.S. Subsidiaries &lt;Nippert Co> and
  &lt;Valleycast Inc>, as well as Metallverken and part of Wirsbo.
      Outokumpu is planning to make Wirsbo an independent
  division in the Outokumpu group and transfer only Wirsbo's
  copper tube production into one of the new division's profit
  centres. A definite decision on Wirsbo will be taken later this
  year.
      The new division will have production plants in Finland,
  Sweden, Norway, the Netherlands and the U.S.
  

U.S. TRADE DEFICIT 38.37 BILLION DLRS IN 4TH QTR
  The U.S. merchandise trade deficit
  on a balance of payments basis was a record 38.37 billion dlrs
  in the October to December fourth quarter, the Commerce
  Department said.
      The record trade shortfall came after a revised 37.15
  billion dlr third quarter deficit. The department previously
  reported the third quarter deficit was 37.67 billion dlrs.
      For the full year 1986, the merchandise trade deficit was a
  record 147.7 billion dlrs, up from 124.4 billion dlrs in 1985,
  the department said.
      During the final quarter last year imports rose 2.78
  billion dlrs or three pct to 95.7 billion dlrs, while exports
  rose 1.56 billion dlrs or three pct to 57.33 billion dlrs.
      The trade report on a balance of payments basis excludes
  such factors as military sales and the costs of shipping and
  insurance.
      The Commerce Department said non-petroleum imports in the
  quarter were up 2.7 billion dlrs or three pct to 87.7 billion
  dlrs, with the largest increases in consumer goods, which rose
  1.2 billion dlrs, and in non-monetary gold and passenger cars
  from Canada, up 900 mln dlrs each.
      Lumber imports from Canada fell 300 mln dlrs or 33 pct
  because of a 15 pct duty on imports from Canada, the department
  said. Passenger car imports fell 600 mln dlrs because of an 18
  pct decrease in the number of South Korean-made imported cars
  and a nine pct decrease from Japan.
      On the exports side, agricultural exports rose 600 mln dlrs
  or nine pct to 7.1 billion dlrs, primarily because of a 104 pct
  or 600 mln dlr increase in soybean exports.
      Soybean shipments to Western Europe rose sharply because
  supplies from Brazil, a traditional major exporter, were
  limited by drought.
      Commerce said the U.S. trade deficit with Latin America
  rose 900 mln dlrs to 2.6 billion dlrs, with Japan increased 700
  mln dlrs to 14.8 billion dlrs and with Western Europe rose 200
  mln to 7.2 billion dlrs in the quarter.
      The deficit with newly industrialized Far East countries,
  including Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and Taiwan, fell
  500 mln dlrs to eight billion dlrs and with Canada the deficit
  decreased 200 mln dlrs to 3.3 billion dlrs in the quarter.
      In the full year 1986, imports rose 30.6 billion dlrs or
  nine pct to 369.5 billion dlrs. Exports increased by only 7.3
  billion dlrs or three pct to 221.8 billion dlrs.
      Commerce said petroleum imports during 1986 fell 16.6
  billion dlrs or 33 pct to 33.9 billion dlrs because of lower
  prices. The average price per barrel decreased to 14.72 dlrs
  from 26.41 dlrs.
      Agricultural exports fell by 2.6 billion dlrs or nine pct
  to 26.9 billion during the year. The average price of rice fell
  27 pct, cotton was down 22 pct, corn 18 pct, wheat 16 pct and
  soybeans nine pct.
      The trade deficit with Japan for all of 1986 rose 11.1
  billion dlrs to 54.6 billion dlrs and with Western Europe
  increased 7.2 billion dlrs to 28.6 billion dlrs.
  

 UK INTERVENTION BD SAYS EC SETS WHITE SUGAR TENDER REBATE 43.248 ECUS.

   UK INTERVENTION BD SAYS EC SETS WHITE SUGAR TENDER REBATE 43.248 ECUS.
  

BAYER USA &lt;BAYRY> AFFILIATES INCREASED SALES
  Bayer USA Inc said sales of its
  affiliated operating cmpanies based in the U.S. increased in
  1986 by 4.4 pct from the previous year.
      Combined sales were 4.2 billion dlrs, up from 4.0 billion
  dlrs in 1985, the company said.
      However, the company said net income was 106.9 mln dlrs,
  three pct below 1985.
      Bayer said its operating companies include Mobay Corp,
  Miles Laboratories Inc, Agfa-Gevaert Inc, Compugraphic Corp,
  Haarmann and Reimer Corp, Deerfield Urethane Inc and Helena
  Chemical Co.
      Bayer said Mobay, its primary chemicals company, reported
  net income of 83.4 mln dlrs, up eight pct of 1985. It also said
  Miles, its pharmaceutical and healthcare company, recorded
  net income of 29 mln dlrs, a 44 pct increase over 1985.
  

AMERICAN EXPRESS &lt;AXP> VIEWING SHEARSON OPTIONS
  American Express Co, rumored to be
  considering a spinoff of part of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc,
  said it is studying a range of options for its brokerage unit
  that could improve Shearon's access to capital and help it meet
  broadening international competition.
      In a joint statement, American Express and Shearson said
  the actions under consideration are an integral part of
  American Express' worldwide financial services strategy and
  that the two companies have been having both internal and
  external discussions on the matters.
      American Express said no decision has been reached on the
  strategic options and that it and Shearson could ultimately
  decide to follow growth plans already in place.
      Last week, rumors circulated on Wall Street that the
  financial services giant was considering a spinoff of part of
  Shearson and there was speculation it may be considering
  selling a stake to a Japanese firm. Analysts said the
  speculation also focused on American Express selling 20 pct of
  the profitable brokerage firm to the public.
      There was some speculation that American Express had also
  considered a total spinoff of Shearson, but the plan was
  considered highly unlikely, analysts said.
       American Express said in the statement on Sunday that it
  will not comment on rumors and speculation and a spokesman
  would not go beyond the statement. The company also remained
  silent last Thursday and Friday, as rumors drove American
  Express stock up a total of 5-1/2 dlrs in two days to bring it
  to a Friday close at 74.
       It said it issued the statement on Sunday because a
  similar statement was being circulated to employees.
      Analysts have been divided on whether it makes sense for
  American Express to give up a stake in the wholly-owned
  brokerage, which improved its after-tax earnings by about 50
  pct in the last year.
      Some analysts said American Express may consider spinning
  off part of Shearson because it is concerned that its stock
  price does not fully reflect the value of the brokerage firm.
       Shearson contributed 316 mln dlrs of American Express'
  1.25 billion dlr net in 1986.
      American Express' ambitious plans for international growth
  may be also enhanced by the added cash that spinning out part
  of Shearson would bring. Analysts speculated that all of
  Shearson would have a market value of about 3.5 billion dlrs.
      To some however, the need for added capital is puzzling.
  "(American) Express is in a position where they can raise
  capital if they need to," said Larry Eckenfelder of
  Prudential-Bache Securities.
      Analysts said rumors were fed by the reorganization of
  Shearson management Wednesday. Chief operating officer Jeffrey
  Lane got the added, previously vacant, post of president.
       The reorganization also created four new positions for
  chairmen of Shearson's operating divisions, a move analysts
  speculated would allow Shearson to be a stand alone company.
       Analysts, contacted on Sunday said the statement does
  little to clarify last week's market speculation. It does
  confirm, however, that the financial services firm, which
  unsuccessfully attempted to expand Shearson with a major
  acquisition last year, is looking beyond its own walls for
  growth and positioning in the global market competition.
      Late last year, Shearson's takeover offer to the E.F.
  Hutton Group Inc was rejected by Hutton, and analysts said
  there had been speculation that Shearson also was rebuffed when
  it approached another major Wall Street brokerage.        
  

DEB SHOPS INC &lt;DEBS> SETS STOCK SPLIT
  Deb Shops Inc said its board
  declared a 100 pct stock dividend and will increase the
  quarterly dividend to four cts from 3-1/4 cts after adjustm,ent
  for the split.
      The company said the split is payable April 17 to holders
  of record March 25.  The dividend increase will be effective
  with the April 30 payment, it said.
  

CANADA LEADING INDICATOR UP 0.4 PCT IN DECEMBER, AFTER 0.4 PCT NOVEMBER GAIN - OFFICIAL

  CANADA LEADING INDICATOR UP 0.4 PCT IN DECEMBER, AFTER 0.4 PCT NOVEMBER GAIN - OFFICIAL
  

CONTINENTAL HEALTH &lt;CTHL> PURCHASES MARKETECH
  Continental Health
  Affiliates Inc said that it has acquired &lt;Marketech Inc>, an 80
  pct partner in &lt;Diatronics Nutrition Services>.
      Continental said Diantronics Nutrition Services is a joint
  venture with physicians providing patient-ready home infusion
  therapy products and services to outpatients of five northern
  New Jersery hospitals representing over 1,900 inpatient beds.
      Continental said the terms of the deal were not disclosed.
  

VISUAL GRAPHICS SETS DIVIDENDS
  Visual Graphics Corp &lt;VGCA> &lt;VGCB>
  said its board declared a quarterly dividend of 7-1/2 cts per
  share on its class "B" common stock and 8-1/4 cts per share on
  class "A" common stock payable April Three to shareholders of
  record as of March 23.
       The company set up the two classes of common stock in
  February. Previously, the company had paid a 7-1/2 cent per
  share quarterly dividend on one class of common stock.
  

DEB SHOPS INC &lt;DEBS> 4TH QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 71 cts vs 57 cts
      Net 5,457,000 vs 4,299,000
      Sales 62.9 mln vs 50.1 mln
      Year
      Shr 1.65 dlrs vs 1.37 dlrs
      Net 12.6 mln vs 10.4 mln
      Sales 181.4 mln vs 147.1 mln
  

SIGMA MINES DETAILS GOLD ORE RESERVES
  &lt;Sigma Mines (Quebec) Ltd>, 65 pct
  owned by Dome Mines Ltd &lt;DM>, said its Sigma Mine had proven
  and probable reserves at the end of 1986 of 4,902,940 tons,
  with an average grade of 0.139 ounces of gold a ton.
      Sigma said the reserves are equivalent to 10 years future
  production at current milling rates.
      The reserves comprise 1,640,779 tons proven reserves
  grading an average of 0.163 ounces of gold a ton and 3,262,161
  tons probable reserves grading an average of 0.127 ounces of
  gold a ton.
      Sigma said it changed its 1986 reserve reporting method
  following Dome Mines previously reported move to adopt general
  industry practice of reporting proven and probable ore
  reserves.
      Prior to 1986, Sigma conservatively reported only proven
  reserves that could be mined without future development costs.
      Proven reserves as of December 31, 1985 were 978,000 tons
  grading an average of 0.194 ounces of gold a ton, equivalent to
  about two years future production.
  

REGENCY CRUISES INC &lt;SHIP> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr profit nine cts vs loss two cts
      Net profit 1,419,000 vs loss 314,000
      Revs 8,097,000 vs 4,794,000
      Avg shrs 15.8 mln vs 15.5 mln
      Year
      Shr profit 37 cts vs loss 10 cts
      Net profit 5,695,000 vs loss 1,268,000
      Revs 40.9 mln vs 4,794,000
      Avg shrs 15.6 mln vs 12.5 mln
      NOTE: Company began operations Nov 17, 1985.
  

SEAMAN FURNITURE CO INC &lt;SEAM> 3RD QTR JAN 31
  Shr 64 cts vs 51 cts
      Net 4,373,000 vs 3,346,000
      Sales 59.8 mln vs 45.5 mln
      Avg shrs 6,808,000 vs 6,600,000
      Nine mths
      Shr 1.57 dlrs vs 1.18 dlrs
      Net 10.7 mln vs 7,745,000
      Sales 167.0 mln vs 123.1 mln
  

NOVO INDUSTRI EARNINGS FALL DESPITE INCREASED SALES
  Danish-based insulin and enzymes
  producer Novo Industri A/S (NVO.CO) said pre-tax earnings fell
  almost 10 pct in 1986 though sales rose by two pct.
      The pre-tax figure fell to 788 mln crowns from 872 mln in
  1985, on sales increased from 4.1 billion to 4.2 billion,
  giving net earnings of 521 mln crowns against 604 mln in 1985.
      Earnings per 20-crown share went from 23.79 crowns to 20.45
  crowns but the company proposed an unchanged 20 pct dividend.
      "Foreign exchange fluctuations in 1986 were a very
  significant factor behind developments in the result before and
  after tax," Novo said in a statement.
      "Not only the U.S. Dollar but also other currencies
  essential to Novo fell in 1986 in relation to the Danish crown,"
  the statement added.
      In November 1986, Novo purchased 75 pct of shares in A/S
  Ferrosan, which heads a group specialising in research and
  development of CNS (central nervous treatment) treatments and
  the sale of pharmaceuticals and vitamins in Scandinavia.
      The 357 mln crowns paid in goodwill "had a very limited
  effect on the 1986 result," the Novo statement said.
  

SCS/COMPUTE INC &lt;SCOM> 3RD QTR JAN 31 LOSS
  Shr loss 30 cts vs loss 43 cts
      Net loss 891,000 vs loss 969,000
      Revs 1,930,000 vs 1,815,000
      Avg shrs 2.9 mln vs 2.2 mln
      Nine Mths
      Shr loss one dlr vs loss 1.36 dlrs
      Net loss 2,622,000 vs loss 3,037,000
      Revs 4,638,000 vs 4,105,000
      Avg shrs 2.6 mln vs 2.2 mln
  

SECURITIES DEALER HAS LEASEWAY &lt;LTC> STAKE
  Alpine Associates, a Cresskill, N.J.
  securities dealer, told the Securities and Exchange Commission
  it has acquired 565,100 shares of Leaseway Transport
  Corp, or 5.9 pct of the total outstanding common stock.
      Alpine, a limited partnership, said it bought the stock for
  28.1 mln dlrs as an investment in the ordinary course of its
  business as a securities dealer.
      It left open the possibility that it might buy more
  Leaseway stock or sell some or all of its current stake, but
  said it has no plans to seek control of the company.
  

EMPIRE OF CAROLINA INC &lt;EMP> YEAR NET
  Shr 1.26 dlrs vs 67 cts
      Net 7,299,000 vs 3,607,000
      Revs 52.4 mln vs 40.7 mln
      Avg shrs 6,028,755 vs 2,408,766
      NOTE: 1985 results restated to include Deltona Corp &lt;DLT>
  investment on equity method.
  

VHC LTD &lt;VHCL> 4TH QTR OPER NET
  Oper shr profit 18 cts vs loss one ct
      Oper net profit 387,832 vs loss 29,312
      Revs 6,872,630 vs NA
      Year
      Oper shr profit 39 cts vs loss 23 cts
      Oper net profit 835,010 vs loss 441,836
      Revs 20.8 mln vs NA
      Avg shrs 2,135,909 vs 1,885,909
      NOTE: Excludes gains of 378,000 dlrs or 18 cts and 715,000
  dlrs or 33 cts in current qtr and year, respectively, from
  benefit of tax loss carryforwards. Year-ago excludes losses of
  75,809 dlrs or four cts in qtr and 146,061 dlrs or eight cts in
  year from discontinued operations. 1985 restated.
  

TRANSTECH INDUSTRIES INC &lt;TRTI> YEAR NET
  Oper shr 91 cts vs seven cts
      Oper net 4,356,774 vs 289,764
      Revs 69.2 mln vs 50.2 mln
      Avg shrs 4,736,692 vs 4,151,672
      NOTE: 1985 net excludes 3,027,714 dlr loss from
  discontinued operations.
  

THAI SUGAR PRODUCTION INCREASES
  Thai sugar production totalled 960,788
  tonnes in January, an increase of 12.7 pct on January 1986,
  according to figures received by the International Sugar
  Organization.
      November and December production figures also exceeded last
  year's totals with the result that output in the first three
  months of the season showed a 23.1 pct increase over 1985/86.
  Production in the November 1986 to January 1987 period totalled
  1.29 mln tonnes.
      Thai exports in December and January were down, however.
  January exports fell from 73,164 to 35,910 tonnes.
      Domestic consumption increased 7.3 pct to 192,069 tonnes
  for the three month period, but this was not sufficient to
  prevent a significant rise in stocks, which climbed to 1.62 mln
  tonnes by the end of January, compared with 1.52 mln a year
  earlier.
      Thai Agricultural Ministry officials have previously
  forecast a decline in 1986/87 raws output to around 2.3 mln
  tonnes from 2.48 mln in 1985/86.
  

CANADA DECEMBER LEADING INDICATOR UP 0.4 PCT
  Canada's leading composite indicator
  advanced 0.4 pct in December after gaining 0.4 pct in the two
  previous months, Statistics Canada said.
      The unfiltered index rose 0.8 pct in the month, a
  turnaround from the 0.3 pct decline in November, the federal
  agency said.
      The manufacturing groups continued to post advances while
  goods production rose 1.6 pct, the third increase in the last
  four months. The advances, however, were offset by a
  deceleration in household demand.
  

ANOVA VENTURES SETS DIVIDEND IN DUEVEL SHARES
  &lt;ANova Ventures Corp> said its board
  declared a dividend payable in the form of registered shares of
  stock in &lt;Duvel Corp>, a blind public pool.
      ANova describes itself as a publishing and financial
  services firm specializing in arranging revers acquisitions and
  mergers between blind pools/shells and private companies.
      ANova said it created Duvel to act as a blind pool and will
  seek an operating private company to merger with Duvel. Duvel
  has sold 300,000 common shares to a private investor group to
  finance expenses of registration and 640,000 shares will be
  paid to ANova stockholders as a dividend, it added.
  

CHRYSLER &lt;C> DEAL LEAVES UNCERTAINTY FOR AMC WORKERS
  Chrysler Corp's 1.5 billion dlr bid to
  takeover American Motors Corp &lt;AMO> should help bolster the
  small automaker's sales, but it leaves the future of its 19,000
  employees in doubt, industry analysts say.
      It was "business as usual" yesterday at the American Motors
  headquarters, one day after the proposed merger was unveiled by
  Chrysler and AMC's French parent Renault, according to company
  spokesman Edd Snyder.
      But AMC's future, to be discussed at a board meeting today,
  would be radically different as a Chrysler subsidiary than if
  it had continued with the state-run French car group as its
  controlling shareholder.
      Industry analysts said the future of AMC's car assembly
  plant in Kenosha, Wis., and its Toledo, Ohio, Jeep plant would
  be in doubt if the overcapacity predicted in the North American
  auto industry by the early 1990s comes to pass.
      Both plants are far from "state of the art" for car
  manufacturing sites, and AMC has a history of poor labor
  relations at each.
      "Chrysler doesn't need that many new plants," said Michael
  Luckey, automotive analyst for the Wall Street firm Shearson
  Lehman Brothers. "They probably will close the Toledo plant and
  move Jeep production to Canada."
      Ronald Glantz of Montgomery Securities said that at the
  very least, the new owner of the Toledo plant would be able to
  wring concessions from the United Automobile Workers union
  local representing Jeep workers.
      "The UAW won't be able to hold them up for ransom as they
  have AMC because during a down year, Chrysler will have
  underutilized facilities to transfer production," he said.
      Analysts said they foresaw no major complications that
  would abort a combination which historians said would be the
  auto industry's biggest merger since American Motors was formed
  in 1954.
      AMC was in need of a financial savior because of its losses
  of more than 800 mln dlrs since 1980 and pressures in France
  for Renault to cut its backing. The company had said it could
  not forecast consistent profitability until 1988 at the
  earliest.
      In announcing the takeover agreement, Chrysler chairman Lee
  Iacocca cited AMC's Jeep division as well as its new 675 mln
  dlr assembly plant at Bramalea, Ontario, and its network of
  1,200 dealers as the major attractions.
      Analysts reasoned that Chrysler might feel moved eventually
  to sell off or close some of the older plants to cut overhead
  costs in view of the new debts and liabilities it would incur
  in the AMC buyout.
  

ST. JOE GOLD TO DEVELOP ONTARIO MINE
  St. Joe Gold Corp said it plans to
  proceed with development of its Golden Patricia gold property
  in northwestern Ontario.
      It said about five mln dlrs will be spent to continue
  underground development and obtain operating permits and
  another 10.2 mln dlrs is expected to be required to complete
  underground development, construct a mill and provide the
  infrastructure needed to put the mine into commercial
  production.
      St. Joe Gold said if the necessary operating permits were
  granted in time, it would start gold production in the second
  half of the year ending October 31, 1988 at an annual rate of
  about 40,000 troy ounces.
      The company said the property is estimated to contain over
  500,000 troy ounces of gold, and the initial mining project
  covers only seven of 192 claims, with drill-indicated reserves
  of 293,000 short tons grading 0.88 troy ounce of gold per ton.
      It said initial mine output is expected to be about 150
  tons of ore daily.
      St. Joe Gold said the Golden Patricia vein has not been
  tested at depth or along strike to the east and west and
  exploration is continuing on the Golden Patricia property and
  the adjacent wholly-owned Muskeg Lake property.
      The company also said its Richmond Hill gold and silver
  deposit in the Carbonate district of western South Dakota has
  been shown by drilling to contain about 3,900,000 tons grading
  0.055 troy ounce of gold and 0.23 troy ounce of silver per ton.
   It said preliminary results are encouraging and a feasibility
  study is nearing completion.
  

NUCOR CORP &lt;NUE> RAISES QUARTERLY
  Qtly div nine cts vs eight cts prior
      Pay May 12
      Record March 31
  

&lt;KELSEY-HAYES CANADA LTD> YEAR NET
  Shr 1.60 dlrs vs 3.12 dlrs
      Net 10.6 mln vs 20.6 mln
      Revs 162.5 mln vs 214.6 mln
      Note: 1985 shr restated to reflect January 31, 1986 stock
  split.
      73 pct-owned by Kelsey-Hayes Co.
  

RIGGS NATIONAL CORP &lt;RIGS> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 27-1/2 cts vs 27-1/2 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record March 31
  

&lt;PACER SYSTEMS> TO MAKE ACQUISITION
  Pacer Systems said it has
  agreed in principle to acquire the assets of Sea Data Corp, a
  maker of low-powered electronic systems including undersea
  intelligent recording sensors and high-density digital data
  recorders, for one mln dlrs.
  

ROPAK &lt;ROPK> HAS 34 PCT OF BUCKHORN &lt;BKN>
  Ropak Corp said it received
  and accepted about 456,968 common shares and 527,035 Series A
  convertible preferred shares of Buckhorn Inc at four dlrs and
  5.75 dlrs each respectively in response to its tender offer
  that expired Friday, and it now owns 34.4 pct of Buckhorn
  voting power.
      The company had owned 63,000 common and 25,100 preferred
  shares before starting the hostile tender.  Ropak said it is
  borrowing the funds needed to buy the Buckhorn shares from its
  bank lender and will not need to use any funds that another
  bank had committed to provide under a margin loan.
      Ropak said it waived minimum acceptance requirements to buy
  the shares and intends to evaluate a number of possible ways of
  completing an acquisition of Buckhorn.  It said it hopes that
  Buckhorn's board will reevaluate its position and enter into
  meaningful negotiations.
  

SPAIN QUALIFIES RESERVE REQUIREMENTS STATEMENT
  A Bank of Spain spokesman qualified a
  bank statement announcing an extension of reserve requirements
  to convertible peseta funds held by banks, saying the move
  applied only to future rises above current balances.
      "The 19 pct reserve requirement will only be applied to
  further increases in bank's convertible peseta funds," the
  spokesman said. Convertible peseta funds previously were exempt
  from reserve requirements. The spokesman said the measure was
  intended to curb an influx of short-term foreign speculative
  capital which threatened the government's money supply growth
  target.
  

SPAIN'S MONEY SUPPLY GROWTH DOUBLES IN FEBRUARY
  Spain's broad based M-4 money supply
  rose at an annualised rate of 16.7 pct in February against 8.1
  pct in January and 22.4 pct in February last year, Bank of
  Spain figures show.
      The broad-based money supply is measured as liquid assets
  in public hands plus quasi-monetary assets.
      Money supply growth was 11.4 pct last year. The government
  wants to reduce the rate to eight pct this year.
  

DEALERS WARY OVER STERLING INTERVENTION RUMOUR
  Foreign exchange market rumours that the
  the Bank of England has been selling sterling to halt its rise
  prompted a wary response from dealers who said they saw no
  obvious confirmation, market sources said.
      Bank of England officials were not immediately available
  for comment. Earlier this week, the Bank sanctioned a cut in
  bank interest rates in a surprise move, which aimed at limiting
  sterling's rise ahead of the March 17 budget.
      But today the pound has strengthened to 72.7 on its
  trade-weighted index from 72.1 last night, though the U.K.
  Currency is below its day's high against the dollar.
  

TELEPHONE SUPPORT SYSTEMS INC &lt;TSSI> 3RD QTR
  Nov 30 end
      Shr four cts vs 11 cts
      Net 62,986 vs 174,158
      Sales 720,906 vs 907,542
      Year
      Shr 18 cts vs six cts
      Net 277,852 vs 94,263
      Sales 2,247,374 vs 2,030,390
  

NETWORK VIDEO INC &lt;NVID> 3RD QTR FEB 28 NET
  Shr one ct vs five cts
      Net 50,745 vs 161,019
      Revs 478,700 vs 1,048,543
      Avg shrs 4,350,000 vs 3,217,500
      Nine mths
      Shr four cts vs 12 cts
      Net 169,275 vs 390,179
      Revs 1,478,066 vs 2,658,692
      Avg shrs 4,350,000 vs 3,217,500
  

COMTECH INC &lt;CMTL> 2ND QTR JAN 31 NET
  Oper shr profit one ct vs profit two cts
      Oper net profit 63,000 vs profit 84,000
      Sales 5,009,000 vs 4,042,000
      1st half
      Oper shr profit two cts vs loss 17 cts
      Oper net profit 87,000 vs loss 794,000
      Sales 9,838,000 vs 7,368,000
      Backlog 17.8 mln vs 11.4 mln
      NOTE: Current year net excludes tax credits of 32,000 dlrs
  in quarter and 45,000 dlrs in half.
  

BALTEK CORP &lt;BTEK> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr 21 cts vs 34 cts
      Oper net 480,000 vs 765,000
      Revs 6,386,000 vs 5,862,000
      Year
      Oper shr 1.20 dlrs vs 78 cts
      Oper net 2,692,000 vs 1,732,000
      Revs 25.2 mln vs 20.3 mln
      NOTEL Net excludes tax credit 35,000 dlrs vs reversal of
  credit 40,000 dlrs in quarter and credits 79,000 dlrs vs 72,000
  dlrs in year.
  

SAHLEN AND ASSOCIATES &lt;SALNU> COMPLETES PURCHASE
  Sahlen and Associates Inc
  said it has completed the purchase of Gleason Securities
  Service Inc of New York and Gleason Plant Security Inc of
  Connecticut.
      Sahlen said the deal's terms were not disclosed, but added
  that the acquired companies had combined annual revenues of
  over 18 mln dlrs.
      Sahlen, a private invetigation company, said the Gleason
  companies provide security guard services to corporations in
  the tri-state area.
  

MEM CO INC &lt;MEM> DECLARES QTLY DIV
  Qtly div 15 cts vs 15 cts prior
      Pay May 11
      Record March 31.
  

INSITUFORM OF NORTH AMERICA INC &lt;INSUA> 4TH QTR
  Shr nine cts vs four cts
      Net 658,159 vs 299,930
      Revs 3,770,341 vs 2,614,224
      Avg shrs 7,382,802 vs 6,747,442
      Year
      Oper shr 33 cts vs 18 cts
      Oper net 2,287,179 vs 1,045,799
      Revs 13.1 mln vs 8,577,853
      Avg shrs 6,874,505 vs 5,951,612
      NOTE: 1985 year net includes 13,000 dlr tax credit.
  

PHILADELPHIA PORT CLOSED BY TANKER CRASH
  The port of Philadelphia was closed
  when a Cypriot oil tanker, Seapride II, ran aground after
  hitting a 200-foot tower supporting power lines across the
  river, a Coast Guard spokesman said.
      He said there was no oil spill but the ship is lodged on
  rocks opposite the Hope Creek nuclear power plant in New
  Jersey.
      He said the port would be closed until today when they
  hoped to refloat the ship on the high tide.
      After delivering oil to a refinery in Paulsboro, New
  Jersey, the ship apparently lost its steering and hit the power
  transmission line carrying power from the nuclear plant to the
  state of Delaware.
  

MAJOR REALTY CORP &lt;MAJR> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Shr loss 19 cts vs profit 11 cts
      Net loss 1,140,270 vs profit 590,463
      Revs 1,259,164 vs 3,225,512
      Year
      Shr loss 67 cts vs profit 10 cts
      Net loss 4,004,840 vs profit 580,488
      Revs 3,184,480 vs 9,123,041
  

NUTMEG INDUSTRIES INC &lt;NUTM> YEAR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 14 cts
      Net 510,917
      Sales 12.3 mln
      NOTE: Share adjusted for five for four stock split in
  January 1987.
      Backlog 13.0 mln dlrs vs 3,733,000 dlrs.
      Company began operating January 27, 1986.
  

HENRY ANSBACHER HAS 51 PCT OF ADAMS AND PORTER INC
  &lt;Henry Ansbacher Holdings Plc> said it
  has acquired a 51 pct interest in the U.S. Retail and general
  corporate insurance broker &lt;Adams and Porter Inc>.
      The move is the first step in building a new international
  insurance broking group following the appointment of a new
  management team for its Seascope Insurance Holdings unit.
      Ansbacher said A and P has exciting growth potential,
  particularly on the east coast of the U.S. And has an annual
  revenue of more than four mln dlrs. Ansbacher shares were up
  4-1/2p to 90-1/2, helped by the announcement earlier today of a
  1986 pretax profit rise to 5.56 mln stg from 2.74 mln in 1985.
  

NATWEST, RABO UNIT REPORTS 8.8 PCT PROFIT GROWTH
  Dutch bank F. Van
  Lanschot Bankiers N.V., Co-owned by National Westminster PLC
  &lt;NWBL.L> and RABOBANK B.A. &lt;RABN.A> , said 1986 net profit rose
  8.8 pct to 24.1 mln guilders on a 4.8-pct higher balance sheet
  total of 6.2 billion.
      Van Lanschot Bankiers is a subsidiary of Van Lanschot
  Beleggingscompagnie B.V. In which Britain's National
  Westminster Bank PLC and Dutch cooperative bank RABOBANK
  Nederland B.A. Each have a 40-pct stake. Commercial Union's
  Dutch insurance unit &lt;Delta Lloyd Verzekeringsgroep N.V.> has a
  5.4-pct stake in Van Lanschot, which lowered risk provisions to
  22.5 mln guilders.
  

PENRIL &lt;PNL> SEEKS TO SELL TWO UNITS
  Penril Corp said it is seeking to
  sell its Triplett Electrical Instrument Corp subsidiary in
  Bluffton, Ohio, and Triplett's Alltest division in Hoffman
  Estates, Ill., as part of a plan to concentrate on its three
  profitable division and reduce its debt load.
      The company also said it is evaluating a plan to satisfy
  its obligations under its 10-7/8 pct subordinated notes but
  gave no details.  Interest on the notes is due today.
      Penril further said director Clifford L. Alexander Jr. has
  resigned from the board.  It gave no reason.
      Penril said shareholders at the annual meeting approved the
  limitation of directors' liability.   
  

LICHT SEES RISE IN EUROPEAN BEET AREA: TRADE
  West German sugar statistician F.O.
  Licht estimates European beet plantings this year at 7.22 mln
  hectares compared with a revised 1986 figure of 7.21 mln,
  traders said.
      In its first estimate for 1987, it puts EC plantings at
  1.85 mln hectares compared with 1.89 mln in 1986, while it
  estimates sowings in Western Europe (including EC) at 2.49 mln
  hectares compared with 2.50 mln in 1986.
      Traders said Licht forecasts Eastern Europe plantings at
  4.73 mln hectares against 4.72 mln in 1986.
  

FED EXPECTED TO ADD RESERVES
  The Federal Reserve is expected to
  intervene in the government securities market to add temporary
  reserves via customer or system repurchase agreements,
  economists said.
      Most economists said the Fed will inject reserves
  indirectly via customer repurchases, but they added that the
  Fed might opt for a direct injection of reserves via overnight
  system repurchases.
      Federal funds opened at 6-3/8 pct and eased to 6-5/16 pct
  in early trading. Funds averaged 6.29 pct yesterday.
  

BEN AND JERRY'S HOMEMADE INC &lt;BJIC> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 10 cts vs two cts
      Net 163,832 vs 31,063
      Sales 5,434,430 vs 3,167,735
      Avg shrs 1,712,231 vs 1,533,277
      Year
      Shr 59 cts vs 41 cts
      Net 1,016,375 vs 550,625
      Sales 19.7 mln vs 9,755,018
      Avg shrs 1,710,256 vs 1,327,172
  

BONNEVILLE PACIFIC CORP &lt;BPCO> 3RD QTR JAN 31
  Shr 52 cts vs 41 cts
      Net 4,921,601 vs 3,157,070
      Revs 35.8 mln vs 31.7 mln
      Avg shrs 8,939,955 vs 7,600,000
      Nine mths
      Shr 52 cts vs 34 cts
      Net 4,604,406 vs 2,585,621
      Revs 36.0 mln vs 32.1 mln
      Avg shrs 8,939,955 vs 7,600,000
  

JC PENNEY &lt;JCP> UP ON SMITH BARNEY OPINION
  J.C. Penney Co's stock rose sharply 
  after analyst William Smith of Smith Barney recommended the
  stock, based on the company's strong earnings momentum and the
  possibility of a stock buyback, dividend hike or stock split,
  traders said.
      "I am very impressed with the strong basic earnings story,"
  analyst Smith said, noting that the company has "fine tuned its
  buying and inventories, and has admirably controlled costs in a
  time that they needed to."
      The stock jumped 2-1/2 to 98-3/4.
      Smith said the company ended 1986 with a strong cash
  position of about 639 mln dlrs as compared to 158 mln dlrs the
  year before. "This implies the possibility of a share buyback,
  or significant dividend increase or a stock split," he said.
      In addition, he said the company has been gradually
  adjusting its merchandise mix and its gross margins have been
  improving.
      Smith expects the company to earn 8.25-to-8.50 dlrs a share
  in 1987 as compared to the 7.06 dlrs a share earned last year.
  Last year's results include a 69 cent charge for the buyback of
  debt.
  

COMPUTER LANGUAGE RESEARCH IN &lt;CLRI> 4TH QTR
  Shr loss 22 cts vs loss 18 cts
      Net loss 3,035,000 vs loss 2,516,000
      Revs 20.9 mln vs 19.6 mln
      Qtly div three cts vs three cts prior
      Year
      Shr profit two cts vs profit 34 cts
      Net profit 215,000 vs profit 4,647,000
      Revs 93.4 mln vs 98.7 mln
      NOTE: Dividend payable April one to shareholders of record
  March 17.
  

GERMAN SUGAR OFFERS PUT AT ABOUT 100,000 TONNES
  The West German intervention board said
  about 100,000 tonnes of sugar have been offered into
  intervention so far.
      A spokesman, speaking from Frankfurt, told Reuters offers
  have increased recently but contracts have not yet been
  concluded. A European Commission spokesman in Brussels earlier
  confirmed that one mln tonnes of sugar had been offered to
  intervention boards in various member states. The intervention
  board spokesman in Frankfurt said, "One million tonnes is an
  awful lot and the Community's coffers are almost empty. This
  could turn into a serious political problem."
      West German trade sources said they believed the one mln
  tonne offer by the EC sugar industry into intervention would
  have a neutral market impact overall.
  

BANKERS TRUST CO RAISES BROKER LOAN RATE
  Bankers Trust Co said it raised its
  broker loan rate to 7-1/4 pct from seven pct, effective
  immediately.
      U.S. Trust Co, which also quotes its broker loan rate
  publicly, is posting a 7-1/2 pct rate.
  

SIGMA MINES DETAILS GOLD ORE RESERVES
  &lt;Sigma Mines (Quebec) Ltd>, 65 pct
  owned by Dome Mines Ltd, said its Sigma Mine had proven and
  probable reserves at the end of 1986 of 4,902,940 tons, with an
  average grade of 0.139 ounces of gold a ton.
      Sigma said the reserves are equivalent to 10 years future
  production at current milling rates.
      The reserves comprise 1,640,779 tons proven reserves
  grading an average of 0.163 ounces of gold a ton and 3,262,161
  tons probable reserves grading an average of 0.127 ounces of
  gold a ton.
      Sigma said it changed its 1986 reserve reporting method
  following Dome Mines' previously reported move to adopt general
  industry practice of reporting proven and probable ore
  reserves.
      Prior to 1986, Sigma conservatively reported only proven
  reserves that could be mined without future development costs.
      Proven reserves as of December 31, 1985 were 978,000 tons
  grading an average of 0.194 ounces of gold a ton, equivalent to
  about two years future production.
  

MOORE MCCORMACK &lt;MMC> TO SELL GLOBE UNIT
  Moore McCormack Resources Inc said it
  agreed in principle to sell its Globe Metallurgical Inc unit to
  Cyprus Minerals Co &lt;CYPM> for undisclosed terms.
      The sale, expected to close by mid-April, is subject to
  certain conditions, including board approval at both companies.
      Globe produces silicon metals and magnesium ferrosilicon.
  The products are used in the chemical, aluminum, iron, rubber
  and semiconductor industries.
  

U.S. HOSUING COMPLETIONS FELL 0.2 PCT IN JANUARY
  U.S. Completions of new homes fell
  0.2 pct in January to a seasonally adjusted rate of 1.884 mln
  units from 1.888 mln in December, the Commerce Department said.
      The January fall came after a strong 6.4 pct rise from
  November's rate of 1.774 mln units and brought completions to
  6.7 pct above the January, 1986 level of 1.765 mln units.
      In January, completions of single-family units rose 0.4 pct
  to a seasonally adjusted 1.183 mln units from 1.178 mln units
  in December while multi-family units fell 1.3 pct to 701,000
  units in January, the department said.
  

&lt;DALE BURDETT INC> FACES DAMAGE CLAIM
  Dale Burdett Inc said it
  faces damages claims totalling about 420,000 dlrs from the
  former owners of Burdett Publications Inc.
      The company said on February 20, 1986, its predecessor
  Nolex Development Inc acquired Burdett Publications Inc in an
  exchange of 17 mln common shares for all Burdett Publications
  shares, but the transaction was not qualified with the
  California Department of Corporations.
      As a result, it said, the former Burdett Publications
  owners have a claim for damages against Dale Burdett as
  successor to Nolex for one yuear starting January 21, 1987,
  with the damages measured by the difference in values of shares
  exchanged plus interest from February 20, 1986.
  

U.S. JUSTICE DEPARTMENT REVIEWS ICAHN USAIR FILING
  The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ)
  is reviewing whether Trans World Airlines Inc &lt;TWA> and
  Chairman Carl Icahn violated federal antitrust law by failing
  to seek advance clearance from the DOJ or the Federal Trade
  Commission for his extensive open-market purchases of USAir
  Group Inc &lt;U> stock, a DOJ official told a Senate panel.
      "This is a matter that is being looked into," Charles Rule,
  acting assistant attorney general-antitrust, told the Senate
  Judiciary Committee's Antitrust Subcommittee.
      Rule declined further comment while the review was
  continuing.
      Rule was responding to panel Chairman Howard Metzenbaum
  (D-Ohio), who had asked why the department was not acting
  against "what appears to be a clear violation of the law."
      Metzenbaum said Icahn had failed to file a pre-merger
  notification form with the FTC prior to purchasing more than 15
  mln dlrs' worth of USAir stock.
      But Rule said that, for airline companies, a purchaser
  would be exempt from the requirement if it instead had filed a
  merger application with the U.S. Department of Transportation.
      Icahn filed such an application with the DOT, but the
  filing was thrown out by the DOT on Friday.
      The DOT threw out the application late Friday on grounds it
  lacked the necessary data for the government to review the
  proposed USAir takeover bid.
      Icahn refiled a more complete application form Monday.
      Rule pledged to act against Icahn and TWA if a violation
  were found.
  

T CELL SCIENCES INC &lt;TCEL> 3RD QTR JAN 31 LOSS
  Shr loss one ct vs loss 16 cts
      Net loss 117,989 vs loss 528,394
      Revs 820,484 vs 35,186
      Avg shrs 8,226,577 vs 3,150,000
      Nine mths
      Shr loss seven cts vs loss 37 cts
      Net loss 527,864 vs loss 1,177,434
      Revs 1,975,487 vs 90,875
      Avg shrs 7,277,418 vs 3,150,000
  

DUTCH ADJUSTED UNEMPLOYMENT UNCHANGED IN FEBRUARY
  Dutch seasonally-adjusted
  unemployment totalled 690,600 people in February, unchanged
  from January but down from 732,700 in February 1986, a Social
  Affairs Ministry spokesman said.
      The unadjusted figure stood at 708,700 at the end of last
  month, a decline of 3,800 from the January total of 712,500 and
  comparing with 750,000 at the end of February last year.
  

PUROLATOR &lt;PCC> IN BUYOUT WITH HUTTON &lt;EFH>
  New Jersey-based overnight messenger
  Purolator Courier Corp said it has agreed to be acquired for
  about 265 mln dlrs by a company formed by E.F. Hutton LBO Inc
  and certain managers of Purolator's U.S. courier business.
      Analysts have said that Purolator has been for sale for
  some time. Purolator announced earlier it was mulling a
  takeover bid, but analysts wrongly predicted the offer was from
  another courier company.
      Hutton LBO, a wholly owned subsidiary of E.F. Hutton Group
  Inc, will be majority owner of the company.
      Hutton said the acquiring company, PC Acquisition Inc, is
  paying 35 dlrs cash per share for 83 pct of Purolator's stock
  in a tender offer to begin Thursday. The rest of the shares
  will be purchased for securities and warrants to buy stock in a
  subsidiary of PC Acquisition, containing Purolator's U.S.
  courier operations.
      If all the shares of Purolator are tendered, shareholders
  would receive for each share 29 dlrs cash, six dlrs in
  debentures, and a warrant to buy shares in a subsidiary of PC
  Acquisition containing the U.S. courier operations.
      Hutton said in the merger shareholders would get 46 mln
  dlrs aggregate amount of guaranteed debentures due 2002 of PC
  Acquisition and warrants to buy 15 pct of the common stock of
  the PC courier subsidiary. Hutton said the company has valued
  the warrants at two to three dlrs per share.
      Purolator's stock price closed at 35.125 dlrs on Friday.
  While some analysts estimated the company was worth in the mid
  30s, at least one said it would be worth 38 to 42 dlrs.
      This follows sales of two other Purolator units. It agreed
  recently to sell its Canadian Courier unit to Onex Capital for
  170 mln dlrs, and previously sold its auto filters business.
      Purolator retains its Stant division, which makes closure
  caps for radiators and gas tanks. A Hutton spokesman said the
  firm is reviewing its options on Stant.
      Purolator's courier business has been lagging that of its
  U.S. rivals because of the high price it paid in the past
  several years to add air delivery to its ground fleet.
      E.F. Hutton will provide 279 mln dlrs of its funds to
  complete the transaction. This so-called "bridge" financing
  will be replaced later with long-term debt most likely in the
  form of bank loans, Hutton said. Hutton LBO is committed to
  keeping the courier business, its president Warren Idsal said.
      "Purolator lost 120 mln dlrs over the last two years
  largely due to U.S. courier operations, which we believe the
  management is turning around. We belive it will be a very
  serious competitor in the future," said Idsal.
      William Taggart, chief executive officer of U.S. Courier
  division, will be chief executive officer of the new company.
      The tender offer will be conditioned on a minimum of two
  thirds of the common stock being tendered and not withdrawn to
  the expiration of the offer as well as certain other conditions.
      The offer will begin Thursday, subject to clearances from
  the staff of the Interstate Commerce Commission and will expire
  20 business days after commencement unless extended.
  

U.S. HOUSING COMPLETIONS FELL 0.2 PCT IN JAN
  Completions of new homes fell 0.2
  pct in January to a seasonally adjusted rate of 1.884 mln units
  from 1.888 mln in December, the Commerce Department said.
      The January fall came after a strong 6.4 pct rise from
  November's rate of 1.774 mln units and brought completions to
  6.7 pct above the January, 1986, level of 1.765 mln units.
      In January, completions of single-family units rose 0.4 pct
  to a seasonally adjusted 1.183 mln units from 1.178 mln units
  in December while multi-family units fell 1.3 pct to 701,000
  units in January, the department said.
  

MITCHELL ENERGY AND DEVELOPMENT CORP &lt;MND> NET
  4th qtr Jan 31
      Shr five cts vs 28 cts
      Net 2,448,000 vs 13.3 mln
      Revs 156.1 mln vs 225.5 mln
      Avg shrs 47.3 mln vs 47.8 mln
      Year
      Shr 18 cts vs 1.01 dlrs
      Net 8,430,000 vs 48.2 mln
      Revs 587.9 mln vs 843.9 mln
      Avg shrs 47.4 mln vs 47.9 mln
  

U.S. HOUSING COMPLETIONS FELL 0.2 PCT IN JANUARY
  U.S. Completions of new homes fell
  0.2 pct in January to a seasonally adjusted rate of 1.884 mln
  units from 1.888 mln in December, the Commerce Department said.
      The January fall came after a strong 6.4 pct rise from
  November's rate of 1.774 mln units and brought completions to
  6.7 pct above the January, 1986 level of 1.765 mln units.
      In January, completions of single-family units rose 0.4 pct
  to a seasonally adjusted 1.183 mln units from 1.178 mln units
  in December while multi-family units fell 1.3 pct to 701,000
  units in January, the department said.
  

FED SETS TWO BILLION DLR CUSTOMER REPURCHASE, FED SAYS

  FED SETS TWO BILLION DLR CUSTOMER REPURCHASE, FED SAYS
  

GROUNDWATER TECHNOLOGY INC &lt;GWTI> 3RD QTR JAN 31
  Shr 19 cts vs 12 cts
      Net 850,000 vs 432,000
      Sales 9,850,000 vs 4,783,000
      Avg shrs 4,504,000 vs 3,527,000
      Nine mths
      Shr 57 cts vs 37 cts
      Net 2,400,000 vs 1,281,000
      Sales 25.2 mln vs 12.8 mln
      Avg shrs 4,233,000 vs 3,485,000
  

SEVEN OAKS INTERNATIONAL INC &lt;QPON> IN PAYOUT
  Qtly div four cts vs four cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record March 23
  

FED ADDS RESERVES VIA CUSTOMER REPURCHASES
  The Federal Reserve entered the U.S.
  Government securities market to arrange two billion dlrs of
  customer repurchase agreements, a Fed spokesman said.
      Dealers said Federal funds were trading at 6-5/16 pct when
  the Fed began its temporary and indirect supply of reserves to
  the banking system.
  

CHINA BUYS U.S. HARD AND SOFT WHEAT
  Private exporters said China bought a
  total of 550,000 tonnes of U.S. wheat under the export
  enhancement program, with final confirmation by the U.S.
  Department of Agriculture of the subsidies still awaited.
      The purchase consisted of a total of 340,000 tonnes of hard
  red winter wheat for various May/Aug shipments, with 210,000
  tonnes of soft red winter for Aug/Sept, the exporters said.
  

PROPERTY TRUST OF AMERICA &lt;PTRAS> YEAR NET
  Ope shr 63 cts vs 80 cts
      Oper net 3,169,000 vs 3,757,000
      Revs 9,585,000 vs 10.2 mln
      Avg shrs 5,070,000 vs 4,721,000
      NOTE: Net excludes gains from sale of investments of
  887,000 dlrs vs 304,000 dlrs.
  

PAKISTAN COTTON OUTPUT REACHES 7.7 MLN BALES
  Pakistan cotton production during the
  current crop season (Sept/March) reached 7.7 mln bales of 375
  pounds each, up 500,000 from last season, Shafi Niaz, Chairman
  of the Agricultural Prices Commission, said.
      Official sources said Pakistan was likely to use 3.4 mln
  bales of cotton during the current financial year ending June
  after 2.96 mln in 1985/86 and 2.70 mln in 1984/85.
      They said consumption would increase due to a rise in
  demand for cotton yarn in domestic markets and abroad. Pakistan
  produced 540 mln kilos of yarn in fiscal year 1985/86 and
  exported 157 mln.
      The State-owned cotton export corporation was likely to
  export 3.8 mln bales of cotton during the current fiscal year
  compared with 3.86 mln last year, cotton traders said.
      The traders said there would be 1.3 mln bales of cotton
  carryover this fiscal year compared with just over a mln bales
  last year.
  

CHI-CHI'S INC &lt;CHIC> 3RD QTR JAN 31 LOSS
  Shr loss 38 cts vs profit eight cts
      Net loss 10.4 mln vs profit 2,144,317
      Revs 72.9 mln vs 67.4 mln
      Nine mths
      Shr loss 21 cts vs profit 38 cts
      Net loss 5,747,393 vs profit 10.1 mln
      Revs 224.6 mln vs 200.6 mln
      NOTE: Current year net both periods includes 20.0 mln dlr
  pretax charge for disposition of 21 underperforming
  company-owned restaurants.
      Current year net includes tax credits of 3,205,000 dlrs in
  quarter and 7,305,000 dlrs in year.
  

CHEMLAWN CORP SAID IT IS TALKING WITH NEW SUITORS ABOUT BEING ACQUIRED

  CHEMLAWN CORP SAID IT IS TALKING WITH NEW SUITORS ABOUT BEING ACQUIRED
  

CHI-CHI'S &lt;CHIC> TAKES 20 MLN DLR CHARGE
  Chi-Chi's Inc said it has taken
  a 20 mln dlr pretax charge against earnings for the third
  quarter ended January 31 to cover the cost of disposing of 21
  "underperforming" company-owned restaurants.
      The company also said it has agreed to repurchase up to
  three mln common shares on the open market.
      The company now has about 27.1 mln shares outstanding.
      Chi-Chi's today reported a loss for the third quarter ended
  January 31, after the pretax charge and a 7,305,000 dlr tax
  credit, of 10.4 mln dlrs, compared with a year-earlier profit
  of 2,144,317 dlrs.
      Chi-Chi's said it believes the disposition of the
  restaurants has the potential of increasing its pretax earnings
  by about two mln dlrs next fiscal year.
      The company said it will use existing cash resources for
  the share repurchases.
  

DUPONT &lt;DD> UP ON RECOMMENDATIONS
  Shares of Du Pont Co rose today after
  accumulating recommendations from Shearson Lehman Brothers and
  First Boston, traders said.
      Du Pont, which opened with a two point gain, stood at
  109-1/8, up 1-1/8.
      First Boston's analyst was not available for comment.
      Analyst Theodore Semegran of Shearson said he raised his
  earnings estimates for the company to 7.25 dlrs a share in 1987
  and eight dlrs a share in 1988. The company earned 6.35 dlrs a
  share in 1986.
      "Good domestic demand, higher operating earnings and a
  strng export business, probably benefitting from a lower dollar
  and effects of reduced imports in chemicals will continue to
  aid Du Pont." He also noted that energy earnings in the first
  quarter are better than expected because of the rise in crude
  prices. Semegran expects first quarter earnings
  of about 1.85 dlrs a share from 1.67 dlrs last year.
      He also expects the company to raise its annual dividend
  about 20 to 30 cts a share, from its current dividend of 3.20
  dlrs a share, "and a stock split is possible but it has a low
  probablility."
  

CHEMLAWN &lt;CHEM> IN TALKS ON BEING ACQUIRED
  ChemLawn Corp said it has
  started talks on the possible sale of the company with "various
  parties" that it did not identify.
      The company said the talks began after it considred and
  rejected Waste Management Inc's &lt;WMX> 27 dlr per share tender
  offer for all its sharesd.
      ChemLawn gave no details on the talks.
  

SHV WITHDRAWS IC GAS OFFER
  SHV Holdings NV said it is
  withdrawing its take-over bid for Imperial Continental Gas
  Association &lt;ICGS.L> after failing to gain the minimum number
  of pledges sought from IC Gas shareholders.
      SHV said in a statement it had sought to gain 750,000 IC
  Gas shares under a 700p offer for IC Gas ordinary stock but was
  informed that level was not reached when the deadline expired.
  "The tender offer is therefore void," it said.
       SHV also offered 252 pence for every one stg nominal of IC
  Gas loan stock under the bid, made by &lt;SHV (United Kingdom)
  Holding Co Ltd>.
  

PROGRESS AT RUBBER PACT TALKS REPORTED SLOW
  Negotiators at a United Nations
  conference on natural rubber are making slow progress towards
  reaching an agreement, delegates said.
      The conference, which began Monday, is widely seen as the
  final effort to adopt a new International Natural Rubber
  Agreement (INRA) before the current one expires in October.
      Some 40 producing and consuming countries are taking part
  in the two-week meeting. This is the fourth such conference in
  nearly two years.
      Delegates said both sides still appeared divided on the key
  issue of the price adjustment mechanism.
      Consumers want frequent price reviews at 12 month intervals
  instead of 18 months as at present, a proposal currently
  rejected by producers.
      And while consumers press for the price adjustment to be
  automatic, producers have resisted reducing the role of the
  International Rubber Organization Council in the price
  adjustment procedure.
      Conference chairman Manaspas Xuto of Thailand has said it
  was "imperative" to settle outstanding issues this week so that
  technical drafting work can be done next week.
  

LORD ABBETT AND CO DECLARES MUTUAL FUND DIVS
  LORD ABBETT VALUE APPRECIATION FUND
      Annual div 33 cts vs 23 cts prior
      Long term capital gain 2.06 vs 75 cts prior
      Short term capital gain 18 cts vs 11 cts prior
      Pay April 6
      Record March 12
      
      LORD ABBETT U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES FUND
      Daily div .029 cts vs .029 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record April 15
      LORD ABBETT TAX FREE INCOME NATIONAL SERIES
      Daily .068 cts vs .068 prior
      Pay April 15
      Record April 15
      
      LORD ABBETT TAX FREE INCOME FUND NY SERIES
      Daily .067 cts vs .067 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record April 15
      
      LORD ABBETT TAX FREE INCOME FUND TEXAS SERIES
      Daily .059 cts vs .059 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record April 15
      LORD ABBETT CALIFORNIA TAX FREE INCOME FUND
      Daily .062 vs .063 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record April 15
  

&lt;ASSOCIATES CORP OF NORTH AMERICA> 1ST QTR NET
  Qtr ended Jan 31
      Net 55.3 mln dlrs vs 51.7 mln dlrs
      Revs 419.1 mln vs 391.7 mln
      Note: Revs include investment and other income of 18.4 mln
  dlrs vs 18.5 mln dlrs.
      Company is wholly owned by Gulf and Western Corp &lt;GW>.
  

NEWPORT PHARMACEUTICALS &lt;NWPH> 3RD QTR LOSS
  Period ended January 31.
      Shr loss six cts vs profit one ct
      Net loss 536,000 vs profit 166,000
      Revs 2,099,000 vs 3,149,000
      Avg shrs 10,429,000 vs 9,943,000
      Nine Mths
      Shre loss nine cts vs loss five cts
      Net loss 790,000 vs loss 377,000
      Revs 7,089,000 vs 7,646,000
      Avg shrs 10,406,000 vs 9,351,000
      Note: Full name Newport Pharmaceuticals International Inc.
  

THE RAYMOND CORP &lt;RAYM> DECLARES QTLY DIV
  Qtly div 11-3/4 cts vs 11-3/4 cts prior
      Pay March 27
      Record March 13
  

MITCHELL ENERGY &lt;MND> AGAIN CUTS CAPITAL OUTLAYS
  Mitchell Energy and
  Development Corp said it plans to hold its capital spending in
  fiscal 1988, ending January 31, to 96 mln dlrs, down from the
  123 mln dlrs spent in 1987 and 213 mln dlrs in 1986.
      The company also said its natural gas revenues so far this
  year have been reduced by lower contract customer purchases due
  to mild weather and soft economic conditions.
      "But the contracts call for the lower 'takes' to be made up
  during the course of the year," Mitchell Energy said. Meanwhile
  it will sell additional quantities of gas on the spot market.
      Mitchell Energy said the additional spot sales will tend to
  lower the average price realized for gas in the early part of
  fiscal 1988.
      However, it said the average for the full year is not
  expected to be significantly lower than the 2.99 dlrs per
  thousand cubic feet averaged in fiscal 1987.                   
  

INVESTOR TO TAKE CONTROL OF RIVER OAKS &lt;ROI>
  River Oaks Industries Inc said
  it agreed in principle to give control of the company to Benson
  Seizer, a New York investor, in return for 2.6 mln dlrs in
  capital.
      The company, a maker of mobile homes, said it terminated
  merger discussions with &lt;Nursing Centers of America>.
      River Oaks said it will place a 2.6 mln dlr convertible
  note with Seizer, who in turn will name six additional members
  to the company's five-member board. One of the new directors
  will take over as chairman and chief executive officer, River
  Oaks said.
      River Oaks said the note will be convertible into two mln
  shares of its common stock at one dlr a share. The company
  currently has 14 mln shares outstanding.
      The company said it will also grant Seizer an option to buy
  an additional 2.6 mln shares during the next four years at 1.25
  dlrs a share during the first year and 1.50 dlrs a share
  thereafter.
      The company said the money raised from Seizer will further
  strengthen its balance sheet and enhance its ability to seek
  selective expansion opportunities.
      Seizer is experienced in turnaround situations and is
  expected to take direct involvement in River Oaks management,
  said Charles F. DeGroot, who will remain a director of the
  company after giving up the post of chairman to one of Seizer's
  board nominees.
      Don Manning will cede his post as chief executive but will
  remain president, the company said.
  

FINANCIAL SANTA BARBARA &lt;FSB> TO MAKE PURCHASE
  Financial Corp of Santa
  Barbara said it has signed a definitive agreement to purchase
  Stanwell Financial, the lending operations unit of mortgage
  banking company &lt;Stanwell Mortgage>, for undisclosed terms.
  

GEVAERT NV &lt;GEVN.BR> 1986 YEAR
  Consolidated group net profit 1.88 billion francs vs 1.29
  billion.
      Net financial and operating profit 1.11 billion vs 825.1
  mln.
      Extraordinary earnings 774.7 mln vs 462.8 mln.
      Net dividend 165 francs vs 150.
  

NATIONAL SAVINGS MOVE POINTS TO LOWER U.K. RATES
  U.K. Interest rates look set to move
  lower even after Monday's half-point cut in bank base rates to
  10-1/2 pct, analysts said, citing as evidence the suspension of
  a British National Savings issue yesterday.
      The Department of National Savings, effectively a Treasury
  Department unit, yesterday suspended its 32nd issue, launched
  in October and paying a high tax-free 8-3/4 pct on five-year
  private investments between 25 and 5,000 stg. A spokesman said
  the suspension was just a reaction to yields on national
  savings bonds being way out of line with the rest of the
  market.
      The move was followed by a surprise sell-out within minutes
  today of a Bank of England one-billion stg tap issue, the
  second such issue in as many weeks, analysts noted.
      They said the near-instant sale of the entire new gilts
  issue, for which the Bank of England had required a high 40 pct
  downpayment, was clear evidence that the market thought rates
  had to drop sooner rather than later.
      The sale of the tranche of 8-3/4 pct treasury bonds due
  1997 occurred in an active, bullish gilts market as downward
  pressure on money market rates remained intact, with the
  bellwether three-month interbank rate down 1/8 point at
  10-9-7/8 pct.
       It coincided with another strong sterling rally which
  pushed the pound to four-year highs against the dollar.
      "That government stock disappeared very quickly indeed," said
  Stephen Lewis, head of economic research at stockbrokers
  Phillips and Drew; "It is an indication that the market believes
  rates are going to fall further ... At least by a half-point
  immediately after the budget (on March 17), and some people
  hope for more."
      Stockbrokers James Capel said in a comment the move by the
  National Savings Department was "of considerable significance."
      It said, "the real message ... Is that the decks are being
  quickly cleared so as to facilitate a speedy decision by the
  building societies to cut their rates when the inevitable cut
  in bank base rates to 10 pct materialises."
      Building societies have said a drop in bank base rates
  would normally have to exceed half a point to give rise to a
  reduction in mortgage lending rates.
      Lewis of Phillips and Drew said he too believed the
  National Savings issue suspension may reflect new U.K. Treasury
  policy to point building societies towards a mortgage rate cut.
      "National Savings has been competing too effectively with
  the building societies of late. Building society income has
  been depressed in recent months," he said.
      He and other analysts said Chancellor of the Exchequer
  Nigel Lawson was keen to see mortgage rates fall to keep a lid
  on U.K. Inflation.
      Underlying upward pressure on prices is stronger in Britain
  than in most other Western economies with inflation seen rising
  well above four pct this year and above five pct in 1988 after
  last year's 3.7 pct.
      Emphasising the impact of mortgage rates on consumer
  prices, Lewis said a one-point cut in building society rates
  would reduce inflation in Britain by about 0.4 pct.
      But Lewis and others noted that building societies had been
  complaining to the government about intense competition from
  National Savings, which they argued reduced the scope for early
  mortgage rate cuts.
      "The Chancellor need not be worried about losing some PSBR
  funding from National Savings, but he must be taking the
  building societies' criticism to heart. It looks like the
  National Savings move reflects this," one senior dealer said.
      A Savings Department spokesman refused to comment on this
  interpretation, saying the suspension of the issue was merely a
  reaction to the recent fall in U.K. Interest rates, which had
  pushed yields on national savings bonds way out of line with
  the rest of the market.
      "We are not politically motivated ... Funding was just
  becoming too expensive and we don't need all that money," he
  told Reuters, adding the department had suspended issues at
  least twice in the past, when offered interest rates were above
  or below market rates.
      He said demand for the issue had risen sharply of late as
  U.K. Money market rates continued their steady decline and
  income was threatening to overshoot an unofficial three billion
  stg target set for fiscal 1986 ending March 31.
      In the first 10 months of fiscal 1986, National Saving's
  contribution to government funding totalled 2.72 billion stg,
  compared with 2.01 billion stg in the same period of the
  previous year, official figures show.
      Figures for February, out on Monday, are expected to show a
  further increase of between 300 and 400 mln stg, pushing the
  total for 11 months above target, government officials said.
  

NICOR INC &lt;GAS> REGULAR DIVIDEND SET
  Qtly div 45 cts vs 45 cts previously
      Pay May 1
      Record March 31
  

HANDLEMAN CO &lt;HDL> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 14 cts vs 14 cts prior
      Pay April 10
      Record March 27
  

PERINI CORP &lt;PCR> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 20 cts vs 20 cts prior
      Pay June 16
      Record May 22
  

JONES AND VINING SAID VULCAN CORP OFFERS FIVE DLRS A SHARE FOR JONES

  JONES AND VINING SAID VULCAN CORP OFFERS FIVE DLRS A SHARE FOR JONES
  

INTERNATIONAL BANKNOTE CO INC &lt;IBK> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Oper shr loss 11 cts vs loss 14 cts
      Oper net loss 1,963,000 vs loss 2,199,000
      Revs 17.5 mln vs 40.9 mln
      Year
      Oper shr profit nine cts vs profit two cts
      Oper net profit 1,555,000 vs 456,000
      Revs 86.3 mln vs 143.7 mln
      NOTE: Net excludes extraordinary tax charges of 115,000
  dlrs vs 995,000 dlrs in quarter and credits 8,096,000 dlrs vs
  1,173,000 dlrs in year.
      1985 year net includes pretax gain 7,400,000 dlrs from
  termination of pension plan.
      1985 net includes pretax charge 1,200,000 dlrs in quarter
  and gain 1,400,000 dlrs in year from restructuring and
  consolidation.
      1985 quarter net includes 1,480,000 dlr tax credit.
      1986 year net includes pretax gain 17.2 mln dlrs from sale
  of foreign subsidiary.
  

ALCAN TO CLOSE WEST GERMAN ALUMINIUM SMELTER
  &lt;Alcan Aluminiumwerke
  GmbH>, a subsidiary of Alcan Aluminium Ltd &lt;AL.N> of Canada,
  said it plans to close its aluminium smelter in Ludwigshafen at
  the end of June.
      A spokesman said Alcan was closing the smelter, with annual
  capacity of 44,000 tonnes and 320 employees, because of high
  electricity costs and the low world market price of aluminium.
      Alkan had said earlier this year it would close half the
  plant's capacity but decided to shut down completely when talks
  with potential cooperation partners failed, the spokesman said.
  He declined to name the other companies involved in the talks.
  

EC CONCERNED OVER U.S. TEXTILE IMPORT MOVES
  The European Community (EC) expressed
  disquiet over protectionist moves in the United States to limit
  imports of textiles and said it would retaliate immediately if
  EC exports were hit.
      A spokeswoman for the EC Commission said EC External Trade
  Commissioner Willy De Clercq had written to his U.S.
  Counterpart, special U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter,
  outlining the concerns of the 12-nation Community.
      The draft legislation under consideration by Congress would
  impose permanent quotas on products entering the U.S. and seek
  to limit any increase to a growth in the overall trade.
  

SPEED-O-PRINT BUSINESS &lt;SBM> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr loss seven cts vs profit 17 cts
      Net loss 102,000 vs profit 258,000
      Revs 1,695,000 vs 1,371,000
      Year
      Shr loss 33 cts vs profit 26 cts
      Net loss 488,000 vs profit 384,000
      Revs 6,700,000 vs 4,774,000
      NOTE: 1986 results include operations of radio stations
  WJYE-FM for the full year and WNNR-AM for the last six months.
      Speed-O-Print Business Machines Corp is full name of
  company.
  

ASBESTEC INDUSTRIES &lt;ASBS> SETS STOCK SPLIT
  Asbestec Industries Inc said
  its board declared a three-for-two stock split, payable April
  17, record April Three.
  

QUAKER OATS CO &lt;OAT> REGULAR DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 20 cts vs 20 cts previously
      Pay April 15
      Record March 23
  

JONES AND VINING &lt;JNSV> GETS VULCAN &lt;VUL> BID
  Jones and Vining Inc said
  Vulcan Corp, one of its main competitors in the production of
  shoe lasts, has offered to acquire Jones and Vining for five
  dlrs a share.
      Jones and Vining said a management effort to take the
  company private will go ahead at 4.50 dlrs per share. The form
  of the buyout has not yet been determined and the buyout is
  subject to a nunber of conditions, it said.
      Jones and Vining said its board believes that a transaction
  with Vulcan would be difficult to complete, but it has asked
  Vulcan for further information to explore the bid.
      On January 23, Jones and Vining said its board had
  recommended that shareholders aprove a management buyout at
  4.50 dlrs a share.
      On February Six, Vulcan initially offered to acquire Jones
  and Vining for five dlrs a share, but Jones and Vining
  dismissed the offer as "frivolous" and "without substance" and
  said the bid failed to comply with provisions of the Securities
  Act of 1934.
  

PPG INDUSTRIES &lt;PPG> SEES GROWTH IN 1987
  PPG Industries Inc will continue to
  show earnings growth in 1987 despite a difficult economic
  climate, the company said in its annual report, mailed to
  shareholders today.
      For 1986, the company's earnings rose five pct, to 316 mln
  dlrs, on revenues that increased eight pct, to 4.7 billion
  dlrs. Earnings per share were 2.66 dlrs, compared with 2.27
  dlrs.
      The company added that in 1986 its return on equity reached
  17.3 pct, up from 15.5 pct in 1985 and close to its goal of 18
  pct.
  

BELGIAN MINISTER UNVEILS PRIVATISATION PLAN
  Belgian Budget Minister Guy
  Verhofstadt has proposed a plan to sell off shares in several
  state-owned enterprises, including national airline Sabena and
  the postal and telecommunications authority, government sources
  said.
      They said the plan could raise more than 25 billion francs
  in revenue over the next five years according to Verhofstadt's
  projections, helping the government to reduce its huge budget
  deficit, targetted this year at 418 billion francs.
      But the scheme had received a guarded reception from the
  Social Christian parties in Belgium's centre-right coalition
  when Verhofstadt unveiled it at a cabinet meeting yesterday.
      Discussion of the plan was likely to be long and difficult,
  the sources said.
      Verhofstadt proposes beginning the selloffs in the last
  quarter of 1987, with the sale of 30 to 40 pct of state
  investment company SNI. He expects the sale to raise three
  billion francs, they added.
      A 25 pct share in Sabena would be sold in mid-1989 for 1.5
  billion francs, while 50 pct of the postal and
  telecommunications authority would be sold off in two stages in
  mid-1990 and early 1992, raising at least seven billion francs.
      Also on Verhofstadt's list are the Maritime Transport
  Authority, leading gas distributor Distrigaz, CGER savings
  bank, CGER, and several other credit institutions.
      Le Soir daily quoted CGER vice-president Paul Henrion as
  expressing strong opposition to the privatisation of his bank.
      "Public company we are and public company we wish to stay,"
  Henrion told the paper.
  

BBC AG BROWN BOVERI UND CIE &lt;BBCZ.Z> 1986 YEAR
  Parent Company net profit 12.8 mln Swiss francs vs 7.5 mln.
      Orders received 2.21 billion francs vs 2.61 billion.
      Sales 2.25 billion francs vs 2.49 billion.
      Group sales 13.83 billion francs vs 13.88 billion.
      Group orders 11.03 billion francs vs 13.00 billion.
   REUTE
  

SCIENCE DYNAMICS CORP &lt;SIDY> YEAR NET
  Shr 24 cts vs 13 cts
      Net 704,803 vs 385,081
      Revs 5,669,682 vs 4,142,095
  

FOODARAMA SUPERMARKETS INC &lt;FSM> 1ST QTR JAN 31
  Shr 42 cts vs 35 cts
      Net 570,000 vs 476,000
      Sales 122.4 mln vs 123.1 mln
      NOTEL Prior year net includes pretax charge 453,000 dlrs
  for reopening of eight stores.
  

ENGINEERING MEASUREMENTS CO &lt;EMCO> 3RD QTR NET
  Qtr ends Jan 31
      Shr four cts vs 12 cts
      Net 102,508 vs 264,910
      Revs 2,278,083 vs 2,536,312
      Nine mths
      Shr 18 cts vs 15 cts
      Net 489,253 vs 404,877
      Revs 6,679,745 vs 6,613,551
      NOTE: Excludes discontinued operations gain of 40,519 dlrs
  in the third quarter fiscal 1986, and loss of 9,666 dlrs in the
  nine months fiscal 1986.
  

BOOTHE FINANCIAL CORP &lt;BCMP> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr one ct vs 24 cts
      Net 43,000 vs 1,032,000
      Revs 10 mln vs 4.9 mln
      Avg shrs 3.7 mln vs 4.3 mln
      12 mths
      Shr 1.02 dlrs vs 1.62 dlrs
      Net 3,950,000 vs 7,308,000
      Revs 30.8 mln vs 33.3 mln
      Avg shrs 3.9 mln vs 4.5 mln
      NOTE: 1985 restated to reflect tax loss carryforwards.
  

CONSOLIDATED NATURAL GAS CO &lt;CNG> IN PAYOUT
  Qtly div 37-1/2 cts vs 37-1/2 cts prior
      Pay May 15
      Record April 15
  

SANDUSKY PLASTICS INC &lt;SPI> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div six cts vs six cts prior
      Pay March 31
      Record March 20
  

MARRIOTT &lt;MHS> TO SELL HOTEL
  &lt;Four Seasons Hotels> said it and &lt;VMS
  Realty Partners> of Chicago have agreed to purchase the Santa
  Barbara Biltmore Hotel from Marriott Corp for an undisclosed
  amount.
      It said the venture will rename the hotel the Four Seasons
  Biltmore at Santa Barbara and invest over 13 mln dlrs in
  improvements on the 228-room property.
  

REXNORD &lt;REX> TO SELL RAILWAY EQUIPMENT UNIT
  Rexnord nc said it signed a
  definitive agreement to sell its Railway Maintenance Equipment
  Co subsidiary to Banner Industries Inc. Terms were withheld.
      It said Railway Maintenance had 1986 sales of 16 mln dlrs
  and employs 100 people.
      Rexnord said the sale is part of a major program to divest
  several of its businesses representing about 200 mln dlrs in
  net assets. Still to be divested are the Process Machinery
  Division with sales of 137 mln dlrs and Mathews Conveyer Co,
  with sales of 83 mln dlrs.
  

LICHT SEES STAGNANT EUROPEAN BEET AREA
  The overall area devoted to sugar
  beet in Europe is forecast to remain stagnant this year at 7.22
  mln hectares compared with 7.21 mln ha in 1986, West German
  statistician F.O. Licht said.
      It was feared that the recent steep rise in sugar prices
  would have a marked effect on planting intentions this year,
  Licht said, but judging by this first estimate the effect was
  probably minimal.
      The total beet area in the European Community is forecast
  to fall two pct to 1.85 mln ha against 1.89 mln in 1986.
      The total Western Europe area is put at 2.49 mln ha,
  against 2.50 mln in 1986. Eastern Europe area is forecast at
  4.73 mln ha against 4.72 mln.
      Individual West Europe country estimates, in 1,000 hectares
  (with 1986 figures in brackets), are, Belgium/Luxembourg 114
  (118), Denmark 69 (69), France 419 (421), Greece 35 (44),
  Ireland 36 (38), Italy 270 (275), Netherlands 129 (138),
  Portugal 1 (1), Spain 192 (190), U.K. 200 (201), West Germany
  385 (399), Austria 32 (28), Finland 30 (31), Sweden 51 (52),
  Switzerland 15 (14), Turkey 355 (340), Yugoslavia 160 (136).
      Eastern Europe plantings are forecast as follows, USSR 3400
  (3440), Albania 10 (9), Bulgaria 52 (50), Czechoslovakia 195
  (196), East Germany 210 (205), Hungary 108 (96), Poland 460
  (440), Romania 295 (280).
      On the basis of average yields this year, Licht said these
  area forecasts pointed to a total European beet sugar crop in
  1987/88 of 29.8 mln tonnes, raw value, down from 31.4 mln
  tonnes in 1986/87. Licht said sugar yields were fairly high
  last season, thanks to favourable weather, and this increases
  the chances of a significant reduction in production in
  1987/88.
      Based on average yields, EC beet sugar production could
  fall nearly 10 pct this year to 13.5 mln tonnes from 14.9 mln
  in 1986/87, while total Western Europe production could be 16.9
  mln tonnes against 18.1 mln. Eastern Europe production could be
  12.9 mln tonnes against 13.3 mln in 1986/87.
  

BRITAIN TO MINT NEW "BRITANNIA" GOLD COIN
  Britain will from next autumn mint and
  market a new bullion coin called the "Britannia" containing one
  ounce of 24 carat gold, together with bullion coins of smaller
  denominations, a Treasury official said.
      The new investment coin, to be sold worldwide, will
  fluctuate in price according to the international price of
  gold.
      The smaller coins will be in denominations of a half ounce,
  a quarter ounce and a tenth of an ounce. REUTER
  

MEESE SEES A PLUS IN CHRYSLER-AMC MERGER
  Attorney General Edwin Meese said he
  saw some benefit in the proposed purchase of American Motors Co
  &lt;AMO> By Chrysler Corp &lt;C> in that it would return the smallest
  of the U.S. auto manufacturers to American hands.
      Meese told the House Appropriations Subcommittee that
  consideration would be part of the Justice Department's review
  of the proposed merger. He said the agency has not yet received
  a formal notice of the merger which would start the review
  process.
     Chrysler has made a 1.3 billion dlr bid to buy AMC from its
  French parent Renault.
      "I think one of the things that has to be recognized in that
  merger is that it appears, at least, that a good portion of the
  ownership of American Motors, which has been in overseas hands
  will be put back in American hands," Meese told the
  subcommittee.
      "That may be one of the factors that would be weighed in the
  judgment," he added.
      Renault currently holds about 46 pct of AMC.
  

DUTCH PARLIAMENT OFFERS LITTLE HELP IN PORT ROW
  Dutch members of parliament said they
  could do little to help resolve the dispute over redundancies
  in Rotterdam port's general cargo sector and urged the union
  and employers to sort out their differences themselves.
      Both sides gave evidence to the all-party standing
  committee on Social Affairs today, but committee members said
  they saw little chance of parliamentary intervention.
      The dispute began on January 19 in protest at employers'
  plans for 800 redundancies from the 4,000-strong workforce,
  starting with 350 this year. The port and transport union, FNV,
  is to challenge the redundancies in an Amsterdam court
  tomorrow.
  

SOSNOFF SAYS CAESARS &lt;CAW> OFFERED STOCK BUYBACK
  Martin Sosnoff, who has offered to
  buy Caesars World Inc for 28 dlrs a share, said senior
  officials of the company have offered to buy back the Caesars
  stake he already holds, now 13.6 pct of the total outstanding.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Sosnoff, a New York investor and money manager, said the offers
  to buy back his stock occurred "on several occasions during the
  past year."
      The offers were made by several Caesars World
  representatives, including its chairman, Henry Gluck, he said. 
     Sosnoff said he rejected all of the proposals.
      The Caesars World official suggested various forms of
  payment for Sosnoff's stake, including other securities of the
  company and cash, he said. Sosnoff did not detail the value of
  the proposed compensation.
      Also suggested was a deal involving "put" and "call" option
  regarding Sosnoff's Caesars World holdings, he said.
      The proposed deals would have also included a "standstill"
  agreement, which would have restricted Sosnoff's right to buy
  more Caesars World stock or "to take any action adverse to
  incumbent management," he said.
      Sosnoff's report on the offers he received for his Caesars
  World shares were amended to his official offer to purchase the
  company, as well as reported to the SEC.
      Sosnoff now holds about 4.1 mln Caesars World shares, or
  13.6 pct of the company's 30 mln shares outstanding.
      The Sosnoff offer to buy the shares of the company he does
  not already hold has been valued at 725.2 mln dlrs.
  

ENERGY/FOREIGN INVESTORS
  Lured by the weakening dollar and the
  conviction that oil prices are poised for a rebound, European
  energy companies are buying up cheap U.S. oil and gas reserves
  to replenish their supplies, oil industry analysts said.
      They said owning oil reserves in a politically stable
  United States is good insurance against future shortages.
  However, the quick pace of foreign investment has heated up
  competition among European firms, well-heeled U.S.
  institutional investors and major oil companies to snare choice
  domestic oil properties.
      Strevig and Associates, a Houston firm that tracks oil and
  gas reserve sales, said growing interest among foreign buyers
  had helped push reserve prices in recent months higher. All
  buyers of U.S. reserves paid a median price of 6.45 dlrs a
  barrel of oil during the fourth quarter of 1986 for
  acquisitions, up from 5.33 dlrs in the third quarter and five
  dlrs in the second quarter, according to the firm's research.
      "Foreign investors have been here nibbling a long time, but
  we're seeing new names and smaller companies coming in," said
  Arthur Smith, an oil property appraisal specialist and
  president of John S. Herold Inc in Greenwich, Conn.
      "Europeans, especially, do not have much indigenous oil and
  gas and realize the tide will eventually turn in favor of the
  Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries," he added.
      Smith and other oil industry analyst and economists believe
  the trend in foreign investments will continue in 1987 because
  of the fall in value of the U.S. dollar, the perception that
  oil prices have hit bottom and the fact that it is cheaper to
  buy new reserves than to explore for them.
      Plenty of properties are available on the market, thanks to
  the need of many companies to raise cash for debt payments and
  general restructuring throughout the oilpatch.
      In two of the biggest transactions of recent months,
  French-owned Minatome Corp., a unit of &lt;Total Compagnie
  Francaise des Petroles>, spent more than 230 mln dlrs to
  separately acquire oil assets of Texas International &lt;TEICC>
  and Lear Petroleum Partners &lt;LPP>. A spokesman for Minatome
  said the company is searching for additional acquisitions.
      A partnership of two Belgian-owned firms, &lt;Petrofina S.A.>
  and &lt;Cometra Oil S.A.> paid 150 mln dlrs late last year to buy
  virtually all the exploration assets of the Williams Cos &lt;WMB>,
  the Oklahoma pipeline firm.
      But Japanese investors prefer entering into joint ventures
  with experienced U.S. companies to explore for new oil. Japan's
  &lt;Nippon Oil> is a partner of Texaco Inc's &lt;TX> Texaco USA in a
  100 mln dlrs U.S. drilling program, and has joined with
  Dupont's &lt;DD> Conoco Inc in a similar 135 dlrs mln deal.
      Most buyers said the pay-back period of a property, its
  geographic location and the lifting cost of the crude oil are
  more important factors in evaluating potential acquisitions
  than relying on a simple price-per-barrel formula.
      Rich Hodges, a Houston-based land manager representing
  International Oil and Gas Corp, a partnership of &lt;Preussag
  Corp> and &lt;C. Deilmann Inc> of West Germany, said the firm had
  earmarked at least 50 mln dlrs to spend on oil reserves in
  Texas, Oklahoma or Louisiana in the coming months.
      But he called that a small amount compared to the amount
  other investors have for acquisitions. PaineWebber's Geodyne
  Energy Income Fund, for example, has said it plans to spend up
  to 300 mln dlrs on oil and gas properties.
      "The competition is stiff, not only from other foreign
  investors but from the brokerage houses and U.S. oil
  companies," he said. "Our company is shopping around because we
  feel it's substantially less risky than pure exploration. If
  you're going to take the risk inherent in exploration, you need
  prices higher than the current market," he added.
      In addition to the foreign investors and U.S. brokerage
  houses, analysts said many of the major oil companies were also
  competing for prime properties.
      Houston-based Shell Oil Co, a unit of Royal Dutch/Shell Group
  &lt;RD>, has been one of the most active companies in buying and
  selling reserves, Smith said. Since 1982, Shell has acquired
  two billion dlrs in new reserves, including 470 mln barrels of
  oil equivalent at a net cost of 2.80 dlrs a barrel, he said.
      "Buying reserves is a good strategy for most of these
  companies," Smith said. "Domestic production has dropped by one
  mln barrels a day because of cutbacks in drilling and it may
  drop by another one mln barrels a day in 1988."
  

&lt;CINRAM LTD> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 45 cts vs 58 cts
      Net 1.1 mln vs 829,000
      Sales 7.9 mln vs 9.4 mln
      Avg shrs 2,332,397 vs 1,428,000
      Year
      Shr 1.22 dlrs vs 1.06 dlrs
      Net 2.9 mln vs 1.5 mln
      Sales 25.7 mln vs 22.2 mln
      Avg shrs 2,332,397 vs 1,428,000
  

AUSTRIAN 1987 GROWTH SEEN BETWEEN 0.5 AND 1.5 PCT
  A meeting of leading politicians,
  bankers and economists has forecast Austrian real gross
  domestic product growth for this year at between 0.5 and 1.5
  pct, a government spokesman said.
      This compared with a two pct growth forecast made by the
  semi-official Institute for Economic Research (WIFO) last
  December.
      Helmut Kramer, spokesman for Chancellor Franz Vranitzky,
  told Reuters that the forecast had been made during the meeting
  attended by Vranitzky, Finance Minister Ferdinand Lacina,
  National Bank President Stefan Koren and a WIFO representative.
      Economists have been cutting growth forecasts recently
  mainly due to expectations of a poor export performance this
  year, notably to Eastern Europe and oil exporting states.
      Hannes Androsch, general director of
  Creditanstalt-Bankverein &lt;CABV.VI>, today put 1987 GDP growth
  at between one and 1.5 pct.
      Kramer also said the meeting had heard that unemployment
  for the year would be above the 5.5 pct forecast, but was
  unlikely to be more than six pct.
  

&lt;FOR BETTER LIVING INC> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr profit primary 91 cts vs loss 86 cts
      Shr profit diluted 90 cts vs loss 86 cts
      Net profit 787,000 vs loss 751,000
      Sales 20 mln vs 12.5 mln
      Year
      Shr profit profit 2.63 dlrs vs profit five cts
      Shr profit diluted 2.59 dlrs vs profit five cts
      Net profit 2,273,000 vs profit 43,000
      Sales 70.1 mln vs 47.1 mln
      Note: Prior qtr and year figures include gains on disposal
  of discontinued operations of 76,000 dlrs and 79,000 dlrs,
  respectively.
  

NEWPORT ELECTRONICS INC &lt;NEWE> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr loss nine cts vs loss four cts
      Oper net loss 108,000 vs loss 55,000
      Sales 3,029,000 vs 2,694,000
      Year
      Oper shr profit 42 cts vs profit 15 cts
      Oper net profit 511,000 vs profit 177,000
      Sales 13.3 mln vs 11.2 mln
      Avg shrs 1,233,136 vs 1,217,981
      Note: Current qtr and year figures exclude operating loss
  carryforward gain of 26,000 dlrs vs gain of 88,000 dlrs in
  prior year periods.
  

TRANSCO EXPLORATION PARTNERS LTD &lt;EXP> IN PAYOUT
  Qtly div 44 cts vs 44 cts prior
      Pay June One
      Record May Eight
  

TRANSCO ENERGY CO &lt;E> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 68 cts vs 68 cts prior
      Pay June One
      Record May Eight
  

BROWN BOVERI OMITS DIVIDEND, PLANS WARRANT BOND
  BBC AG Brown Boveri und Cie
  &lt;BBCZ.Z> said it will omit dividend in 1986 for the second
  consecutive year.
      It said it planned to invite shareholders and non-voting
  stockholders to subscribe to a warrant bond issue of around 150
  mln Swiss francs to be made after the June 2 annual meeting.
      The value of the stock subscription rights should
  correspond roughly to the dividend of 30 francs per share paid
  in 1984. The company also plans to issue participation
  certificates with a par value of 70 mln Swiss francs, from
  which existing shareholders are excluded.
  

TOTAL ERICKSON RESOURCES LTD &lt;TLEXF> YEAR NET
  Shr profit nine cts vs loss 45 cts
      Net profit 2,500,000 vs loss 9,900,000
      Revs 16,800,000 vs 3,300,000
      Note: 1986 net includes 2.6 mln dlr or nine ct a shr
  writedown of nine pct stake in &lt;Trans-Canada Resources Ltd>.
      1985 results reflect only six mths of mining operations due
  to merger of Erickson Gold Mines Ltd and Total Eastcan
  Exploration Ltd on June 30, 1985.
  

VERSAR &lt;VSR> TO BUY MARIETTA &lt;ML> UNIT
  Versar Inc said it has agreed
  in principle to acquire Martin Marietta Corp's Martin Marietta
  Environmental Systems unit for about 5,300,000 dlrs.
      Versar said it would use its working capital and an
  established life of credit to find the purchase, which is
  subject to approval by both boards and is expected to be
  completed in April.
      Marietta Environmental had 1986 revenues of about nine mln
  dlrs.
      Versar said the acquisition should have a "moderately"
  favorable effect on its earnings this year.
  

U.K. BANKS OFFER FIXED-RATE MORTGAGES AT 10.2 PCT
  Two major U.K. Clearing banks announced
  they will offer a total of 800 mln stg in new mortgages at a
  fixed interest rate of 10.2 pct for the first three years,
  below current bank base lending rates of 10.5 pct.
      Midland Bank Plc &lt;MDBL.L> said it has initially allocated
  500 mln stg for home loans at this rate, while Lloyds Bank Plc
  &lt;LLOY.L> will offer 300 mln stg.
      Earlier this week, Midland said it would cut its standard
  rate of mortgage payment to 11.5 pct from April 1, following a
  half a percentage point reduction in leading banks' base
  lending rates from 11 pct.
      Building society and other bank mortgage rates are largely
  still well above the new base rate level, although last year
  Lloyds offered a fixed rate of 9.9 pct on certain home loans.
      A Midland spokesman said his bank calculated that at the
  current level of 2.7 billion stg, its existing mortgage book
  accounts for about 5 pct of the total British home loan market.
      Lloyds said it has 3.6 billion stg in outstanding mortgage
  loans, but had not estimated its total market share.
      Among other major clearing banks, Barclays Plc &lt;BCS.L> and
  National Westminister Bank Plc &lt;NWBL.L> said they had no
  immediate plans to announce similar fixed rate schemes.
  

JIM WALTER &lt;JWC> BUSY OWENS-CORNING &lt;OCF> PLANT
  Jim Walter Corp said it completed
  the acquisition of Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp's mineral
  ceiling and fiberboard plant in Meridian, Miss.
      Terms were not disclosed
      The plant's operations will complement existing ceiling
  materials production within jim Walter's building material's
  group, which last year generated income of 54.9 mln dlrs on
  sales of 740 mln dlrs.
  

VIACOM SAID IT HAS NEW NATIONAL AMUSEMENTS, MCV HOLDINGS BIDS

  VIACOM SAID IT HAS NEW NATIONAL AMUSEMENTS, MCV HOLDINGS BIDS
  

AMERICAN PRESIDENT &lt;APS> TO LEASE MORE SHIPS
  American President Cos Ltd said
  its American President Lines shipping subsidiary  obtained
  final approval from U.S. and Japanese authorities to lease four
  new ships from Lykes Bros Co.
      The move will will enable it to boost service in the
  Pacific by 15 pct in 1987, American President said.
      The company said it will lease the ships for three years
  and hold two additional three-year options.
      It said American President Lines is currently operating at
  capacity in the Pacific and the new ships will arrive in time
  for the normal demand surge of the spring and summer seasons.
  

BOWNE AND CO INC &lt;BNE> SETS STOCK SPLIT
  Bowne and Co Inc said its board
  declared a two-for-one stock split, payable May 10 to holders
  of record April 17.
  

INVESTMENT FIRM BOOSTS AMERFORD &lt;AMRF> STAKE
  Louart Corp, a Los Angeles
  investment firm, said it raised its stake in Amerford
  International Corp to 105,615 shares, or 7.8 pct of the total
  outstanding, from 69,715 shares, or 5.2 pct.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Louart said it bought 35,900 Amerford common shares between
  March 19, 1986 and Jan 30, 1987 at prices ranging from 3.92 to
  4.29 dlrs a share.
      It said it bought the shares for investment purposes and
  might increase its stake in the future.
  

CORRECTED - AUSTRIA 1987 GROWTH FORECAST REVISED
  Austrian gross domestic product growth
  for this year is likely to be between 0.5 and 1.5 pct, Helmut
  Kramer, head of the semi-official Institute for Economic
  Research (WIFO) said.
      This compared with a two pct growth forecast made by the
  WIFO last December.
      Kramer made the forecast at a meeting today on Austria's
  economic outlook also attended by Chancellor Franz Vranitzky,
  Finance Minister Ferdinand Lacina and National Bank President
  Stefan Koren.
  

FIRST BOSTON &lt;FBC> SWISS AFFILIATE BOOSTS STAKE
  First
  Boston, the Swiss affiliate of First Boston Inc, said it raised
  its stake in the company to 11,262,307 shares, or 35.5 pct of
  the total, from 10,262,307 shares, or 32.8 pct.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Financiere Credit Suisse said it bought 870,100 First Boston
  common shares between Feb 10 and 27 at prices ranging from
  48.125 to 53.000 dlrs a share, or 22.5 mln dlrs total.
      It said it bought the shares as part of an agreement to
  raise its minority stake in First Boston to 40 pct, the same
  stake level First Boston holds in Financiere Credit Suisse.
  

NUMAC OIL AND GAS LTD &lt;NMC> YEAR NET
  Oper shr 23 cts vs 77 cts
      Oper net 5,255,179 vs 17.6 mln
      Revs 37.8 mln vs 73.7 mln
      NOTE: Cash flow 19.5 mln dlrs or 86 cts shr vs 36.7 mln
  dlrs or 1.62 dlrs shr.
      1985 net excludes 32 ct shr loss from discontinued
  operations.
      Gross proven and probable reserves of crude oil and natural
  gas liquiids 18.4 mln barrels, off 7.6 pct from a year before.
  

FARAH &lt;FRA> AGAIN OMITS QUARTERLY DIVIDEND
  Farah Inc said it omitted its
  quarterly common stock dividend for the second consecutive
  quarter.
      The company, which last paid a quarterly common dividend of
  22 cts a share in December, said it will consider future
  dividend payments on the basis of improved profitability and
  cash flow.
      Farah said it expects to turn a profit for the balance of
  1987. For its first quarter ended January 31, Farah lost
  1,891,000 dlrs, or 32 cts a share, on sales of 71 mln dlrs.
      In addition, Farah said it received shareholder approval to
  change its name to Farah Inc from Farah Manufacturing Co.
  

JORDAN-PETROCANADA AGREE OIL EXPLORATION PROJECT
  A two-year project to search for oil and
  gas in Jordan was agreed in Amman by Jordan's Natural Resources
  Authority (NRA) and the Canadian company, Petrocanada
  International Assistance Corporation (PCIAC).
      The 19.1 mln dlr assistance agreement was signed by
  Jordan's Minister of Energy Hisham al-Khatib and PCIAC chairman
  Peter M. Towe.
      PCIAC is a Canadian government corporation providing
  assistance to countries like Jordan to reduce their dependence
  on oil imports, Towe said.
  

NUMAC OIL &lt;NMC> SEES RESULTS IMPROVING
  Numac Oil and Gas Ltd said it expects
  significant improvement in operating performance during 1987.
      The company today reported 1986 earnings from continuing
  operations of 5,255,179 dlrs, down from 17.6 mln dlrs a yuear
  earlier, due to lower prices for crude oil and pipeline
  capacity constraints.
      Numac said changes introduced by federal and provincial
  governments during 1986 should help results.
  

DOLE SAYS 0/92 OPTION SHOULD BE CONSIDERED
  U.S. Senate Republican leader Robert
  Dole said Congress should consider legislation to apply the
  so-called 0/92 option to producers of major commodities.
      Dole told the National Corn Growers Association that he
  thought the proposal, supported by the Reagan administration,
  "should be seriously considered" because a refusal to do so could
  "play into the hands of those who want mandatory controls" placed
  on production.
      However, Dole did not say whether he would support the 0/92
  option, which would offer producers at least 92 pct of their
  income support payments regardless of how much they planted.
      The Senate Republican leader said the 0/92 option posed two
  problems. First, it is viewed, he said, by some as welfare. In
  addition, debate on the proposal could open up the whole farm
  bill, Dole said.
      Dole also repeated his call for an across-the-board export
  enhancement program, saying a subsidy offer to the Soviet Union
  could help improve U.S. relations with that country.
      Dole said that the United States has made the decision to
  trade with Moscow and that it's important to offer competitive
  prices.
      The senator predicted Congress would have to decide this
  year whether to require an expansion of the export subsidy
  program, which currently targets benefits to recapture markets
  lost to other suppliers which subsidize.
      Dole, who last year pledged to offer legislation to require
  a marketing loan for major crops but never did so, again called
  for the marketing loan for wheat and feedgrains.
      The Reagan administration's proposed farm policy changes
  "are not going anywhere" this year, Dole said, singling out the
  proposal to cut target prices 10 pct per year.
      Asked by reporters after his speech whether he sensed a
  shift in the State Department towards supporting an export
  enhancement initiative for the Soviet Union, Dole said he
  didn't see any change.
      Dole also said it would be a very close call in the Senate
  whether to open up the farm bill to general debate this year.
      Dole said he was encouraged by the selection of Republican
  David Karnes to replace the late Sen. Edward Zorinsky (D-Neb.)
  

H.J. HEINZ CO 3RD QTR SHR 55 CTS VS 46 CTS

  H.J. HEINZ CO 3RD QTR SHR 55 CTS VS 46 CTS
  

H.J. HEINZ RAISES QUARTERLY TO 28 CTS FROM 25 CTS

  H.J. HEINZ RAISES QUARTERLY TO 28 CTS FROM 25 CTS
  

&lt;RANCHMEN'S RESOURCES LTD> YEAR LOSS
  Shr loss seven cts vs loss 3.83 dlrs
      Net profit 1,700,000 vs loss 13,900,000
      Revs 18.7 mln vs 25.6 mln
      Note: Current shr after preferred dividends of 2.0 mln dlrs
      Prior shr and net includes 34.5 mln dlr writedown on oil
  properties
  

DOLE MULLS BILL TO EXTEND ETHANOL TAX EXEMPTION
  U.S. Senate Republican leader Robert
  Dole (R-Kan.) said he and a group of Republican lawmakers are
  considering introducing legislation to extend the ethanol tax
  exemption through the year 2000.
      Dole, addressing the National Corn Growers Association
  board, said the proposal was under consideration by a rural
  task force of Republican members of Congress and governors.
      Gasoline containing at least 10 pct ethanol now receives a
  six cents per gallon exemption from a nine cent federal excise
  tax. The exemption is to expire the end of 1992.
      Ethanol is produced primarily by a few large agribusiness
  firms including Archer Daniels Midland (ADM) and A.E. Staley.
  The tax exemption has helped bolster ethanol production despite
  a sharp drop in the prices of competing crude oil.
  

OAK INDUSTRIES &lt;OAK> TO BUY REXNORD &lt;REX> UNIT
  Oak Industries said it signed
  a definitive agreement to buy the stock of Rexnord Inc's
  Railway Maintenance Equipment Co unit, for an undisclosed sum.
      The company said Railway Maintenance had 1986 revenues of
  16 mln dlrs.
      Oak said the acquisition is part of its two-tier strategy
  of buying releated and unrelated businesses.
      Oak had a tax loss carryforward of 125 mln dlrs at the end
  of 1986.
  

SUMITOMO BANK &lt;SUMI> DECLARES STOCK DIVIDEND
  Sumitomo Bank of California said
  it declared a 7-1/2 pct stock dividend in addition to its
  regular quarterly cash dividend of 29 cts per share.
      Both dividends are payable April 27 to shareholders of
  record March 31, the company said.
  

LSB BANCSHARES INC &lt;LXBK> RAISES PAYOUT
  Qtly div 18 cts vs 17 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record April One
  

H.J. HEINZ CO &lt;HNZ> 3RD QTR JAN 28 NET
  Shr 53 cts vs 46 cts
      Qtly div 28 cts vs 25 cts prior
      Net 74.7 mln vs 63.2 mln
      Revs 1.08 billion vs 1.01 billion
      Nine mths
      Shr 1.78 dlrs vs 1.60 dlrs
      Net 244.4 mln vs 219.7 mln
      Revs 3.33 billion vs 3.15 billion
      Note: Dividend payable April 10 to shareholders of record
  March 23.
  

PERU GUERRILLAS INTERRUPT TRAIN ROUTE TO MINES
  Maoist guerrillas using dynamite derailed
  two locomotives and four train wagons, interrupting traffic on
  Peru's sole railway line linking the capital to the central
  Andes, where most of the country's mining centres are located,
  authorities said.
      Damages was estimated at 800,000 dlrs in the dynamite blast
  yesterday at Chacapalca, where the explosion wrecked the train
  laden with minerals and 45 metres of the railway line.
      Crews hoped to restore traffic to the line later today
  after clearing the damaged train and repairing the tracks at
  Chacapalca, 225 km east of the Capital, Lima.
      An official at Mineroperu comercial (Minpeco), Peru's state
  minerals marketing firm, said the agency was assessing the
  situation. There had not been a declaration of force majeure on
  contracts to ship minerals abroad.
      Foreign sales of silver, copper, zinc and other minerals
  earn Peru over half of its export income. Most of the minerals,
  extracted and refined in the central peruvian andes, are
  shipped down the central railway to the lima port of callao.
  

WALL STREET STOCKS/TENNECO INC &lt;TGT>
  Tenneco Inc, a company that has long
  been rumored to be a takeover candidate, rose sharply today
  when speculation surfaced that investor T. Boone Pickens may be
  targeting the company for an acquisition, traders and analysts
  said.
      Tenneco spokesman Joseph Macrum said "we have no comment to
  make whatsoever." Pickens was not available for comment.
      Traders noted that activity in the stock increased today
  after a published report linked Pickens to Tenneco.
      Tenneco rose two points to 48-3/4.
      Paul Feretti, an analyst with New Orleans-based Howard,
  Weil, Labouisse, Friedrichs, Inc, said he was not surprised at
  market rumors that Tenneco might be the target of a takeover
  attempt.
      "It's pure market speculation that Boone Pickens and his
  group may be interested," Feretti said.
      "But Tenneco would be a challenge to run because of its
  sheer size and diversity. Mr. Pickens is a man who likes a
  challenge."
      Pickens, who made an unsuccessful attempt to take over
  Dallas-based Diamond Shamrock Corp &lt;DIA> last winter, has made
  no secret of his plans to acquire additional natural gas
  reserves in the belief that gas prices will stabilize sooner
  than oil prices. Tenneco holds natural gas reserves estimated
  in excess of 3.5 trillion cubic feet, analysts said.
      Feretti conservatively estimated Tenneco's breakup value at
  58 dlrs a share and said the company generated a cash flow of
  about 10 dlrs a share "which is probably very attractive to
  Pickens." Other analysts, however, estimate a breakup value
  well into the 60 dlr a share range.
      "I strongly doubt that there is going to be any hostile
  takeover," Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc's Houston-based analyst
  John Olson said, putting little credence in the rumors.
      "Tenneco is a gargantuan enterprise with seven billion dlrs
  in long-term debt and preferred stock outstanding." He said the
  buyer would also have to deal with "the intractable problems"
  Tenneco faces with its farm equipment unit and energy
  businesses.
      Analysts suggested that Tenneco could use a number of
  defensive strategies to fend off an unwanted buyer, such as
  spin off some of its non-energy businesses directly to
  shareholders, buy back shares or create a limited partnership
  out of its natural gas pipeline interests.
      An analyst who asked to remain unidentified, discouraged
  the Pickens rumor. "Pickens has a plateful already with his
  holdings in Burlington Northern and Amerada Hess," he said. "I
  don't think he would be willing to take on Tenneco's problems
  with Case (the farm equipment unit), which has been losing
  about 180 mln dlrs annually and is worth less than a billion
  dlrs on the market today."
  

SOFTWARE AG &lt;SAGA> SEES WEAK RESULTS
  Software AG Systems Inc said it
  expects to report earnings for its third quarter "substantially
  weaker" than earnings of prior periods due to an unexpected
  shortfall in U.S. domestic license revenues.
      For the second quarter ended November 30, Software AG
  earned 2,089,000 dlrs, down from 5,014,000 dlrs a year before.
  In last year's third quarter, Software AG earned 1,598,000
  dlrs.
  

MILES LABORATORIES INC 4TH QTR NET
  Net 3,563,000 vs 2,821,000
      Sales 318.6 mln vs 305.4 mln
      Year
      Net 28,950,000 vs 20,167,000
      Sales 1.22 billion vs 1.17 billion
      Note: Company is a subsidiary of Bayer AG of West Germany.
  1986 figures exclude Miles' Bayvet animal health business, sold
  Jan. 1, 1986, to Mobay Corp, another Bayer AG affiliate.
  

PLACER &lt;PLC> TO INCREASE STAKE IN EQUITY SILVER
  &lt;Equity Silver
  Mines Ltd> said it agreed to sell 6.6 mln shares of a new class
  of par value voting stock to Placer Development Ltd for 37.1
  mln dlrs, increasing Placer's stake in Equity to 74.5 pct from
  68 pct.
      The transaction is subject to regulatory approval and a
  vote by Equity minority shareholders at the April 23 annual
  meeting, the company said.
      Proceeds from sale of the shares, priced at 5.625 dlrs
  each, will be used to buy and deliver 4,985,000 ounces of
  silver to Placer, Equity said.
      Equity Silver said the silver remains to be delivered under
  its sale agreement with Placer, after delivery of its 750,000
  ounce minimum commitment for 1987.
      Equity said it arranged to acquire 4,985,000 ounces of
  silver at 7.40 dlrs an ounces, subject to selling the shares to
  Placer.
      Purchase and delivery of the silver to Placer will result
  in an after-tax gain of about 6.6 mln dlrs, Equity said.
      It also said the stock and silver transactions will create
  a 37,059,000 dlr fund out of which dividends will be paid when
  cash is available.
      The cash fund will enable Equity Silver to continue to pay
  dividends on its preferred shares and increase the likelihood
  that it may be able to pay dividends on its common shares, the
  company said.
      It did not elaborate on what common share dividends might
  be paid.
      The company normally pays quarterly preferred dividends
  totalling 619,000 dlrs from retained earnings, Equity Silver
  said.
      Equity Silver had retained earnings of 2,312,000 dlrs at
  December 31, 1986.
  

BRAZIL'S SARNEY MEETS STRIKES WITH SHOW OF FORCE
  With troops in place in Brazil's
  ports and oil installations, the government of Prersident Jose
  Sarney today sought to end a wave of labour unrest by a show of
  force.
      Yesterday the government sent thousands of troops supported
  in some instances by tanks to occupy nine oil refineries and
  six areas of oil production.
      The state-oil company Petrobras requested the intervention
  because of a threatened strike by 55,000 oil industry
  employees.
      The government had already dispatched more than 1,000
  marines to occupy the country's main ports after a national
  seamen's strike was ruled illegal last Friday.
      The strike by 40,000 seamen, now in its 13th day,
  represents a stern challenge to the government.
      The stoppage has delayed exports at a time when Brazil
  desperately needs foreign exchange.
      It was a deterioration in the country's trade balance which
  precipitated Brazil's current debt crisis and the decision on
  February 20 to suspend interest payments on 68 billion dlrs of
  commercial debt.
      There was no sign today of an early end to the seamen's
  strike, which has badly hit the port of Santos -- the most
  important in South America -- and the country's other main
  ports.
      Small groups of marines armed with submachineguns stand on
  the quays near the strike-bound ships, but the military
  presence here is generally discreet.
      A total of 800 marines are inside the docks but most are
  out of sight.
      Yesterday marines and police occupied one ship, the
  Docemarte, seamen's leaders said. After explaining to the
  captain that the strikers faced up to one year in jail because
  the strike was illegal, the men returned to work.
      One of the strike leaders, Elmano Barbosa, said "it is a
  psychological war. They are using force and we are using
  peaceful methods."
      Port sources said only two Brazilian ships in Santos, the
  Docemarte and the Henrique Leal, were working.
      At the seamen's national strike headquarters in Rio de
  Janeiro, spokesmen say a total of about 190 ships are
  strike-bound in Brazil and in foreign ports.
      Contradicting earlier reports from strike headquarters in
  Rio de Janeiro, seamen in Santos said the strikers on board
  ships here were not running out of food.
      The current labour unrest is the worst faced by Sarney's
  civilian government since it came to power two years ago.
      Yesterday, in a separate protest, hundreds of thousands of
  farmers held rallies directed largely against high bank
  interest rates.
      The current rash of labour unrest in industry and
  agriculture stems from the failure of the government's
  now-collapsed Cruzado Plan price freeze.
  

LAROCHE STARTS BID FOR NECO &lt;NPT> SHARES
  Investor David F. La Roche of North
  Kingstown, R.I., said he is offering to purchase 170,000 common
  shares of NECO Enterprises Inc at 26 dlrs each.
      He said the successful completion of the offer, plus shares
  he already owns, would give him 50.5 pct of NECO's 962,016
  common shares.
      La Roche said he may buy more, and possible all NECO
  shares. He said the offer and withdrawal rights will expire at
  1630 EST/2130 gmt, March 30, 1987.
  

INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS MLP &lt;INP> 3RD QTR DEC 31 NET
  Shr profit 20 cts vs profit five cts
      Net profit 2,273,000 vs profit 563,000
      Rev 38.7 mln vs 30.3 mln
      Avg shares 11,138,503 vs 10,982,699
      Nine months
      Shr profit 40 cts vs loss 10 cts
      Net profit 4,448,000 vs loss 1,123,000
      Rev 108.4 mln vs 75.2 mln
      NOTE: Third qtr net includes gain from discontinued
  operations of 3.5 mln dlrs, or 31 cts a share, vs 271,000, or
  two cts a share, in fiscal 1985's third qtr. Nine months net
  includes gain from discontinued operations of 3.8 mln dlrs, or
  34 cts a share, vs 731,000 dlrs, or seven cts a share, in the
  first nine months of fiscal 1985.
  
  
  

SHADOWFAX RESOURCES LTD &lt;SHFXF> YEAR LOSS
  Shr loss three cts vs profit 14 cts
      Net loss 79,778 vs profit 458,176
      Revs 1,063,623 vs 1,165,186
      Note: 1986 year includes 400,000 dlr writedown on Utah oil
  and gas properties
  

PARALAX &lt;VIDO> AGREES TO ACQUIRE AMERICAN VIDEO
  Paralax Video Enterprises Inc said it
  has agreeed to acquire &lt;American Video Group Inc> in exchange
  for 287,700 Paralax restricted common shares and three year
  warrants to buy 318,600 restricted shares at six dlrs a share.
      Paralax said holders of some American Video convertible
  debentures have elected to exchange them for Paralax restricted
  common with a market value of about 380,000 dlrs with that
  value to be determined in about 45 days.
      American Video is a closely held company operating video
  rental concessions in post and base exchanges at 54 Army, Air
  Force, Navy and Coast Guard installations. In its most recent
  year, the company had revenues of about 1.5 mln dlrs.
      Paralax said the acquisition is scheduled to close March
  16. The company now has about 5.5 mln shares outstanding.
  

KURZWEIL MUSIC SYSTEMS INC &lt;KURM> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Shr loss 21 cts vs loss 29 cts
      Net loss 1,246,000 vs loss 1,420,000
      Revs 2,120,000 vs 1,186,000
      Avg shrs 5,853,587 vs 4,880,427
      Year
      Shr loss 85 cts vs loss 1.21 dlrs
      Net loss 4,968,000 vs loss 5,274,000
      Revs 6,536,000 vs 5,056,000
      Avg shrs 5,854,543 vs 4,367,864
  

J.P. MORGAN AND CO INC &lt;JPM> SETS QUARTERLY
  Dividend 34 cts vs 34 cts previously
      Pay April 15
      Record March 23
  

BAYLY &lt;BAYL> BUYS MAJORITY OF CHUTES
  Bayly Corp said it acquired 55 pct
  of Chutes Corp, a maker of denim-oriented sportswear
  headquartered in Seattle, Wash.
      Terms were not disclosed.
  

&lt;SDC SYDNEY DEVELOPMENT CORP> NINE MTHS LOSS
  Period ended December 31, 1986
      Oper shr loss 1.08 dlrs vs loss 84 cts
      Oper loss 7,700,000 vs loss 1,700,000
      Revs 11,800,000 vs 9,800,000
      Note: Current shr and net exclude extraordinary gain of
  300,000 dlrs or five cts shr, versus extraordinary gain of
  200,000 dlrs or four cts shr
  

CFTC APPROVES MGE CORN SYRUP FUTURES CONTRACT
  The Commodity Futures Trading
  Commission has approved the Minneapolis Grain Exchange's
  application to trade high fructose corn syrup-55, HFCS-55,
  futures contracts, the commission said.
      The contract provides for the delivery of 48,000 lbs, plus
  or minus two pct, of bulk HFCS-55 meeting specified standards
  regarding its physical and chemical properties.
      CFTC said the exchange plans to begin trading a July 1987
  HFCS-55 contract on April 6.
      CFTC said the soft drink industry currently buys at least
  95 pct of all U.S.-produced HFCS-55, a liquid food and beverage
  sweetener produced through the processing of corn starch by
  corn refiners.
  

INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS MLP &lt;INP> MAKES CASH PAYOUT
  Intelligent Systems Master
  Limited Partnership said it will make a cash distribution of 25
  cts a unit in early April to unitholders of record as of March
  31.
      The company said continued strength in its results prompted
  the move.
      Intelligent Systems added that if current plans to sell
  some of its assets, as previously announced, are successful, it
  may make further distributions estimated at 15 cts to 25 cts a
  unit.
      Earlier, the company reported fiscal third quarter ended
  December 31 net income of 2.3 mln dlrs, or 20 cts a share, up
  from fiscal 1985 third quarter results of 563,000 dlrs, or five
  cts a share.
      In addition, it reported fiscal 1986 nine months' net
  income of 4.4 mln dlrs, or 40 cts a share, versus a loss of 1.1
  mln dlrs, or 10 cts a share, in fiscal 1985's first three
  quarters.
  

KURZWEIL &lt;KURM> HAS REDUCED WORK FORCE
  Kurzweil Music Systems Inc said
  it has taken steps this year to reduce costs, including a 10 to
  15 pct reduction in its work force.
      A spokesman said the company now has about 70 employees.
      It said other reductions include the use of professional
  services, administrative costs, manufacturing overhead and
  non-essential development services, adding these cuts are
  expected to have a significant impact beginning in the second
  quarter.
      Earlier today Kurzweil reported a 1986 loss of 85 cts a
  share compared to a 1985 loss of 1.21 dlrs a share.
  

AIDE SAYS FRANCE SUPPORTS OIL AND FATS TAX
  France supports the European Commission's
  plans for a European Community (EC) fats and oils tax but
  objects to some of its oilseeds proposals, Yves Van Haecke, an
  aide to French agriculture minister Francois Guillaume said.
      He told a general assembly of France's Oilseeds Federation
  (FFCOP) that a suppression of monthly increases of oilseed
  support prices, for example, was unacceptable.
      French oilseeds experts added the principle of a single tax
  regardless of varying quality was clumsy and capable of
  unneccessarily alienating exporters such as the U.S.
  

SENIOR ENGINEERING MAKES 12.5 MLN DLR US PURCHASE
  &lt;Senior Engineering Group Plc> said it
  reached agreement with &lt;Cronus Industries Inc> to acquire the
  whole share capital of &lt;South Western Engineering Co> for 12.5
  mln dlrs cash. This sum is being financed by a term loan.
      South Western is one of the U.S.'s leading manufacturers of
  heat transfer equipment, with a turnover of 54.86 mln dlrs and
  pre-tax profits of 1.72 mln in 1986.
      Completion of the deal is conditional on approval under
  U.S. Hart-Scott-Rodino regulations which is expected within 30
  days. Some 350,000 dlrs is payable immediately, 12 mln dlrs
  payable on completion with the balance due by June 30, 1987.
  

HEINZ &lt;HNZ> HAS HIGHER NET DESPITE HIGHER COSTS
  H.J. Heinz Co said net income for
  the third quarter rose 18.2 pct despite an 17.2 pct increase in
  marketing expenses.
      Meanwhile, the company said it raised its quarterly
  dividend to 28 cts a share from 25 cts a share in part on the
  expectation that its tax rate under the new tax law will result
  in greater cash flow.
      For the third quarter ended January 31, Heinz earned 74.7
  mln dlrs, or 55 cts a share, up from earnings of 63.2 mln dlrs,
  or 46 cts a share, for the year-ago quarter.
      For the nine months, the company posted a profit of 244.4
  mln dlrs, or 1.78 dlrs a share, compared with a profit of 219.7
  mln dlrs, or 1.60 dlrs a share, for the year-ago period.
      "Based on the company's performance for the first nine
  months, we expect to achieve our 23rd consecutive year of new
  growth records," Anthony J.F. O'Reilly, Heinz's newly elected
  chairman.
  

BRAZILIAN FCOJ OFFICIAL WELCOMES U.S. DUTY CUT
  Mario Branco Peres, president of
  the Brazilian Association of Citrus Juice Industries
  (Abrassuco), welcomed a decision by the U.S. Commerce
  Department sharply cutting its duties on imported frozen
  concentrated orange juice (FCOJ) from Brazil.
      Speaking by telephone from Sao Paulo, Peres said, "With its
  decision, the U.S. government recognised the honesty of
  Brazilian exporters, who never have the intention of practising
  dumping."
      In a final ruling yesterday, the U.S. government eliminated
  the duties shipped by Sucocitrico Cutrale and cut to 1.96 pct
  the duty on Citrosuco. Duties of 8.54 pct had been set last
  October.
      Peres said Brazil had enough orange juice to meet the needs
  of its major clients.
      "We do not have in stock what we would like to have, but we
  certainly have enough orange juice available to supply our
  buyers," Peres said, declining to estimate the amount of the
  current stock. "To keep it a secret is part of our strategy," he
  added.
      Peres said the price policy of the orange juice was based
  on market conditions.
      "There is nothing better than a free trade policy," he said.
      Cutrale and Citrosuco officials were not immediately
  available for comment.
  

WALL STREET STOCKS/ICH CORP &lt;ICH>
  ICH Corp's stock
  continued under pressure because of lower earnings
  expectations, Wall Street analysts said.
      The stock was down one today at 17-1/4, and down about four
  since Thursday, when ICH announced it would be reporting
  lower-than-expected fourth quarter net income.
      The company said it would report full year 1986 net income
  of 2.00 dlrs per share compared to 2.32 dlrs per share in 1985.
  Analysts said they had estimated 1987 net at 3.00-4.00 dlrs and
  were now looking for at 2.50 dlr to 2.80 dlr range.
      ICH officials were unavailable for comment.
  

INVACARE CORP &lt;IVCR> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr profit 26 cts vs profit 19 cts
      Net profit 1,458,000 dlrs vs profit 1,070,000 dlrs
      Rev 30.9 mln dlrs vs 27.5 mln dlrs
      12 mths
      Shr profit 60 cts vs loss 19 cts
      Net profit 3,367,000 dlrs vs loss 1,061,000 dlrs
      Revs 111.5 mln dlrs vs 94.3 mln dlrs
  

&lt;RENAISSANCE ENERGY LTD> YEAR NET
  Shr 47 cts vs 31 cts
      Net 4,757,000 vs 2,466,000
      Revs 32.8 mln vs 33.5 mln
      Avg shrs 12,638,000 vs 8,941,000
  

USDA ACCEPTS OFFERS FOR 550,000 TONNES  OF BONUS WHEAT FOR CHINA

  USDA ACCEPTS OFFERS FOR 550,000 TONNES  OF BONUS WHEAT FOR CHINA
  

QUEBEC FEBRUARY HOUSING STARTS FALL
  Quebec housing starts fell in February
  to 2,191, a four pct drop from last year when growth in Quebec
  housing starts was among the highest in the Canada, the Canada
  Mortgage and Housing Corp said.
      The February rate seasonally adjusted now stands at 40,000,
  down from 79,000 in January, the government agency said.
  

INVACARE &lt;IVCR> EXPECTS HIGHER 1987 SALES
  Invacare Corp chairman, president
  and chief executive officer A. Malachi Mixon III said he
  expects the home healthcare equipment company to post sales
  increases in the 10 to 15 pct range in 1987.
      Mixon said the increases should come from internal growth
  as well as potential acquisitions.
      "Invacare is aggressively seeking acquisitions to
  complement the company's existing product lines," Mixon said.
      Earlier, the company reported fourth quarter 1986 net of
  1.5 mln dlrs, or 26 cts a share, up from 1.1 mln dlrs, or 19
  cts a share, in 1985's fourth quarter.
      Invacare also reported 1986 net income of 3.4 mln dlrs, or
  60 cts a share, up from a loss of 1.1 mln dlrs, or 19 cts a
  share, in 1985.
  

CHEUNG KONG CHAIRMAN SEES STRONG RESULTS IN 1987
  Cheung Kong (Holdings) Ltd &lt;CKGH.HK>
  is expecting strong results this year after reporting better
  than expected profits in 1986, chairman Li Ka-shing said.
      He did not give a specific earnings projection but he told
  reporters the firm will pay total dividends of not less than 19
  cents a share this year after a one-for-four bonus issue and a
  four-for-one stock split.
      The company earlier declared total dividends equal to 15
  cents a share for 1986, adjusting for the stock split and bonus
  issue.
      Cheung Kong's earnings rose to 1.28 billion H.K. Dlrs in
  1986, well above market expectations of 920 mln to one billion
  dlrs. They compared with profits of 551.7 mln dlrs in 1985.
      Cheung Kong also reported extraordinary gains of 983.6 mln
  dlrs mainly from the firm's sale of the Hong Kong Hilton Hotel
  to Hongkong Electric Holdings Ltd &lt;HKEH.HK> for one billion
  dlrs. It had gains of 81.3 mln dlrs in 1985.
      Li attributed the surge in 1986 earnings to a buoyant local
  property market and substantial increases in contributions from
  associated companies.
      "Looking ahead, 1987 should be another year of stability for
  the property market," Li said. "The growth in (Hong Kong's)
  exports is expected to stimulate the demand for industrial
  buildings."
      Cheung Kong is cash rich and is looking for new projects in
  the British colony, Li said, noting the firm is interested in a
  land reclamation project along the Hong Kong harbour and is
  exchanging views with the government on a proposal to build a
  second airport.
  

LAMSON AND SESSIONS CO &lt;LMS> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Oper shr loss 26 cts vs profit five cts
      Oper net loss 1,506,000 vs profit 312,000
      Revs 42 mln vs 27.9 mln
      Year
      Oper shr loss 43 cts vs profit 16 cts
      Oper net loss 2,535,000 vs profit 1,236,000
      Revs 129.9 mln vs 120.3 mln
      NOTE: Excludes discontinued operations loss 1.42 dlrs a
  share versus loss nine cts in the quarter, and loss 1.62 dlrs a
  share versus loss 12 cts in the year.
      Also excludes extraordinary loss of six cts a share in the
  fourth quarter 1985, and gain of 1.81 dlrs a share in full year
  1985.
      Also excludes 1986 full year gain of 80 cts per share from
  accounting change.
  

ARGENTINE MEAT EXPORTS LOWER IN 1986
  Argentine meat exports during
  Jan/Dec 1986 totalled 220,911 tonnes, against 223,204 tonnes
  shipped in the same 1985 period, the National Meat board said.
      Shipments in tonnes with comparative figures for the 1985
  period, in brackets, included: beef 120,184 (137,686), horse
  meat 25,651 (33,892) and beef offal 50,100 (47,745).
      Argentina's meat exports totalled 20,481 tonnes in December
  1986, against 15,801 tonnes in the same 1985 month.
      Shipments in tonnes, with comparative figures for December
  1985, in brackets, included: beef 14,384 (10,339), horse meat
  1,609 (1,539) and beef offal 3,388 (3,098), the board said.
      Main destinations for refrigerated beef (bone in
  equivalent) were as follows, in tonnes, with comparative
  figures for 1985 in brackets:
      E.C. 46,300 (49,700), Israel 16,200 (17,600), Brazil 18,100
  (unavailable), Peru 8,100 (2,300), Angola 4,800 (12,100), Chile
  3,400 (8,200), Switzerland 3,000 (3,000), Canary Islands 2,400
  (3,700), Singapore 1,900 (1,700), Aruba/Curazao 1,600 (1,700).
      Main destinations for canned meat and cooked beef (bone in
  equivalent) in tonnes, with figures for 1985 in brackets, were:
  United States 88,300 (102,900), E.C. 30,700 (24,100).
  

SOUTH KOREA TO KEEP TRADE SURPLUS 3-5 YEARS
  South Korean Trade Minister Rha
  Woong Bae said his nation would maintain a trading surplus for
  three to five years as a way to cut its foreign debt.
      He said in an interview with Reuter that after a few years
  it was likely South Korea would drop barriers to foreign goods
  and move toward a more balanced trade position.
      He said the present trade surplus was vital if his nation
  was to reduce its 44.5 billion dlr foreign debt.
      Rha said that 1986 was the first year South Korea had a
  trade surplus - 4.5 billion dlrs, against a 1985 deficit of 
  900 mln dlrs.
      Rha made his remarks at the end of a two-week trade mission
  here during which a team he led agreed to buy U.S. products
  valued at 1.8 billion dlrs.
      About 800 mln dlrs of the purchases here were in goods of
  the type South Korea normally bought from Japan.
      Rha leaves today for Ottawa for trade talks with Canadian
  officials and businessmen.
      Asked if South Korea would retaliate against U.S. goods if
  Congress closed U.S. markets to its products, he said "at this
  moment, we have no thought of retaliation."
      South Korea is a major exporter to the U.S. of textiles and
  apparel and electronic goods, such as television sets, video
  cassette records and personal computers.
      Its purchases from the United States include electronic
  testing equipment, grains and cotton.
  

RESTURANT ASSOCIATES INDUSTRIES INC &lt;RAA>4TH QTR
  Shr 26 cts vs 36 cts
      Shr diluted 25 cts vs 36 cts
      Net 1,389,000 vs 1,412,000
      Revs 56.9 mln vs 35.1 mln
      Avg shrs 5,412,000 vs 3,962,000
      Year
      Shr 90 cts vs 75 cts
      Shr diluted 86 cts vs 75 cts
      Net 4,692,000 vs 2,961,000
      Revs 201.4 mln vs 140.0 mln
      Avg shrs 5,234,000 vs 3,954,000
      NOTE: Results for 14 and 53 week periods ended January 3,
  1987, vs 13 and 52 week periods ended December 28, 1985
      1985 net in both periods includes gain of 99,000 dlrs from
  tax loss carryforward
      Spokeswoman said average shares outstanding on a diluted
  basis were not available
  

USDA ACCEPTS BONUS WHEAT OFFERS FOR CHINA
  The Commodity Credit Corp (CCC) has
  accepted bids for export bonuses to cover sales of 340,000
  tonnes of hard red winter wheat and 210,000 tonnes of soft red
  winter wheat to China, the U.S. Agriculture Department said.
      The bonuses awarded averaged 36.22 dlrs per tonne, and the
  wheat is scheduled for delivery during May-Oct 1987.
      The bonus awards were made to Cargill, Inc (305,000
  tonnes), Continental Grain Co (155,000 tonnes), Mitsubishi
  International Corp (60,000 tonnes) and Richco Grain Co (30,000
  tonnes).
      Bonuses will be paid to the exporters in the form of
  commodities from CCC stocks.
      The purchases complete the Export Enhancement Program
  initiative for China announced Jan 26.
  

SOUTHERN NEW ENGLAND TELECOM &lt;SNG> DECLARES DIV
  Qtly div 72 cts vs 72 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record March 23
      NOTE: Company's full name is Southern New England
  Telecommunications Corp.
  

VENEZUELA MOVES CLOSER TO CHAMPLIN PURCHASE
  the council of ministers approved
  petroleos de venezuela's planned purchase of a half interest in
  the champlin petroleum refinery at corpus christi, texas,
  government sources said.
      The cabinet authorized energy and mines minister arturo
  hernandez grisanti to approve the purchase in the shareholders
  assembly of the state oil company petroleos de venezuela
  (pdvsa).
      Pdvsa last april 14 signed a letter of intent to buy a half
  interest in champlin's corpus christi refinery for an
  undisclosed sum.
      Under the terms of the provisional agreement, venezuela
  would supply up to 160,000 barrels a day to the plant through a
  new company which would be jointly owned by the pdvsa and
  champlin, a subsidiary of the union pacific corp &lt;unp>.
      The deal would also allow pdvsa a joint share in champlin's
  refinery and distribution network.
      The purhcase is one of a series of overseas joint ventures
  by which venezuela has managed to assure markets for some
  400,000 barrels of its approximately 1.5 mln bpd exports.
      Hernandez grisanti told reporters after the cabinet meeting
  that pdvsa will pay 93 mln dlrs for its half ownership in the
  champlin refinery - 33 mln dlrs in cash and 60 mln dlrs crude
  oil and products.
      Through the deal, he said, venezuela will be assured the
  sale of at least 140,000 bpd of crude and products.
      Hernandez said pdsva has entered similar joint ventures
  with veba oel of west germany, nynas petroelum in sweden, and
  citgo in the united states.
  

EMPIRE OF CAROLINA INC &lt;EMP> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 71 cts vs 15 cts
      Net 4,234,000 dlrs vs 803,000 dlrs
      Revs 15.4 mln dlrs vs 10.3 mln dlrs
      12 mths
      Shr 1.26 dlrs vs 67 cts
      Net 7,299,000 dlrs vs 3,607,000 dlrs
      Revs 52.5 mln dlrs vs 40.7 mln dlrs
      NOTE: Empire's investment in the Deltona Corp is reported
  on the equity method beginning the fourth qtr of 1986. Amounts
  for 1985 and the first three qtrs of 1986 have been restated to
  reflect the retroactive application.
      During 1986, the 17-1/2 pct debentures and 9-7/8 dlrs
  preferred stock were redeemed or converted resulting in
  6,028,755 common shares outstanding at December 31, 1986 as
  compared to 2,408,766 common shares outstanding at December 31,
  1985.
  

ENSECO INC &lt;NCCO> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Oper shr loss six cts vs profit seven cts
      Oper net loss 481,517 vs profit 487,432
      Revs 7,492,686 vs 5,575,043
      Avg shrs 8.5 mln vs 7.2 mln
      Year
      Oper shr loss six cts vs profit 34 cts
      Oper net loss 465,043 vs profit 2,283,811
      Revs 29.5 mln vs 19.8 mln
      Avg shrs 7.8 mln vs 6.7 mln
      NOTE: Excludes extraordinary credit of four cts a share in
  fourth quarter 1986, and 15 cts in year.
  

CORRECTED - REXNORD &lt;REX> TO SELL RAILWAY UNIT
  Rexnord Inc said it signed a
  definitive agreement to sell its Railway Maintenance Equipment
  Co subsidiary to Oak Industries Inc. Terms were withheld.
      Also participating in the agreement was Banner Industries
  Inc, which previously agreed to acquire Rexnord.
      Railway Maintenance had 1986 sales of 16 mln dlrs.
      Rexnord said the sale is part of a major program to divest
  several of its businesses representing about 200 mln dlrs in
  net assets. Still to be divested are the Process Machinery
  Division with sales of 137 mln dlrs and Mathews Conveyer Co,
  with sales of 83 mln dlrs. -- Corrects mame of purchaser
  

WALL STREET STOCKS/SUPERMARKETS GENERAL &lt;SGL>
  Dart Group Corp &lt;DARTA>, which wants
  to acquire Supermarkets General Corp for 1.62 billion dlrs, is
  not likely to give up without a fight if its target seeks
  another buyer, arbitrageurs said.
      Speculation that Dart's offer of 41.75 dlrs per share could
  be just the beginning of a bidding contest helped Supermarkets
  shares gain one to 42-1/8  on 2.3 mln shares.
      One rumor had Federated Department Stores Inc &lt;FDS> taking
  a look at Supermarkets General. "Our policy is that we do not
  comment on any rumors or speculation of this nature," a
  Federated spokeswoman said.
      An arbitrageur noted that Dart, controlled by chairman
  Herbert H. Haft and his son Robert, last year raised its
  initial bid for Safeway Stores by approximately 10 pct when
  Safeway resisted.
      However, that company was later sold to a buyout group that
  topped the Hafts.
      If history repeats itself, the Hafts could raise their bid
  to 46 dlrs if they are rebuffed by Supermarkets General, the
  arbitrageur said. But another arbitrageur said the Hafts'
  present bid seemed "quite fair." He said the offer amounts to
  10 times after-tax-cash flow which is "probably fully priced."
  

U.S. EXPORTERS REPORT 455,000 TONNES  OF WHEAT SOLD TO CHINA FOR 1986/87 AND 1987/88

  U.S. EXPORTERS REPORT 455,000 TONNES  OF WHEAT SOLD TO CHINA FOR 1986/87 AND 1987/88
  

AMERICAN MOTORS &lt;AMO> WEIGHS TAKEOVER PROPOSAL
  American Motors Corp said its
  directors met Wednesday to review the takeover proposal which
  the corporation received Monday from Chrysler Corp &lt;C>.
      AMC said its board has retained independent investment and
  legal advisers and expects to meet periodically over the next
  several weeks on the proposal.
  

BANGOR HYDRO-ELECTRIC CO &lt;BANG> SETS DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 25 cts vs 25 cts
      Pay April 20
      Record March 31
  

KANSAS CITY SOUTHERN &lt;KSU> MERGER RESPONSE
  Kansas City Southern
  Industries Inc said an attempt by Santa Fe Southern Pacific Co
  &lt;SFX> to reopen the proposed merger of the Atchison, Topeka and
  Santa Fe Railway Co and the Southern Pacific Transportation Co
  offers "nothing truly new."
      In a letter to shippers, Kansas City Chairman Landon
  Rowland stated "This proposed merger is plainly
  anti-competitive, as found by the ICC and urged by the
  Department of Justice. Nothing has changed."
      Landon said Kansas City Southern is continuing its efforts
  to acquire the transportation operation of Santa Fe Railway.
  

WHITTAKER CORP 1ST QTR OPER SHR 17 CTS VS 25 CTS

  WHITTAKER CORP 1ST QTR OPER SHR 17 CTS VS 25 CTS
  

COKE AFFILIATE TO SELL DELAURENTIIS &lt;DEG> STAKE
  De Laurentiis Entertainment Group
  Inc said Embassy Communications, a Californai general
  partnership affiliated with Coca-Cola Co &lt;KO>, plans to sell
  its 10.1 pct stake in the company.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission for
  a secondary offering, De Laurentiis said Embassy will offer its
  entire stake in the company of 964,936 shares of common stock
  in the public sale.
      De Laurentiis said it has 9.6 mln shares outstanding.
      PaineWebber Inc will underwrite the offering.
  

HERLEY MICROWAVE &lt;HRLY> 2ND QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr nine cts vs 17 cts
      Net 275,000 vs 490,000
      Rev 2.4 mln vs four mln
      Six months
      Shr 29 cts vs 31 cts
      Net 885,000 vs 884,000
      Rev 6.1 mln vs 7.1 mln
      NOTE: Company's full name is Herley Microwave Systems Inc.
  

WILLIAMS COS &lt;WMB> COMPLETES SALE OF UNIT
  Williams Cos said it completed the
  sale of its Agrico Chemical Co unit to Freeport-McMoRan
  Resource Partners L.P. &lt;FRP> for an initial 250 mln dlrs cash.
      The company said it will also receive an additional 100 to
  250 mln dlrs in five years based on the operating performance
  of the unit.
      It said the cash proceeds will be used to lower its debt
  costs.
  

EC COMMISSION REJECTS SUGAR THREATS - SOURCES
  The European Community Commission has
  told EC member states that it is not prepared to discuss EC
  sugar prices while sugar traders threaten to make a huge sale
  into intervention stocks to protest against its policies,
  Commission sources said.
      "Our position is that we are not willing to discuss the
  problems of market prices at a time when traders are making
  threats," one source said.
      The sources said the Commission's view was made clear at a
  meeting of its sugar management committee today.
      They said French, West German and Dutch officials had
  informed the committee that traders in their countries intended
  to sell just over 850,000 tonnes of sugar into EC intervention
  stocks.
      The Commission riposted by signalling that it would sell
  the sugar sold into intervention back onto the EC market by
  tender, a move that would push down prices.
      The sources said French traders planned to sell 775,000
  tonnes into intervention stocks, West German traders 7,500
  tonnes and Dutch traders 2,500.
  

VIACOM &lt;VIA> RECEIVES TWO REVISED OFFERS
  Viacom International Inc said it
  received revised merger offers from &lt;National Amusements Inc>
  and &lt;MCV Holdings Inc>.
      The company said the special committee plans to meet later
  today to review both offers.
      Viacom said National Amusements' Arsenal Holdings Inc
  raised the value of its offer for the Viacom shares not held by
  National Amusements in three areas. National Amusements holds
  19.6 pct of Viacom's stock.
      The cash value of the offer was raised to 42.00 dlrs from
  the 40.50 dlrs a Viacom share offered February 23 while the
  value of the fraction of a share of exchangeable preferred
  being offered was increased to 7.50 dlrs a share from six dlrs.
  The interest rate to be used to increase the cash value of the
  merger, if delayed beyond April 30, was raised to nine pct from
  eight pct and 12 pct after May 31.
      A Viacom spokesman said the Arsenal Holdings's offer
  continues to include a 20 pct interest in Arsenal for present
  Viacom shareholders.
      Viacom said MCV Holdings, a group which includes the
  company's senior management and the Equitable Life Assurance
  Society of the United States, raised the value of its offer by
  increasing the value of the preferred being offered to 8.50
  dlrs from 8.00 dlrs a share and raising the ownership in the
  new company to be held by present Viacom shareholders to 45 pct
  from 25 pct. MCV called its previous offer, made February 26,
  the "final" proposed revision of its agreement with Viacom.
  

TREASURY BALANCES AT FED FELL ON MARCH 10
  Treasury balances at the Federal
  Reserve fell on March 10 to 2.842 billion dlrs from 3.073
  billion dlrs the previous business day, the Treasury said in
  its latest budget statement.
      Balances in tax and loan note accounts fell to 9.828
  billion dlrs from 11.418 billion dlrs on the same respective
  days.
      The Treasury's operating cash balance totaled 12.670
  billion dlrs on March 10 compared with 14.490 billion dlrs on
  March 9.
  

SOUTH KOREA TO MAINTAIN TRADE SURPLUS 3-5 YEARS
  South Korean Trade Minister Rha
  Woong Bae said his nation would maintain a trading surplus for
  three to five years as a way to cut its foreign debt.
      He said in an interview with Reuters that after a few years
  it was likely South Korea would drop barriers to foreign goods
  and move toward a more balanced trade position.
      He said the present trade surplus was vital if his nation
  was to reduce its 44.5 billion dlr foreign debt.
      Rha said that 1986 was the first year South Korea had a
  trade surplus - 4.5 billion dlrs, against a 1985 deficit of 900
  mln dlrs.
      Asked if South Korea would drop its trade barriers once its
  foreign debt was substantially reduced, he said "yes, I think
  so."
      Rha made his remarks at the end of a two-week trade mission
  here during which a team he led agreed to buy U.S. products
  valued at 1.8 billion dlrs.
      About 800 mln dlrs of the purchases are in goods of the
  type South Korea normally bought from Japan.
      Rha was to leave later today for Ottawa for trade talks
  with Canadian officials and businessmen.
      He said in the interview the U.S. purchases were to reduce
  his country's 7.1 billion dlr surplus with the United States
  and also to cut its 5.6 billion dlr shortfall with Japan.
      Rha said it was also due to a shift in exchange rates
  between the U.S. dollar and the yen that made it cheaper to buy
  U.S. goods than Japanese goods.
      He said South Korea heavily relied on foreign trade and he
  hoped the leaders of major trading nations could find a way to
  resolve the growing trend toward protectionist legislation.
      Rha said "I hope the leaders can get together to find a
  solution by making some mutually satisfactory concessions."
      But he added "the leaders seem hesitant to make concessions
  because of domestic political reasons."
      Speaking of his own country, he said "We have made a lot of
  concessions already."
      He cited regulations permitting foreign investment in
  industrial firms, allowing increased foreign banking activity
  and cracking down on piracy of intellectual property by
  strengthening protection of copyrights and patents.
      Rha said South Korea had also lowered many of its tariffs.
      Asked if South Korea would retaliate against U.S. goods if
  Congress closed U.S. markets to its products, he said "at this
  moment, we have no thought of retaliation."
      South Korea is a major exporter to the United States of
  textiles and apparel and electronic goods, such as television
  sets, video cassette records and personal computers.
      Its puchases from the United States include electronic
  testing equipment and grains and cotton.
      The trade mission's purchases here included three Boeing
  passenger planes for 400 mln dlrs, four McDonnell Douglas
  planes for 300 mln dlrs; and machinery worth 725 mln dlrs.
  

HONG KONG FIRM UPS CALMAT &lt;CZM> STAKE TO 9.8 PCT
  Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd, a
  Hong Kong investment firm, said it raised its stake in Calmat
  Co to 1,480,830 shares, or 9.8 pct of the total outstanding
  common stock, from 1,217,230 shares, or 8.0 pct.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Industrial Equity, which is principally owned by Brierley
  Investments Ltd, a publicly held New Zealand firm, said it
  bought 263,600 Calmat common shares between Feb 17 and March 9
  for 13.1 mln dlrs.
      It has said it bought the stock for investment purposes,
  but may raise its stake to 15 pct.
  

PARALAX VIDEO &lt;VIDO> TO BUY AMERICAN VIDEO
  Paralax Video Enterprises Inc said it
  signed a definitive agreement to buy &lt;American Video Group Inc>
  for stock.
      According to the merger proposal, American Video
  shareholders will receive about 287,700 restricted Paralax
  shares, and warrants to buy another 318,600 restricted shares
  at six dlrs a share. The warrants run for three years.
      In addition, it said holders of American Video convertible
  debentures agreed to exchange their holdings for about 380,000
  dlrs worth of Paralax stock.
      American Video operates stores in U.S. military bases.
  

LAMSON/SESSIONS &lt;LMS>DROPS RAIL PARTS OPERATIONS
  Lamson and Sessions Co said it has
  decided to discontinue operations of Youngstown Steel Door, a
  maker of components and equipment for railroad freight cars.
      The company said the unit is to be sold sometime this year,
  so was included as discontinued operations in its 1986 results
  announced earlier today.
      The company reported a loss from continuing operations of
  2.5 mln dlrs for the year, against a 1985 profit of 1.2 mln
  dlrs. For discontinued operations, it reported a loss of 9.5
  mln dlrs compared to a year earlier loss of 922,000 dlrs.
  

ROCHESTER TELEPHONE &lt;RTC> TO BUY CANTON PHONE
  Rochester Telephone Corp said
  it agreed to buy &lt;Canton Telephone Co> for undisclosed terms.
      Canton serves customers in northeastern Penn. In 1986, it
  had operating revenues of about 1.3 mln dlrs, the company said.
  

OREGON LUMBER COMPANY TO SELL WOOD TO IRAQ
  A Portland-based wood
  products company has signed a 13 mln dlr contract with the
  Iraqi government to supply finished softwood lumber to Iraq,
  Edward Niedermeyer, president of Niedermeyer-Martin Co said
  yesterday.
      Niedermeyer told the House Foreign Affairs sub-committee on
  International Economic Policy and Trade in Washington that the
  sales agreement contains an option that could make lumber
  exported worth more than 20 mln dlrs.
      The delivery of about 8.0 mln dlrs worth of plywood, in
  addition to lumber, hinges on whether the U.S. Department of
  Agriculture will interpret plywood as an agricultural commodity
  under the credit guarantee program, he said.
      Niedermeyer said the government export credit guarantee
  program (GSM-102) administered by the USDA was the key to
  opening the Iraqi market which up to now had been captured by
  Scandinavian lumber producers.
      "This is the first time we have been able to sell wood
  products in Iraq, he said. Without the USDA program it would
  not have been possible. We hope this will lead to a long term
  export market for U.S. lumber products."
      He said the contract calls for supplying 21 mln board feet
  to 30 mln board feet of softwood lumber for housing,
  construction and furniture manufacturing. He estimated the
  profit potential for his company on the sale at five to six
  pct.
      Niedermeyer spent two weeks in Baghdad negotiating the sale
  late last month and early March. He is a member of the United
  States-Iraq Business Forum, a non-profit group designed to
  promote commerce with Iraq.
      The forum members include Westinghouse and General
  Electric, but Niedermeyer's company is the only wood products
  firm on the membership roster.
  

WALLACE COMPUTER SERVICES INC &lt;WCS> DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 15 cts vs 15 cts previously
      Pay June 19
      Record June One
  

IROQUOIS BRANDS LTD &lt;IBL> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Oper shr loss 97 cts vs loss 73 cts
      Oper net loss 883,000 vs loss 659,000
      Revs 19.4 mln vs 16.7 mln
      12 mths
      Oper shr loss 2.37 dlrs vs loss 1.97 dlrs
      Oper net loss 2,228,000 vs loss 2,145,000
      Revs 72.4 mln vs 63.8 mln
      NOTE: Excludes gain 3.41 dlrs a share versus gain 41 cts in
  the quarter, and gain 5.68 dlrs a share versus gain 1.99 dlrs
  in the year from discontinued and disposed operations.
  

ALABAMA INVESTOR UPS PENOBSCOT SHOE &lt;PSO> STAKE
  Donaldson Bramham Lee, an investor
  from Birmingham, Alabama, said he raised his stake in Penobscot
  Shoe Co to 40,500 shares, or 6.6 pct of the total outstanding
  common stock, from 33,500 shares, or 5.5 pct.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Lee said he bought 7,000 Penobscot common shares between Feb 12
  and March 2 at prices ranging from 13.75 to 16.25 dlrs a share.
      Lee has said he bought the Penobscot stock for investment
  purposes only and has no plans to seek control of the company,
  although he may buy more stock.
  

U.S. CORN DEMAND GROWING IN JAPAN, SOUTH KOREA
  The recent purchase of 1.5 mln
  tonnes of U.S. corn by Japan and 600,000 tonnes by South Korea
  suggests that the two countries' demand for reliable supplies
  of corn is increasing, the U.S. Agriculture Department said.
      In its World Production and Trade Report, the department
  said that view is reinforced by the expectation of a decline in
  exportable supplies of Argentine corn and uncertainty over the
  availability of South African and Chinese corn.
      With these corn purchases, Japan is committed to buying 7.7
  mln tonnes of U.S. corn in 1986/87 (Sept-Aug), nearly 400,000
  tonnes greater than year-ago figures to date.
      South Korea's cumulative commitments amount to 2.5 mln
  tonnes, up 1.5 mln compared to last year, it said.
  

FRENCH ESTIMATE 86/87 WHEAT DELIVERIES UNCHANGED
  The French Cereals Intervention Board,
  ONIC, left its estimate of French 1986/87 (July/June) soft
  wheat deliveries unchanged from its last forecast at 21.98 mln
  tonnes.
      This compared with deliveries of 24.38 mln tonnes in
  1985/86 (August/July).
      Estimated 1986/87 maize deliveries were also left unchanged
  from ONIC's previous forecast at the beginning of February at
  9.91 mln tonnes against 10.77 mln the previous season.
      Barley deliveries were also unchanged at 6.62 mln tonnes
  against 7.7 mln in 1985/86.
  

MEXICO VEG OIL TAX NOT AIMED AT SUNFLOWER--USDA
  The Mexican Secretariat of Commerce
  has told the U.S. that recent implementation of a 10 pct ad
  valorem tariff for fixed vegetable oils, fluid or solid, crude,
  refined or purified, was not targeted at sunflower oil, the
  U.S. Agriculture Department said.
      In its World Production and Trade Report, the department
  said the increase in tariffs on this category which includes
  sunflower, corn and rapeseed oils, was a reaction to importers
  using basket categories to avoid paying tariffs on specific
  high-tariff products.
  

AERO SERVICES &lt;AEROE> SEES BETTER 1987
  Aero Services International Inc
  said it expects to achieve improvements in overall operations
  in the year ending September 30, 1987.
      Earlier, Aero reported a 1986 year end net loss of 3.0 mln
  dlrs compared to a profit of 483,000 dlrs in 1985.
      The company said the loss was attributable to costs
  associated with its acquisition costs and operating losses of
  nine Beckett Aviation fixed base operations purchased in August
  1985 and discontinued weather service and flight simulator
  segments.
  

AERO SERVICES INTERNATIONAL INC &lt;AEROE> YEAR
  Shr loss 63 cts vs profit 10 cts
      Net loss 3.0 mln vs profit 483,000
      Revs 61.9 mln vs 43.7 mln
      NOTE:1986 net loss includes loss of 1.4 mln dlrs or 28 cts
  a share from discontinued operations. 1986 revenues include
  revenues for the last eight months of Beckett Aviation,
  acquired in September of 1985. Year ended September 30, 1986.
  

VISTA RESOURCES INC &lt;VIST> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 1.36 dlrs vs one dlr
      Net 1,010,249 vs 750,856
      Revs 15.2 mln vs 11.9 mln
      12 mths
      Shr 3.24 dlrs vs 2.18 dlrs
      Net 2,407,186 vs 1,627,250
      Revs 57 mln vs 53.1 mln
  

BRAZIL COFFEE EXPORTS DISRUPTED BY STRIKE
  An 11-day-old strike by
  Brazilian seamen is affecting coffee shipments and could lead
  to a short term supply squeeze abroad, exporters said.
      They could not quantify how much coffee has been delayed
  but said at least 40 pct of coffee exports are carried by
  Brazilian ships and movement of foreign vessels has also been
  disrupted by port congestion caused by the strike.
      A series of labor disputes and bad weather has meant
  Brazil's coffee exports have been running at an average two
  weeks behind schedule since the start of the year, one source
  added.
      By the end of February shipments had fallen 800,000 bags
  behind registrations, leaving around 2.4 mln bags to be shipped
  during March. By March 10 only 230,000 bags had been shipped,
  the sources said.
      Given Brazil's port loading capacity of around 100,000 bags
  a day, even if normal operations were resumed immediately and
  not interrupted by bad weather, some March registered coffee
  will inevitably be shipped during April, they added.
  

ALCOA DECLINES SPECIFIC COMMENT ON OPTIONS TRADE
  Alcoa officials acknowledged the
  possibility that they may have a position in the off-exchange
  aluminum options market, but declined specific comment on trade
  speculation that the company is holding a large outstanding
  position.
      An Alcoa (Aluminum Company of America) source involved in
  terminal trading for the company said: "We use all means
  available to manage our business, so it's a possibility we're
  trading options."
      "We won't go into specifics about what we're doing. But
  when you're dealing in un-alloyed ingot, it's a commodity
  business where there are a lot of tools available (for hedging)
  and Alcoa is using all of those tools," said Al Posti, Alcoa's
  manager of corporate news.
      Trade sources have said Alcoa is long call options equal to
  30,000 to 50,000 tonnes of aluminum due to mature in April and
  May. However, some New York-based aluminium traders said they
  believe the size of Alcoa's position has been exaggerated.
      The possibility that Alcoa may be long call options is one
  factor indicating that supply tightness may worsen in the
  second quarter, traders said.
      "If they decide to exercise their right to buy, it would
  mean really squeezing the market," one New York trader said,
  noting that aluminum stocks on the London Metal Exchange were
  90,500 tonnes at the end of last week.
  

BRAE CORP &lt;BRAE> 3RD QTR DEC 31 LOSS
  Shr loss 1.32 dlrs vs profit two cts
      Net loss 5,666,000 vs profit 84,000
      Revs 12.0 mln vs 21.7 mln
      Nine mths
      Shr loss 1.87 dlrs vs loss 71 cts
      Net loss 8,030,000 vs loss 3,062,000
      Revs 40.9 mln vs 53.0 mln
      Note: includes losses from discontinued operations of
  190,000 dlrs vs loss 185,000 dlrs in 3rd qtr and 731,000 dlrs
  loss vs 815,000 dlrs loss in nine mths.
  

MARATHON TO RAISE CRUDE PRICES 50 CTS/BBL TOMORROW WTI  TO 17.50 DLRS

  MARATHON TO RAISE CRUDE PRICES 50 CTS/BBL TOMORROW WTI  TO 17.50 DLRS
  

WASTE MANAGEMENT CORP VOTES TWO FOR ONE STOCK SPLIT AND BOOSTS QTLY DIVIDEND TO 18 CTS

  WASTE MANAGEMENT CORP VOTES TWO FOR ONE STOCK SPLIT AND BOOSTS QTLY DIVIDEND TO 18 CTS
  

GENERAL ELECTRIC &lt;GE> TO SELL DATEL UNIT
  General Electric Co's GE
  Semiconductor Business said it agreed to sell its Datel unit to
  a group led by the unit's president, Nicolas Tagaris.
      Terms were not disclosed.
      Tagaris founded the company, which produces precision data
  acquisition, conversion and control components and subsystems,
  in 1970. He sold it to GE in 1979.
  

TRICO &lt;TRO> SETS DATE FOR ACQUISITION VOTE
  Trico Industries Inc said it
  set March 31 as the date for a special shareholders meeting for
  a vote on the proposed acquisition of the company by Paccar Inc
  &lt;PCAR>.
      In January the two companies announced an agreement
  covering a proposed acquisition by Paccar of Trico's
  approximately 8.2 mln shares outstanding for eight dlrs per
  share in cash.
  

HUGHES TOOL SHAREHOLDERS APPROVE MERGER WITH BAKER INTERNATIONAL

  HUGHES TOOL SHAREHOLDERS APPROVE MERGER WITH BAKER INTERNATIONAL
  

&lt;CANADIAN GYPSUM CO LTD> YEAR NET
  Shr 3.13 dlrs vs 2.02 dlrs
      Net 39.1 mln vs 26.9 mln
      Revs 203.2 mln vs 173.8 mln
  

CREW UNION SETS PACT WITH PACIFIC SOUTHWEST &lt;PSG>
  Pacific Southwest Airlines said it
  reached an agreement with the Southwest Crew Controllers
  Association needed to satisfy conditions of USAir Group's &lt;U>
  proposed acquisition of PSA.
      PSA said this is the third of four unions agreement is
  needed with for USAir's acquisition to be consummated.
      Under the agreement, PSA crew controllers received
  assurances they will be provided with labor protective
  provisions and a seniority integration process.
  

SOUTHERNNET INC &lt;SOUT> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 32 cts vs four cts
      Net 3,370,000 vs 353,000
      Revs 27.8 mln vs 20.2 mln
      Year
      Shr 35 cts vs 67 cts
      Net 3,543,000 vs 3,845,000
      Revs 103.6 mln vs 74.8 mln
  

SENATOR LUGAR CALLS FOR CARGO PREFERENCE REPEAL
  The senior Republican on the U.S.
  Senate Agriculture Committee, Richard Lugar of Indiana, called
  for repeal of the cargo preference law that aids the American
  shipping industry but which he said hurts farmers.
      "Cargo preference is a costly special interest operated at
  the expense of American farmers and dockworkers," Lugar said in
  signing on as a co-sponsor or cargo preference repeal
  legislation.
      The law requires shipment of U.S. goods on American ships
  rather than foreign vessels which are less costly.
  

EIA SAYS DISTILLATE STOCKS OFF 8.8 MLN, GASOLINE OFF 500,000, CRUDE OFF 1.2 MLN

  EIA SAYS DISTILLATE STOCKS OFF 8.8 MLN, GASOLINE OFF 500,000, CRUDE OFF 1.2 MLN
  

SYLVAN LEARNING CORP &lt;SLVN> NINE MONTHS DEC 31
  Shr loss 43 cts vs profit eight cts
      Net loss 3.1 mln vs profit 502,896
      Revs 5.6 mln vs 4.2 mln
      NOTE:1986 net includes negative effect of accounting change
  of 354,650 or five cts a share.
  

BIG U.S. CONSERVATION ENROLLMENT EXPECTED
  Enrollment in the U.S. Agriculture
  Department's fourth conservation signup is expected to be
  announced tomorrow, and USDA officials said the figure may be
  higher than total enrollment for the first three signups.
      Enrollment will be in the range of seven to 12 mln acres,
  USDA conservation specialists said. Total enrollment so far in
  the 10-year conservation program is 8.9 mln acres.
      Producers submitted bids to enter 11 to 12 mln acres into
  the program, Milton Hertz, administrator for USDA's
  Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service said at a
  congressional hearing yesterday. Not all the bids will be
  accepted, Hertz said, but enrollment is expected to be high.
      As in the first three signups, the Great Plains area is
  expected to attract the greatest enrollment.
      "The Great Plains area will be the predominate area which
  we'll get signup in," a USDA conservation specialist said.
      Marginal corn acreage will likely be the bulk of the
  acreage pulled from that area, he said.
      Fringe soybean acres in the southeast and some bean acreage
  in the midwest are also expected to be taken out of production,
  but the USDA source said this would be a relatively small
  percent of the total.
      A special two dlr bonus to corn producers who enroll part
  of their corn base acreage into the program has sparked more
  interest in this latest signup, USDA officials said.
      Under the program, USDA pays farmers annual rents to take
  land out of production for 10 years. The average rent payment
  accepted in the first three signups was 43.50 dlrs per acre.
  

PITTSTON AGREES TO ACQUIRE WTC INTERNATIONAL IN EXCHANGE OF STOCK

  PITTSTON AGREES TO ACQUIRE WTC INTERNATIONAL IN EXCHANGE OF STOCK
  

EIA SAYS DISTILLATE, GAS STOCKS OFF IN WEEK
  Distillate fuel stocks held in
  primary storage fell by 8.8 mln barrels in the week ended March
  six to 119.6 mln barrels, the Energy Information Administration
  (EIA) said.
      In its weekly petroleum status report, the Department of
  Energy agency said gasoline stocks were off 500,000 barrels in
  the week to 251.0 mln barrels and refinery crude oil stocks
  fell 1.2 mln barrels to 331.8 mln.
      The EIA said residual fuel stocks fell 1.5 mln barrels to
  36.4 mln barrels and crude oil stocks in the Strategic
  Petroleum Reserve (SPR) rose 200,000 barrels to 516.7 mln.
      The total of all crude, refined product and SPR stocks fell
  10.3 mln barrels to 1,564.8, it said.
  

MORE HEAVY RAINS IN ARGENTINE GRAIN AREAS
  Heavy rains fell again in
  Argentina's main grain growing areas in the week to yesterday,
  trade sources said.
      Rains fell heaviest early in the week, and in particularly
  high volume in Buenos Aires province, Cordoba, La Pampa and
  Santa Fe provinces.
      Rainfall totalled between 20 and 290 mm in Buenos Aires,
  heaviest in western sectors of the province, 20 to 145 mm in La
  Pampa, 25 to 120 mm in Cordoba, and 10 to 75 mm in Santa Fe.
  Rainfall was lighter in other provinces.
      Rainfall totalled from five to 50 mm in Corrientes, five to
  31 mm in San Luis, five to 30 mm in Entre Rios, three to 20 mm
  in Misiones, 11 to 17 mm in Formosa and one to eight mm in
  Chaco.
      Growers said it was still too early to tell whether the
  rains had damaged crops, though they said maize and sunflower
  crops may have suffered.
      Harvesting of both those crops and sorghum was paralysed by
  the bad weather. For harvesting to resume as normal, the rains
  would have to stop long enough for the soil to dry and allow
  farm machinery to operate.
      The rains caused flooding in western and northwestern
  Buenos Aires, as more than 750 mm have fallen in some areas
  there since February 23 while the annual average is 1,200 mm.
      Flooded areas total between 1.2 and 1.5 mln hectares,
  Buenos Aires province governor Alejandro Armendariz said after
  flying over the flooded area.
      Agriculture Secretary Ernesto Figueras said only 500,000
  hectares of the area now flooded had been planted, and that
  200,000 to 300,000 hectares could be lost. Growers said large
  parts of the flooded areas were not planted because they are
  low-lying and flood easily.
      Trade sources said it was certain crops were damaged by the
  heavy rains but it was too early to tell the exact extent of
  the damage. They said it was likely rain combined with high
  winds uprooted many sunflower and maize plants.
      The sunflower harvest moved forward in the centre and south
  of Cordoba and Santa Fe and got underway in a few isolated
  areas of northern Buenos Aires. Growers have harvested between
  15 and 18 pct of total planted area, up from seven to nine pct
  a week ago.
      Estimates of the total volume of the sunflower crop were
  revised downward in light of the bad weather.
      Estimates for total crop ranged from 2.3 to 2.6 mln tonnes,
  down from 2.4 to 2.7 mln tonnes estimated last week and down
  34.1 to 41.5 pct from last year's record harvest of 4.1 mln
  tonnes.
      Maize harvesting also advanced, reaching between 13 and 15
  pct of total planted area compared to seven to nine pct a week
  ago. The maize harvest is expected to total between 10 and 10.2
  mln tonnes, down from the 10 to 10.4 mln tonnes estimated a
  week ago.
      Last year's maize harvest totalled 12.8 mln tonnes,
  according to official figures.
      Soybean production estimates were revised downward, to 7.8
  to 8.2 mln tonnes compared to estimates of eight to 8.4 mln
  tonnes a week ago. Last year's soybean harvest totalled 7.1 mln
  tonnes, according to official figures.
      Sorghum harvesting moved slowly forward, reaching between
  four and six pct of total planted area, compared to two to four
  pct a week ago.
      Sorghum production estimates remained steady at 3.2 to 3.5
  mln tonnes, down 16.7 to 22 pct from the 4.1 to 4.2 mln tonnes
  produced in the last harvest.
  

PHILIPPINE DEBT TALKS DELAYED FOR CONSULTATIONS
  Today's debt rescheduling talks
  between the Philippines government and its bank advisory
  committee were postponed until Thursday to give the banks more
  time to consider Manila's novel proposal for paying part of its
  interest bill in notes instead of cash, bankers said.
      The committee banks met briefly earlier today and decided
  that they needed more time in particular to consider a news
  report which quoted a Reagan Administration official as urging
  that the proposal be given serious consideration.
      "The banks felt that this was new information and that
  further consultation was called for," one banker said.    
      In a despatch yesterday from Washington, Reuters quoted the
  official as saying Manila's plan to pay some interest with
  notes that could be converted into equity investments in the
  Philippines was fully consistent with the Reagan Administration
  strategy for handling developing country debt.
      "The Philippine proposal is very interesting, it's quite
  unique and I don't think it's something that should be
  categorically rejected out of hand," the official said.
      Because of the key role the U.S. plays in the debt crisis,
  foreign banks in particular wanted time to analyze the
  significance of the policymaker's comments, bankers said.
  

HARPER AND ROW GETS BID FROM HARCOURT BRACE JOVANOVICH FOR 50 DLRS/SHR

  HARPER AND ROW GETS BID FROM HARCOURT BRACE JOVANOVICH FOR 50 DLRS/SHR
  

HUGHES &lt;HT> APPROVES MERGER WITH BAKER &lt;BKO>
  An overwhelming majority of Hughes Tool
  Co shareholders approved a merger agreement with Baker
  International Corp based on revised terms that allow the
  companies additional time to sell a drilling bit business as
  required by the U.S. Justice Department.
       Hughes chairman William Kistler said the revised terms of
  the proposed consent decree also set a 10 mln dlr cap on how
  much funding the newly combined companies will have to spend on
  the disputed drilling bit business until it is sold.
      An earlier proposed consent decree did not establish a
  funding limit.
      The Baker-Hughes merger, which would would create a 1.2
  billion dlr oilfield services company, almost fell through
  earlier this month when Hughes balked at terms of a proposed
  Justice Department consent decree that would have given the
  companies only three months to find a buyer for the Reed
  business.
      Baker said today it would withdraw the one billion dlr
  lawsuit it had filed to force Hughes to follow through with the
  merger.
      Hughes' Kistler, speaking to reporters after 85 pct of
  Hughes' shareholders approved the merger, said the revised
  terms of the agreement give the companies six months to find a
  buyer for the Reed drilling bit business. The previous
  agreement had proposed a three-month period.
      Kistler said the the government had also indicated it would
  consider granting, if necessary, an additional three-month
  extension to complete the sale.
      He said there were "several people looking" at the domestic
  drilling bit business.
      The companies, Kistler said, have also decided to
  voluntarily sell a Reed plant in Singapore.
      Kistler estimated that the merger, which should be
  completed in about two weeks, will result in annual cost
  savings of about 50 mln dlrs. He said he expects "substantial
  cutbacks" in the 20,000-member workforce at Baker-Hughes Inc,
  the name the merged company will take.
      Kistler said the cost savings and greater efficiencies
  should put the company on a profitable course. "We think that
  in the third or fourth quarter after the merger we should see
  something close to breakeven," he said.
      In the fourth quarter of 1986, Hughes earned 31.7 mln dlrs
  on sales of 215.7 mln dlrs.
      Baker, in its first fiscal quarter ended December 31, lost
  34.2 mln dlrs on revenues of 297.7 mln dlrs.
  

USX &lt;X> UNIT TO RAISE MOST CRUDE POSTINGS
  USX's subsidiary, Marathon Petroleum
  Co, said it will raise its contract prices for eleven grades of
  crude oil 50 cts a barrel, effective tomorrow.
      The increase brings Marathon's posted price for West Texas
  Intermediate and West Texas Sour grades to 17.50 dlrs a barrel.
      The Light Louisiana grade was also raised 50 cts to 17.85
  dlrs a barrel.
  

DOLLAR GENERAL CORP &lt;DOLR> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 13 cts vs 40 cts
      Net 2,509,000 vs 7,582,000
      Revs 186.2 mln vs 182.1 mln
      Year
      Shr 23 cts vs 95 cts
      Net 4,318,000 vs 17.8 mln
      Revs 564.8 mln vs 584.4 mln
  

TUESDAY MORNING INC &lt;TUES> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 1.19 dlrs vs 1.46 dlrs
      Net 3,150,185 vs 2,665,284
      Revs 27.9 mln vs 24.1 mln
      Avg shrs 2,653,646 vs 1,826,858
      Year
      Shr 1.45 dlrs vs 1.37 dlrs
      Net 3,611,802 vs 2,502,443
      Sales 62.2 mln vs 52.8 mln
      Avg shrs 2,489,978 vs 1,826,858
  

&lt;BROAD> ACQUIRES &lt;VOGT AND CONANT> UNIT
  Broad Corp said it acquired
  the construction activities of Vogt and Conant Co of Cleveland.
      The combined companies, to be called Broad, Vogt and Conant
  INc, will be the largest structural steel erection company in
  the U.S. Combined sales of the two operations were more than 40
  mln dlrs in 1986.
  

HARPER &lt;HPR> GETS BID FROM HARCOURT &lt;HBJ>
  Harper and Row Publishers Inc said it
  received an acquisition offer from Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
  INc to acquire all of Harper and Row's shares at 50 dlrs a
  share in cash.
      Harper said it will consider the proposal, including such
  possible concerns as anti-trust and other legal considerations.
      On Monday, Harper and Row received a surprise 34 dlr-a-
  share bid from investor Theodore Cross, owner of six pct of the
  shares, for the stock he does not own.
       Harcourt made clear in its offer that it will step aside
  if Harper's directors and shareholders reject the bid, Harper
  said.
      Harper said the board has previously expressed a strong
  determination to remain an independent publishing enterprise.
      Harper also said that New World Pictures, a shareholder,
  has requested a copy of Harper's shareholder list to be used in
  soliciting proxies.
      New World has 30,800 shares of the total 4.4 mln shares.
      Harper and Row's stock closed off 3/4 to 33-1/2 after
  rising 9-1/4 points yesterday.
      Shareholders are due to vote April 2 on a shareholders
  rights plan designed to thwart hostile takeovers.
      Ivan Obolensky, an analyst with the investment banking for
  of Sterling Grace and Co said Harper and Row is one of the few
  remaining independent publishers with a "back list" of authors
  stretching back 200 years.
      He said as long as the company maintains copyrights with
  the estates of deceased authors, it controls all motion picture
  and television rights to the stories. And he said new printing
  technologies make new editions a profitable business.
      "Harcourt Brace needs a back list of that nature and is
  willing to pay up for it," Obolensky said. But he said Harper
  and Row "has plenty of beef to warrant a 50 dlr bid.
  

GOLDMAN SELLS MOST 1ST PENNSYLVANIA &lt;FPA> STOCK
  Goldman, Sachs and Co told the
  Securities and Exchange Commission it sold nearly its entire
  stake in First Pennsylvania Corp of 2,450,598 shares, or 5.2
  pct of the total outstanding common stock.
      Goldman Sachs said it has about 17,800 First Pennsylvania
  common shares remaining. On February 26, the company redeemed
  convertible debentures with common stock, which at once
  increased Goldman's stock holding and the total outstanding.
      Goldman Sachs said it originally bought the stake as part
  of its arbitrage business. Marine Midland Banks &lt;MM> has an
  agreement in principal to acquire First Pennsylvania.
  

LIONEL CORP &lt;LIO> 4TH QTR JAN 31 OPER NET
  Oper shr 1.05 dlr vs 51 cts
      Oper net 14.1 mln vs 5,669,000
      Revs 163.2 mln vs 133.2 mln
      Avg shrs 13.5 mln vs 11.5 mln
      Year
      Oper shr 65 cts vs 26 cts
      Oper net 8,664,000 vs 1,906,000
      Revs 287.8 mln vs 251 mln
      Avg shrs 13.4 mln vs 8,403,562
      NOTE: Prior year 4th qtr and year oper net excludes 13.1
  mln dlrs and 17.4 mln dlrs, respectively, for income from
  discontinued operations.
      Prior year 4th qtr and year oper net also excludes 19.2 mln
  dlrs and 20.3 mln dlrs, respectively, for operating loss
  carryforwards and other reogranization items.
      Prior year 4th qtr and year ended January 25, 1986.
  

RECENT U.S. OIL DEMAND UP 1.9 PCT FROM YEAR AGO
  U.S. oil demand as measured by
  products supplied rose 1.9 pct in the four weeks ended March
  six to 16.39 mln barrels per day from 16.08 mln in the same
  period a year ago, the Energy Information Administration (EIA)
  said.
      In its weekly petroleum status report, the Energy
  Department agency said distillate demand was down 2.2 pct in
  the period to 3.33 mln bpd from 3.40 mln a year earlier.
      Gasoline demand averaged 6.75 mln bpd, up 3.3 pct from 6.53
  mln last year, while residual fuel demand was 1.40 mln bpd, off
  2.7 pct from 1.43 mln, the EIA said.
      Domestic crude oil production was estimated at 8.38 mln
  bpd, down 8.5 pct from 9.15 mln a year ago, and gross daily
  crude imports (excluding those for the SPR) averaged 3.67 mln
  bpd, up 23 pct from 2.97 mln, the EIA said.
      Refinery crude runs in the four weeks were 12.05 mln bpd,
  up 1.5 pct from 11.87 mln a year earlier, it said.
      Year-to-date figures will not become available until March
  26 when EIA's Petroleum Supply Monthly data for January 1987
  becomes available, the agency said.
  

(MONTREAL CITY, DISTRICT SAVINGS BANK) 1ST QTR
  Shr 33 cts vs 24 cts
      Net 6.2 mln vs 4.9 mln
      Loans not given
      Deposits not given
      Assets 3.8 billion vs not given
      Note: full name Montreal City and District Savings Bank
      Period ended January 31
  

FRANCO NEVADA SAYS STOCK RISE DUE TO DRILLING
  Franco Nevada Mining Corp Ltd said the
  gain in its stock price today is related to deep drilling being
  conducted by American Barrick Resources Corp at the Goldstrike
  claims in the Carlin camp in northern Nevada.
      Franco Nevada stock is up two at seven dlrs per share on
  the Toronto Stock Exchange.
      Franco Nevada said American Barrick announced on March nine
  that the drilling indicated a number of significant
  intersections of sulfide gold mineralization below a depth of
  about 1,000 feet.
      One vertical drill hole intersected gold continuously from
  1,100 feet to 1,730 feet averaging 0.30 ounces per short ton,
  the announcement said.
  

BUSINESSMAN HAS 8.9 PCT OF DEL E. WEBB &lt;DWP.A>
  John Cotton, an Arizona businessman,
  told the Securities and Exchange Commission he has acquired the
  equivalent of 213,500 shares of Class A common shares in Del E.
  Webb Investment Properties, or 8.9 pct of the total.
      Cotton, president of Finalco Group Inc, a Paradise Valley,
  Ariz., data processing equipment maker, said he bought the
  stake, which includes warrants to buy 186,300 shares, for
  266,958 dlrs.
      The warrants are exerciseable at 9.50 dlrs a share, he
  said. Cotton said it bought the stock for investment purposes
  only.
  




TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT




Chapter One

News of a Treasure Wreck


There was a rushing, whizzing, throbbing noise in the air.  A great
body, like that of some immense bird, sailed along, casting a grotesque
shadow on the ground below.  An elderly man, who was seated on the
porch of a large house, started to his feet in alarm.

"Gracious goodness! What was that, Mrs. Baggert?" he called to a
motherly-looking woman who stood in the doorway.  "What happened?"

"Nothing much, Mr. Swift," was the calm reply "I think that was Tom and
Mr. Sharp in their airship, that's all. I didn't see it, but the noise
sounded like that of the Red Cloud."

"Of course! To be sure!" exclaimed Mr. Barton Swift, the well-known
inventor, as he started down the path in order to get a good view of
the air, unobstructed by the trees. "Yes, there they are," he added.
"That's the airship, but I didn't expect them back so soon. They must
have made good time from Shopton. I wonder if anything can be the
matter that they hurried so?"

He gazed aloft toward where a queerly-shaped machine was circling about
nearly five hundred feet in the air, for the craft, after swooping down
close to the house, had ascended and was now hovering just above the
line of breakers that marked the New Jersey seacoast, where Mr. Swift
had taken up a temporary residence.

"Don't begin worrying, Mr. Swift," advised Mrs. Baggert, the
housekeeper. "You've got too much to do, if you get that new boat done,
to worry."

"That's so. I must not worry. But I wish Tom and Mr. Sharp would land,
for I want to talk to them."

As if the occupants of the airship had heard the words of the aged
inventor, they headed their craft toward earth. The combined aeroplane
and dirigible balloon, a most wonderful traveler of the air, swung
around, and then, with the deflection rudders slanted downward, came on
with a rush.  When near the landing place, just at the side of the
house, the motor was stopped, and the gas, with a hissing noise, rushed
into the red aluminum container. This immediately made the ship more
buoyant and it landed almost as gently as a feather.

No sooner had the wheels which formed the lower part of the craft
touched the ground than there leaped from the cabin of the Red Cloud a
young man.

"Well, dad!" he exclaimed. "Here we are again, safe and sound. Made a
record, too. Touched ninety miles an hour at times--didn't we, Mr.
Sharp?"

"That's what," agreed a tall, thin, dark-complexioned man, who followed
Tom Swift more leisurely in his exit from the cabin. Mr. Sharp, a
veteran aeronaut, stopped to fasten guy ropes from the airship to
strong stakes driven into the ground.

"And we'd have done better, only we struck a hard wind against us about
two miles up in the air, which delayed us," went on Tom. "Did you hear
us coming, dad?"

"Yes, and it startled him," put in Mrs. Baggert. "I guess he wasn't
expecting you."

"Oh, well, I shouldn't have been so alarmed, only I was thinking deeply
about a certain change I am going to make in the submarine, Tom. I was
day-dreaming, I think, when your ship whizzed through the air. But tell
me, did you find everything all right at Shopton? No signs of any of
those scoundrels of the Happy Harry gang having been around?" and Mr.
Swift looked anxiously at his son.

"Not a sign, dad," replied Tom quickly. "Everything was all right. We
brought the things you wanted. They're in the airship. Oh, but it was a
fine trip. I'd like to take another right out to sea."

"Not now, Tom," said his father. "I want you to help me.  And I need
Mr. Sharp's help, too. Get the things out of the car, and we'll go to
the shop."

"First I think we'd better put the airship away," advised Mr. Sharp. "I
don't just like the looks of the weather, and, besides, if we leave the
ship exposed we'll be sure to have a crowd around sooner or later, and
we don't want that."

"No, indeed," remarked the aged inventor hastily. "I don't want people
prying around the submarine shed. By all means put the airship away,
and then come into the shop."

In spite of its great size the aeroplane was easily wheeled along by
Tom and Mr. Sharp, for the gas in the container made it so buoyant that
it barely touched the earth. A little more of the powerful vapor and
the Red Cloud would have risen by itself. In a few minutes the
wonderful craft, of which my readers have been told in detail in a
previous volume, was safely housed in a large tent, which was securely
fastened.

Mr. Sharp and Tom, carrying some bundles which they had taken from the
car, or cabin, of the craft, went toward a large shed, which adjoined
the house that Mr. Swift had hired for the season at the seashore. They
found the lad's father standing before a great shape, which loomed up
dimly in the semi-darkness of the building. It was like an immense
cylinder, pointed at either end, and here and there were openings,
covered with thick glass, like immense, bulging eyes. From the number
of tools and machinery all about the place, and from the appearance of
the great cylinder itself, it was easy to see that it was only partly
completed.

"Well, how goes it, dad?" asked the youth, as he deposited his bundle
on a bench. "Do you think you can make it work?"

"I think so, Tom. The positive and negative plates are giving me
considerable trouble, though. But I guess we can solve the problem. Did
you bring me the galvanometer?"

"Yes, and all the other things," and the young inventor proceeded to
take the articles from the bundles he carried.

Mr. Swift looked them over carefully, while Tom walked about examining
the submarine, for such was the queer craft that was contained in the
shed.  He noted that some progress had been made on it since he had
left the seacoast several days before to make a trip to Shopton, in New
York State, where the Swift home was located, after some tools and
apparatus that his father wanted to obtain from his workshop there.

"You and Mr. Jackson have put on several new plates," observed the lad
after a pause.

"Yes," admitted his father. "Garret and I weren't idle, were we,
Garret?" and he nodded to the aged engineer, who had been in his employ
for many years.

"No; and I guess we'll soon have her in the water, Tom, now that you
and Mr. Sharp are here to help us," replied Garret Jackson.

"We ought to have Mr. Damon here to bless the submarine and his liver
and collar buttons a few times," put in Mr. Sharp, who brought in
another bundle. He referred to an eccentric individual who had recently
made an airship voyage with himself and Tom, Mr. Damon's peculiarity
being to use continually such expressions as: "Bless my soul! Bless my
liver!"

"Well, I'll be glad when we can make a trial trip," went on Tom. "I've
traveled pretty fast on land with my motorcycle, and we certainly have
hummed through the air. Now I want to see how it feels to scoot along
under water."

"Well, if everything goes well we'll be in position to make a trial
trip inside of a month," remarked the aged inventor. "Look here, Mr.
Sharp, I made a change in the steering gear, which I'd like you and Tom
to consider."

The three walked around to the rear of the odd-looking structure, if an
object shaped like a cigar can be said to have a front and rear, and
the inventor, his son, and the aeronaut were soon deep in a discussion
of the technicalities connected with under-water navigation.

A little later they went into the house, in response to a summons from
the supper bell, vigorously rung by Mrs. Baggert. She was not fond of
waiting with meals, and even the most serious problem of mechanics was,
in her estimation, as nothing compared with having the soup get cold,
or the possibility of not having the meat done to a turn.

The meal was interspersed with remarks about the recent airship flight
of Tom and Mr. Sharp, and discussions about the new submarine. This
talk went on even after the table was cleared off and the three had
adjourned to the sitting-room. There Mr. Swift brought out pencil and
paper, and soon he and Mr. Sharp were engrossed in calculating the
pressure per square inch of sea water at a depth of three miles.

"Do you intend to go as deep as that?" asked Tom, looking up from a
paper he was reading.

"Possibly," replied his father; and his son resumed his perusal of the
sheet.

"Now," went on the inventor to the aeronaut, "I have another plan. In
addition to the positive and negative plates which will form our motive
power, I am going to install forward and aft propellers, to use in case
of accident."

"I say, dad! Did you see this?" suddenly exclaimed Tom, getting up from
his chair, and holding his finger on a certain place in the page of the
paper.

"Did I see what?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Why, this account of the sinking of the treasure ship."

"Treasure ship? No. Where?"

"Listen," went on Tom. "I'll read it: 'Further advices from Montevideo,
Uruguay, South America, state that all hope has been given up of
recovering the steamship Boldero, which foundered and went down off
that coast in the recent gale.  Not only has all hope been abandoned of
raising the vessel, but it is feared that no part of the three hundred
thousand dollars in gold bullion which she carried will ever be
recovered. Expert divers who were taken to the scene of the wreck state
that the depth of water, and the many currents existing there, due to a
submerged shoal, preclude any possibility of getting at the hull. The
bullion, it is believed, was to have been used to further the interests
of a certain revolutionary faction, but it seems likely that they will
have to look elsewhere for the sinews of war.  Besides the bullion the
ship also carried several cases of rifles, it is stated, and other
valuable cargo. The crew and what few passengers the Boldero carried
were, contrary to the first reports, all saved by taking to the boats.
It appears that some of the ship's plates were sprung by the stress in
which she labored in a storm, and she filled and sank gradually.'
There! what do you think of that, dad?" cried Tom as he finished.

"What do I think of it? Why, I think it's too bad for the
revolutionists, Tom, of course."

"No; I mean about the treasure being still on board the ship. What
about that?"

"Well, it's likely to stay there, if the divers can't get at it. Now,
Mr. Sharp, about the propellers--"

"Wait, dad!" cried Tom earnestly.

"Why, Tom, what's the matter?" asked Mr. Swift in some surprise.

"How soon before we can finish our submarine?" went on Tom, not
answering the question.

"About a month. Why?"

"Why? Dad, why can't we have a try for that treasure? It ought to be
comparatively easy to find that sunken ship off the coast of Uruguay.
In our submarine we can get close up to it, and in the new diving suits
you invented we can get at that gold bullion. Three hundred thousand
dollars! Think of it, dad! Three hundred thousand dollars! We could
easily claim all of it, since the owners have abandoned it, but we
would be satisfied with half. Let's hurry up, finish the submarine, and
have a try for it."

"But, Tom, you forget that I am to enter my new ship in the trials for
the prize offered by the United States Government."

"How much is the prize if you win it?" asked Tom.

"Fifty thousand dollars."

"Well, here's a chance to make three times that much at least, and
maybe more. Dad, let the Government prize go, and try for the treasure.
Will you?"

Tom looked eagerly at his father, his eyes shining with anticipation.
Mr. Swift was not a quick thinker, but the idea his son had proposed
made an impression on him. He reached out his hand for the paper in
which the young inventor had seen the account of the sunken treasure.
Slowly he read it through. Then he passed it to Mr. Sharp.

"What do you think of it?" he asked of the aeronaut.

"There's a possibility," remarked the balloonist "We might try for it.
We can easily go three miles down, and it doesn't lie as deeply as
that, if this account is true. Yes, we might try for it. But we'd have
to omit the Government contests."

"Will you, dad?" asked Tom again.

Mr. Swift considered a moment longer.

"Yes, Tom, I will," he finally decided. "Going after the treasure will
be likely to afford us a better test of the submarine than would any
Government tests. We'll try to locate the sunken Boldero."

"Hurrah!" cried the lad, taking the paper from Mr. Sharp and waving it
in the air. "That's the stuff!  Now for a search for the submarine
treasure!"




Chapter Two

Finishing the Submarine


"What's the matter?" cried Mrs. Baggert, the housekeeper, hurrying in
from the kitchen, where she was washing the dishes. "Have you seen some
of those scoundrels who robbed you, Mr. Swift? If you have, the police
down here ought to--"

"No, it's nothing like that," explained Mr. Swift. "Tom has merely
discovered in the paper an account of a sunken treasure ship, and he
wants us to go after it, down under the ocean."

"Oh, dear! Some more of Captain Kidd's hidden hoard, I suppose?"
ventured the housekeeper. "Don't you bother with it, Mr. Swift. I had a
cousin once, and he got set in the notion that he knew where that
pirate's treasure was. He spent all the money he had and all he could
borrow digging for it, and he never found a penny. Don't waste your
time on such foolishness. It's bad enough to be building airships and
submarines without going after treasure."  Mrs. Baggert spoke with the
freedom of an old friend rather than a hired housekeeper, but she had
been in the family ever since Tom's mother died, when he was a baby,
and she had many privileges.

"Oh, this isn't any of Kidd's treasure," Tom assured her.  "If we get
it, Mrs. Baggert, I'll buy you a diamond ring."

"Humph!" she exclaimed, as Tom began to hug her in boyish fashion. "I
guess I'll have to buy all the diamond rings I want, if I have to
depend on your treasure for them," and she went back to the kitchen.

"Well," went on Mr. Swift after a pause, "if we are going into the
treasure-hunting business, Tom, we'll have to get right to work. In the
first place, we must find out more about this ship, and just where it
was sunk."

"I can do that part," said Mr. Sharp. "I know some sea captains, and
they can put me on the track of locating the exact spot. In fact, it
might not be a bad idea to take an expert navigator with us. I can
manage in the air all right, but I confess that working out a location
under water is beyond me."

"Yes, an old sea captain wouldn't be a bad idea, by any means,"
conceded Mr. Swift. "Well, if you'll attend to that detail, Mr. Sharp,
Tom, Mr. Jackson and I will finish the submarine. Most of the work is
done, however, and it only remains to install the engine and motors.
Now, in regard to the negative and positive electric plates, I'd like
your opinion, Tom."

For Tom Swift was an inventor, second in ability only to his father,
and his advice was often sought by his parent on matters of electrical
construction, for the lad had made a specialty of that branch of
science.

While father and son were deep in a discussion of the apparatus of the
submarine, there will be an opportunity to make the reader a little
better acquainted with them. Those of you who have read the previous
volumes of this series do not need to be told who Tom Swift is. Others,
however, may be glad to have a proper introduction to him.

Tom Swift lived with his father, Barton Swift, in the village of
Shopton, New York. The Swift home was on the outskirts of the town, and
the large house was surrounded by a number of machine shops, in which
father and son, aided by Garret Jackson, the engineer, did their
experimental and constructive work. Their house was not far from Lake
Carlopa, a fairly large body of water, on which Tom often speeded his
motor-boat.

In the first volume of this series, entitled "Tom Swift and His
Motor-Cycle," it was told how he became acquainted with Mr. Wakefield
Damon, who suffered an accident while riding one of the speedy
machines. The accident disgusted Mr. Damon with motor-cycles, and Tom
secured it for a low price. He had many adventures on it, chief among
which was being knocked senseless and robbed of a valuable patent model
belonging to his father, which he was taking to Albany. The attack was
committed by a gang known as the Happy Harry gang, who were acting at
the instigation of a syndicate of rich men, who wanted to secure
control of a certain patent turbine engine which Mr. Swift had invented.

Tom set out in pursuit of the thieves, after recovering from their
attack, and had a strenuous time before he located them.

In the second volume, entitled "Tom Swift and His Motor-Boat," there
was related our hero's adventures in a fine craft which was recovered
from the thieves and sold at auction. There was a mystery connected
with the boat, and for a long time Tom could not solve it. He was
aided, however, by his chum, Ned Newton, who worked in the Shopton
Bank, and also by Mr. Damon and Eradicate Sampson, an aged colored
whitewasher, who formed quite an attachment for Tom.

In his motor-boat Tom had more than one race with Andy Foger, a rich
lad of Shopton, who was a sort of bully. He had red hair and squinty
eyes, and was as mean in character as he was in looks. He and his
cronies, Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey, made trouble for Tom, chiefly
because Tom managed to beat Andy twice in boat races.

It was while in his motor-boat, Arrow, that Tom formed the acquaintance
of John Sharp, a veteran balloonist. While coming down Lake Carlopa on
the way to the Swift home, which had been entered by thieves, Tom, his
father and Ned Newton, saw a balloon on fire over the lake. Hanging
from a trapeze on it was Mr. Sharp, who had made an ascension from a
fair ground. By hard work on the part of Tom and his friends the
aeronaut was saved, and took up his residence with the Swifts.

His advent was most auspicious, for Tom and his father were then
engaged in perfecting an airship, and Mr. Sharp was able to lend them
his skill, so that the craft was soon constructed.

In the third volume, called "Tom Swift and His Airship," there was set
down the doings of the young inventor, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon on a
trip above the clouds. They undertook it merely for pleasure, but they
encountered considerable danger, before they completed it, for they
nearly fell into a blazing forest once, and were later fired at by a
crowd of excited people. This last act was to effect their capture, for
they were taken for a gang of bank robbers, and this was due directly
to Andy Foger.

The morning after Tom and his friends started on their trip in the air,
the Shopton Bank was found to have been looted of seventy-five thousand
dollars. Andy Foger at once told the police that Tom Swift had taken
the money, and when asked how he knew this, he said he had seen Tom
hanging around the bank the night before the vault was burst open, and
that the young inventor had some burglar tools in his possession.
Warrants were at once sworn out for Tom and Mr. Damon, who was also
accused of being one of the robbers, and a reward of five thousand
dollars was offered.

Tom, Mr. Damon and Mr. Sharp sailed on, all unaware of this, and unable
to account for being fired upon, until they accidentally read in the
paper an account of their supposed misdeeds. They lost no time in
starting back home, and on the way got on the track of the real bank
robbers, who were members of the Happy Harry gang.

How the robbers were captured in an exciting raid, how Tom recovered
most of the stolen money, and how he gave Andy Foger a deserved
thrashing for giving a false clue was told of, and there was an account
of a race in which the Red Cloud (as the airship was called) took part,
as well as details of how Tom and his friends secured the reward, which
Andy Foger hoped to collect.

Those of you who care to know how the Red Cloud was constructed, and
how she behaved in the air, even during accidents and when struck by
lightning, may learn by reading the third volume, for the airship was
one of the most successful ever constructed.

When the craft was finished, and the navigators were ready to start on
their first long trip, Mr. Swift was asked to go with them. He
declined, but would not tell why, until Tom, pressing him for an
answer, learned that his father was planning a submarine boat, which he
hoped to enter in some trials for Government prizes. Mr. Swift remained
at home to work on this submarine, while his son and Mr. Sharp were
sailing above the clouds.

On their return, however, and after the bank mystery had been cleared
up, Tom and Mr. Sharp, aided Mr. Swift in completing the submarine,
until, when the present story opens, it needed but little additional
work to make the craft ready for the water.

Of course it had to be built near the sea, as it would have been
impossible to transport it overland from Shopton.  So, before the keel
was laid, Mr. Swift rented a large cottage at a seaside place on the
New Jersey coast and there, after erecting a large shed, the work on
the Advance, as the under-water ship was called, was begun.

It was soon to be launched in a large creek that extended in from the
ocean and had plenty of water at high tide. Tom and Mr. Sharp made
several trips back and forth from Shopton in their airship, to see that
all was safe at home and occasionally to get needed tools and supplies
from the shops, for not all the apparatus could be moved from Shopton
to the coast.

It was when returning from one of these trips that Tom brought with him
the paper containing an account of the wreck of the Boldero and the
sinking of the treasure she carried.

Until late that night the three fortune-hunters discussed various
matters.

"We'll hurry work on the ship," said Mr. Swift at length.  "Tom, I
wonder if your friend, Mr. Damon, would care to try how it seems under
water? He stood the air trip fairly well."

"I'll write and ask him," answered the lad. "I'm sure he'll go."

Securing, a few days later, the assistance of two mechanics, whom he
knew he could trust, for as yet the construction of the Advance was a
secret, Mr. Swift prepared to rush work on the submarine, and for the
next three weeks there were busy times in the shed next to the seaside
cottage. So busy, in fact, were Tom and Mr. Sharp, that they only found
opportunity for one trip in the airship, and that was to get some
supplies from the shops at home.

"Well," remarked Mr. Swift one night, at the close of a hard day's
work, "another week will see our craft completed.  Then we will put it
in the water and see how it floats, and whether it submerges as I hope
it does. But come on, Tom. I want to lock up. I'm very tired to-night."

"All right, dad," answered the young inventor coming from the darkened
rear of the shop. "I just want to--"

He paused suddenly, and appeared to be listening. Then he moved softly
back to where he had come from.

"What's the matter?" asked his father in a whisper.  "What's up, Tom?"

The lad did not answer Mr. Swift, with a worried look on his face,
followed his son. Mr. Sharp stood in the door of the shop.

"I thought I heard some one moving around back here," went on Tom
quietly.

"Some one in this shop!" exclaimed the aged inventor excitedly. "Some
one trying to steal my ideas again! Mr. Sharp, come here! Bring that
rifle! We'll teach these scoundrels a lesson!"

Tom quickly darted back to the extreme rear of the building. There was
a scuffle, and the next minute Tom cried out:

"What are you doing here?"

"Ha! I beg your pardon," replied a voice. "I am looking for Mr. Barton
Swift."

"My father," remarked Tom. "But that's a queer place to look for him.
He's up front. Father, here's a man who wishes to see you," he called.

"Yes, I strolled in, and seeing no one about I went to the rear of the
place," the voice went on. "I hope I haven't transgressed."

"We were busy on the other side of the shop, I guess," replied Tom, and
he looked suspiciously at the man who emerged from the darkness into
the light from a window. "I beg your pardon for grabbing you the way I
did," went on the lad, "but I thought you were one of a gang of men
we've been having trouble with."

"Oh, that's all right," continued the man easily. "I know Mr. Swift,
and I think he will remember me. Ah, Mr. Swift, how do you do?" he
added quickly, catching sight of Tom's father, who, with Mr. Sharp, was
coming to meet the lad.

"Addison Berg!" exclaimed the aged inventor as he saw the man's face
more plainly. "What are you doing here?"

"I came to see you," replied the man. "May I have a talk with you
privately?"

"I--I suppose so," assented Mr. Swift nervously. "Come into the house."

Mr. Berg left Tom's side and advanced to where Mr. Swift was standing.
Together the two emerged from the now fast darkening shop and went
toward the house.

"Who is he?" asked Mr. Sharp of the young inventor in a whisper.

"I don't know," replied the lad; "but, whoever he is, dad seems afraid
of him. I'm going to keep my eyes open."




Chapter Three

Mr. Berg is Astonished


Following his father and the stranger whom the aged inventor had
addressed as Mr. Berg, Tom and Mr. Sharp entered the house, the lad
having first made sure that Garret Jackson was on guard in the shop
that contained the submarine.

"Now," said Mr. Swift to the newcomer, "I am at your service. What is
it you wish?"

"In the first place, let me apologize for having startled you and your
friends," began the man. "I had no idea of sneaking into your workshop,
but I had just arrived here, and seeing the doors open I went in. I
heard no one about, and I wandered to the back of the place. There I
happened to stumble over a board--"

"And I heard you," interrupted Tom.

"Is this one of your employees?" asked Mr. Berg in rather frigid tones.

"That is my son," replied Mr. Swift.

"Oh, I beg your pardon." The man's manner changed quickly.  "Well, I
guess you did hear me, young man. I didn't intend to bark my shins the
way I did, either. You must have taken me for a burglar or a sneak
thief."

"I have been very much bothered by a gang of unscrupulous men," said
Mr. Swift, "and I suppose Tom thought it was some of them sneaking
around again."

"That's what I did," added the lad. "I wasn't going to have any one
steal the secret of the submarine if I could help it."

"Quite right! Quite right!" exclaimed Mr. Berg. "But my purpose was an
open one. As you know, Mr. Swift, I represent the firm of Bentley &
Eagert, builders of submarine boats and torpedoes. They heard that you
were constructing a craft to take part in the competitive prize tests
of the United States Government, and they asked me to come and see you
to learn when your ship would be ready. Ours is completed, but we
recognize that it will be for the best interests of all concerned if
there are a number of contestants, and my firm did not want to send in
their entry until they knew that you were about finished with your
ship. How about it? Are you ready to compete?"

"Yes," said Mr. Swift slowly. "We are about ready. My craft needs a few
finishing touches, and then it will be ready to launch."

"Then we may expect a good contest on your part," suggested Mr. Berg.

"Well," began the aged inventor, "I don't know about that."

"What's that?" exclaimed Mr. Berg.

"I said I wasn't quite sure that we would compete," went on Mr. Swift.
"You see, when I first got this idea for a submarine boat I had it in
mind to try for the Government prize of fifty thousand dollars."

"That's what we want, too," interrupted Mr. Berg with a smile.

"But," went on Tom's father, "since then certain matters have come up,
and I think, on the whole, that we'll not compete for the prize after
all."

"Not compete for the prize?" almost shouted the agent for Bentley &
Eagert. "Why, the idea! You ought to compete. It is good for the trade.
We think we have a very fine craft, and probably we would beat you in
the tests, but--"

"I wouldn't be too sure of that," put in Tom. "You have only seen the
outside of our boat. The inside is better yet."

"Ah, I have no doubt of that," spoke Mr. Berg, "but we have been at the
business longer than you have, and have had more experience. Still we
welcome competition. But I am very much surprised that you are not
going to compete for the prize, Mr. Swift. Very much surprised, indeed!
You see, I came down from Philadelphia to arrange so that we could both
enter our ships at the same time. I understand there is another firm of
submarine boat builders who are going to try for the prize, and I want
to arrange a date that will be satisfactory to all. I am greatly
astonished that you are not going to compete."

"Well, we were going to," said Mr. Swift, "only we have changed our
minds, that's all. My son and I have other plans."

"May I ask what they are?" questioned Mr. Berg.

"You may," exclaimed Tom quickly; "but I don't believe we can tell you.
They're a secret," he added more cordially.

"Oh, I see," retorted Mr. Berg. "Well, of course I don't wish to
penetrate any of your secrets, but I hoped we could contest together
for the Government prize. It is worth trying for I assure you--fifty
thousand dollars. Besides, there is the possibility of selling a number
of submarines to the United States. It's a fine prize."

"But the one we are after is a bigger one," cried Tom impetuously, and
the moment he had spoken he wished he could recall the words.

"Eh? What's that?" exclaimed Mr. Berg. "You don't mean to say another
government has offered a larger prize? If I had known that I would not
have let my firm enter into the competition for the bonus offered by
the United States.  Please tell me."

"I'm sorry," went on Tom more soberly. "I shouldn't have spoken. Mr.
Berg, the plans of my father and myself are such that we can't reveal
them now. We are going to try for a prize, but not in competition with
you. It's an entirely different matter."

"Well, I guess you'll find that the firm of Bentley & Eagert are
capable of trying for any prizes that are offered," boasted the agent.
"We may be competitors yet."

"I don't believe so," replied Mr. Swift.

"We may," repeated Mr. Berg. "And if we do, please remember that we
will show no mercy. Our boats are the best."

"And may the best boat win," interjected Mr. Sharp.  "That's all we
ask. A fair field and no favors."

"Of course," spoke the agent coldly. "Is this another son of yours?" he
asked.

"No but a good friend," replied the aged inventor. "No, Mr. Berg, we
won't compete this time. You may tell your firm so."

"Very good," was the other's stiff reply. "Then I will bid you good
night. We shall carry off the Government prize, but permit me to add
that I am very much astonished, very much indeed, that you do not try
for the prize. From what I have seen of your submarine you have a very
good one, almost as good, in some respects, as ours.  I bid you good
night," and with a bow the man left the room and hurried away from the
house.




Chapter Four

Tom is Imprisoned


"Well, I must say he's a cool one," remarked Tom, as the echoes of Mr.
Berg's steps died away. "The idea of thinking his boat better than
ours! I don't like that man, dad. I'm suspicious of him. Do you think
he came here to steal some of our ideas?"

"No, I hardly believe so, my son. But how did you discover him?"

"Just as you saw, dad. I heard a noise and went back there to
investigate. I found him sneaking around, looking at the electric
propeller plates. I went to grab him just as he stumbled over a board.
At first I thought it was one of the old gang. I'm almost sure he was
trying to discover something."

"No, Tom. The firm he works for are good business men, and they would
not countenance anything like that. They are heartless competitors,
however, and if they saw a legitimate chance to get ahead of me and
take advantage, they would do it. But they would not sneak in to steal
my ideas. I feel sure of that. Besides, they have a certain type of
submarine which they think is the best ever invented, and they would
hardly change at this late day. They feel sure of winning the
Government prize, and I'm just as glad we're not going to have a
contest."

"Do you think our boat is better than theirs?"

"Much better, in many respects."

"I don't like that man Berg, though," went on Tom.

"Nor do I," added his father. "There is something strange about him.
He was very anxious that I should compete.  Probably he thought his
firm's boat would go so far ahead of ours that they would get an extra
bonus. But I'm glad he didn't see our new method of propulsion. That is
the principal improvement in the Advance over other types of
submarines. Well, another week and we will be ready for the test."

"Have you known Mr. Berg long, dad?"

"Not very. I met him in Washington when I was in the patent office. He
was taking out papers on a submarine for his firm at the same time I
got mine for the Advance. It is rather curious that he should come all
the way here from Philadelphia, merely to see if I was going to
compete. There is something strange about it, something that I can't
understand."

The time was to come when Mr. Swift and his son were to get at the
bottom of Mr. Berg's reasons, and they learned to their sorrow that he
had penetrated some of their secrets.

Before going to bed that night Tom and Mr. Sharp paid a visit to the
shed where the submarine was resting on the ways, ready for launching.
They found Mr. Jackson on guard and the engineer said that no one had
been around. Nor was anything found disturbed.

"It certainly is a great machine," remarked the lad as he looked up at
the cigar-shaped bulk towering over his head.  "Dad has outdone himself
this trip."

"It looks all right," commented Mr. Sharp. "Whether it will work is
another question."

"Yes, we can't tell until it's in the water," conceded Tom. "But I
hope it does. Dad has spent much time and money on it."

The Advance was, as her name indicated, much in advance of previous
submarines. There was not so much difference in outward construction as
there was in the means of propulsion and in the manner in which the
interior and the machinery were arranged.

The submarine planned by Mr. Swift and Tom jointly, and constructed by
them, with the aid of Mr. Sharp and Mr. Jackson, was shaped like a
Cigar, over one hundred feet long and twenty feet in diameter at the
thickest part. It was divided into many compartments, all water-tight,
so that if one or even three were flooded the ship would still be
useable.

Buoyancy was provided for by having several tanks for the introduction
of compressed air, and there was an emergency arrangement so that a
collapsible aluminum container could be distended and filled with a
powerful gas. This was to be used if, by any means, the ship was
disabled on the bottom of the ocean. The container could be expanded
and filled, and would send the Advance to the surface.

Another peculiar feature was that the engine-room, dynamos and other
apparatus were all contained amidships. This gave stability to the
craft, and also enabled the same engine to operate both shafts and
propellers, as well as both the negative forward electrical plates, and
the positive rear ones.

These plates were a new idea in submarine construction, and were the
outcome of an idea of Mr. Swift, with some suggestions from his son.

The aged inventor did not want to depend on the usual screw propellers
for his craft, nor did he want to use a jet of compressed air, shooting
out from a rear tube, nor yet a jet of water, by means of which the
creature called the squid shoots himself along. Mr. Swift planned to
send the Advance along under water by means of electricity.

Certain peculiar plates were built at the forward and aft blunt noses
of the submarine. Into the forward plate a negative charge of
electricity was sent, and into the one at the rear a positive charge,
just as one end of a horseshoe magnet is positive and will repel the
north end of a compass needle, while the other pole of a magnet is
negative and will attract it. In electricity like repels like, while
negative and positive have a mutual attraction for each other.

Mr. Swift figured out that if he could send a powerful current of
negative electricity into the forward plate it would pull the boat
along, for water is a good conductor of electricity, while if a
positive charge was sent into the rear plate it would serve to push the
submarine along, and he would thus get a pulling and pushing motion,
just as a forward and aft propeller works on some ferry boats.

But the inventor did not depend on these plates alone.  There were
auxiliary forward and aft propellers of the regular type, so that if
the electrical plates did not work, or got out of order, the screws
would serve to send the Advance along.

There was much machinery in the submarine. There were gasolene motors,
since space was too cramped to allow the carrying of coal for boilers.
There were dynamos, motors and powerful pumps. Some of these were for
air, and some for water. To sink the submarine below the surface large
tanks were filled with water. To insure a more sudden descent,
deflecting rudders were also used, similar to those on an airship.
There were also special air pumps, and one for the powerful gas, which
was manufactured on board.

Forward from the engine-room was a cabin, where meals could be served,
and where the travelers could remain in the daytime. There was also a
small cooking galley, or kitchen, there. Back of the engine-room were
the sleeping quarters and the storerooms. The submarine was steered
from the forward compartment, and here were also levers, wheels and
valves that controlled all the machinery, while a number of dials
showed in which direction they were going, how deep they were, and at
what speed they were moving, as well as what the ocean pressure was.

On top, forward, was a small conning, or observation tower, with
auxiliary and steering and controlling apparatus there. This was to be
used when the ship was moving along on the surface of the ocean, or
merely with the deck awash.  There was a small flat deck surrounding
the conning tower and this was available when the craft was on the
surface.

There was provision made for leaving the ship when it was on the bed of
the ocean. When it was desired to do this the occupants put on diving
suits, which were provided with portable oxygen tanks. Then they
entered a chamber into which water was admitted until it was equal in
pressure to that outside. Then a steel door was opened, and they could
step out. To re-enter the ship the operation was reversed.  This was
not a new feature. In fact, many submarines to-day use it.

At certain places there were thick bull's-eye windows, by means of
which the under-water travelers could look out into the ocean through
which they were moving. As a defense against the attacks of submarine
monsters there was a steel, pointed ram, like a big harpoon. There were
also a bow and a stern electrical gun, of which more will be told later.

In addition to ample sleeping accommodations, there were many
conveniences aboard the Advance. Plenty of fresh water could be
carried, and there was an apparatus for distilling more from the sea
water that surrounded the travelers.  Compressed air was carried in
large tanks, and oxygen could be made as needed. In short, nothing that
could add to the comfort or safety of the travelers had been omitted.
There was a powerful crane and windlass, which had been installed when
Mr. Swift thought his boat might be bought by the Government. This was
to be used for raising wrecks or recovering objects from the bottom of
the ocean. Ample stores and provisions were to be carried and, once the
travelers were shut up in the Advance, they could exist for a month
below the surface, providing no accident occurred.

All these things Tom and Mr. Sharp thought of as they looked over the
ship before turning in for the night. The craft was made immensely
strong to withstand powerful pressure at the bottom of the ocean. The
submarine could penetrate to a depth of about three miles. Below that
it was dangerous to go, as the awful force would crush the plates,
powerful as they were.

"Well, we'll rush things to-morrow and the next day," observed Tom as
he prepared to leave the building. "Then we'll soon see if it works."

For the next week there were busy times in the shop near the ocean.
Great secrecy was maintained, and though curiosity seekers did stroll
along now and then, they received little satisfaction. At first Mr.
Swift thought that the visit of Mr. Berg would have unpleasant results,
for he feared that the agent would talk about the craft, of which he
had so unexpectedly gotten a sight. But nothing seemed to follow from
his chance inspection, and it was forgotten.

It was one evening, about a week later, that Tom was alone in the shop.
The two mechanics that had been hired to help out in the rush had been
let go, and the ship needed but a few adjustments to make it ready for
the sea.

"I think I'll just take another look at the water tank valves," said
Tom to himself as he prepared to enter the big compartments which
received the water ballast. "I want to be sure they work properly and
quickly. We've got to depend on them to make us sink when we want to,
and, what's more important, to rise to the surface in a hurry. I've got
time enough to look them over before dad and Mr. Sharp get back."

Tom entered the starboard tank by means of an emergency sliding door
between the big compartments and the main part of the ship. This was
closed by a worm and screw gear, and once the ship was in the water
would seldom be used.

The young inventor proceeded with his task, carefully inspecting the
valves by the light of a lantern he carried.  The apparatus seemed to
be all right, and Tom was about to leave when a peculiar noise
attracted his attention. It was the sound of metal scraping on metal,
and the lad's quick and well-trained ear told him it was somewhere
about the ship.

He turned to leave the tank, but as he wheeled around his light flashed
on a solid wall of steel back of him. The emergency outlet had been
closed! He was a prisoner in the water compartment, and he knew, from
past experience, that shout as he would, his voice could not be heard
ten feet away. His father and Mr. Sharp, as he was aware, had gone to a
nearby city for some tools, and Mr. Jackson, the engineer, was
temporarily away. Mrs. Baggert, in the house, could not hear his cries.

"I'm locked in!" cried Tom aloud. "The worm gear must have shut of
itself. But I don't see how that could be. I've got to get out mighty
soon, though, or I'll smother. This tank is airtight, and it won't take
me long to breath up all the oxygen there is here. I must get that
slide open."

He sought to grasp the steel plate that closed the emergency opening.
His fingers slipped over the smooth, polished surface. He was
hermetically sealed up--a captive!  Blankly he set his lantern down and
leaned hopelessly against the wall of the tank.

"I've got to get out," he murmured.

As if in answer to him he heard a voice on the outside, crying:

"There, Tom Swift! I guess I've gotten even with you now!  Maybe next
time you won't take a reward away from me, and lick me into the
bargain. I've got you shut up good and tight, and you'll stay there
until I get ready to let you out."

"Andy Foger!" gasped Tom. "Andy Foger sneaked in here and turned the
gear. But how did he get to this part of the coast? Andy Foger, you let
me out!" shouted the young inventor; and as Andy's mocking laugh came
to him faintly through the steel sides of the submarine, the imprisoned
lad beat desperately with his hands on the smooth sides of the tank,
vainly wondering how his enemy had discovered him.




Chapter Five

Mr. Berg is Suspicious


Not for long did the young inventor endeavor to break his way out of
the water-ballast tank by striking the heavy sides of it. Tom realized
that this was worse than useless.  He listened intently, but could hear
nothing. Even the retreating footsteps of Andy Foger were inaudible.

"This certainly is a pickle!" exclaimed Tom aloud. "I can't understand
how he ever got here. He must have traced us after we went to Shopton
in the airship the last time.  Then he sneaked in here. Probably he saw
me enter, but how could he know enough to work the worm gear and close
the door? Andy has had some experience with machinery, though, and one
of the vaults in the bank where his father is a director closed just
like this tank. That's very likely how he learned about it. But I've
got to do something else besides thinking of that sneak, Andy. I've got
to get out of here. Let's see if I can work the gear from inside."

Before he started, almost, Tom knew that it would be impossible. The
tank was made to close from the interior of the submarine, and the
heavy door, built to withstand the pressure of tons of water, could not
be forced except by the proper means.

"No use trying that," concluded the lad, after a tiring attempt to
force back the sliding door with his hands. "I've got to call for help."

He shouted until the vibrations in the confined space made his ears
ring, and the mere exertion of raising his voice to the highest pitch
made his heart beat quickly. Yet there came no response. He hardly
expected that there would be any, for with his father and Mr. Sharp
away, the engineer absent on an errand, and Mrs. Baggert in the house
some distance off, there was no one to hear his calls for help, even if
they had been capable of penetrating farther than the extent of the
shed, where the under-water craft had been constructed.

"I've got to wait until some of them come out here," thought Tom.
"They'll be sure to release me and make a search. Then it will be easy
enough to call to them and tell them where I am, once they are inside
the shed. But--" He paused, for a horrible fear came over him. "Suppose
they should come--too late?" The tank was airtight. There was enough
air in it to last for some time, but, sooner or later, it would no
longer support life. Already, Tom thought, it seemed oppressive, though
probably that was his imagination.

"I must get out!" he repeated frantically. "I'll die in here soon."

Again he tried to shove back the steel door. Then he repeated his cries
until he was weary. No one answered him.  He fancied once he could hear
footsteps in the shed, and thought, perhaps, it was Andy, come back to
gloat over him.  Then Tom knew the red-haired coward would not dare
venture back. We must do Andy the justice to say that he never realized
that he was endangering Tom's life. The bully had no idea the tank was
airtight when he closed it. He had seen Tom enter and a sudden whim
came to him to revenge himself.

But that did not help the young inventor any. There was no doubt about
it now--the air was becoming close. Tom had been imprisoned nearly two
hours, and as he was a healthy, strong lad, he required plenty of
oxygen. There was certainly less than there had been in the tank. His
head began to buzz, and there was a ringing in his ears.

Once more he fell upon his knees, and his fingers sought the small
projections of the gear on the inside of the door. He could no more
budge the mechanism than a child could open a burglar-proof vault.

"It's no use," he moaned, and he sprawled at full length on the floor
of the tank, for there the air was purer. As he did so his fingers
touched something. He started as they closed around the handle of a big
monkey wrench. It was one he had brought into the place with him.
Imbued with new hope be struck a match and lighted his lantern, which
he had allowed to go out as it burned up too much of the oxygen. By the
gleam of it he looked to see if there were any bolts or nuts he could
loosen with the wrench, in order to slide the door back. It needed but
a glance to show him the futility of this.

"It's no go," he murmured, and he let the wrench fall to the floor.
There was a ringing, clanging sound, and as it smote his ears Tom
sprang up with an exclamation.

"That's the thing!" he cried. "I wonder I didn't think of it before. I
can signal for help by pounding on the sides of the tank with the
wrench. The blows will carry a good deal farther than my voice would."
Every one knows how far the noise of a boiler shop, with hammers
falling on steel plates, can be heard; much farther than can a human
voice.

Tom began a lusty tattoo on the metal sides of the tank.  At first he
merely rattled out blow after blow, and then, as another thought came
to him, he adopted a certain plan. Some time previous, when he and Mr.
Sharp had planned their trip in the air, the two had adopted a code of
signals. As it was difficult in a high wind to shout from one end of
the airship to the other, the young inventor would sometimes pound on
the pipe which ran from the pilot house of the Red Cloud to the
engine-room. By a combination of numbers, simple messages could be
conveyed. The code included a call for help. Forty-seven was the
number, but there had never been any occasion to use it.

Tom remembered this now. At once he ceased his indiscriminate
hammering, and began to beat out regularly--one, two, three, four--then
a pause, and seven blows would be given. Over and over again he rang
out this number--forty seven--the call for help.

"If Mr. Sharp only comes back he will hear that, even in the house,"
thought poor Tom "Maybe Garret or Mrs. Baggert will hear it, too, but
they won't know what it means.  They'll think I'm just working on the
submarine."

It seemed several hours to Tom that he pounded out that cry for aid,
but, as he afterward learned, it was only a little over an hour. Signal
after signal he sent vibrating from the steel sides of the tank. When
one arm tired he would use the other. He grew weary, his head was
aching, and there was a ringing in his ears; a ringing that seemed as
if ten thousand bells were jangling out their peals, and he could
barely distinguish his own pounding.

Signal after signal he sounded. It was becoming like a dream to him,
when suddenly, as he paused for a rest, he heard his name called
faintly, as if far away.

"Tom! Tom! Where are you?"

It was the voice of Mr. Sharp. Then followed the tones of the aged
inventor.

"My poor boy! Tom, are you still alive?"

"Yes, dad! In the starboard tank!" the lad gasped out, and then he lost
his senses. When he revived he was lying on a pile of bagging in the
submarine shop, and his father and the aeronaut were bending over him.

"Are you all right, Tom?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Yes--I--I guess so," was the hesitating answer. "Yes," the lad added,
as the fresh air cleared his head. "I'll be all right pretty soon. Have
you seen Andy Foger?"

"Did he shut you in there?" demanded Mr. Swift.

Tom nodded.

"I'll have him arrested!" declared Mr. Swift. "I'll go to town as soon
as you're in good shape again and notify the police."

"No, don't," pleaded Tom. "I'll take care of Andy myself.  I don't
really believe he knew how serious it was. I'll settle with him later,
though."

"Well, it came mighty near being serious," remarked Mr. Sharp grimly.
"Your father and I came back a little sooner than we expected, and as
soon as I got near the house I heard your signal. I knew what it was in
a moment. There were Mrs. Baggert and Garret talking away, and when I
asked them why they didn't answer your call they said they thought you
were merely tinkering with the machinery. But I knew better. It's the
first time we ever had a use for 'forty-seven,' Tom."

"And I hope it will be the last," replied the young inventor with a
faint smile. "But I'd like to know what Andy Foger is doing in this
neighborhood."

Tom was soon himself again and able to go to the house, where he found
Mrs. Baggert brewing a big basin of catnip tea, under the impression
that it would in some way be good for him. She could not forgive
herself for not having answered his signal, and as for Mr. Jackson, he
had started for a doctor as soon as he learned that Tom was shut up in
the tank. The services of the medical man were canceled by telephone,
as there was no need for him, and the engineer came back to the house.

Tom was fully himself the next day, and aided his father and Mr. Sharp
in putting the finishing touches to the Advance. It was found that some
alteration was required in the auxiliary propellers, and this, much to
the regret of the young inventor, would necessitate postponing the
trial a few days.

"But we'll have her in the water next Friday," promised Mr. Swift.

"Aren't you superstitious about Friday?" asked the balloonist.

"Not a bit of it," replied the aged inventor. "Tom," he added, "I wish
you would go in the house and get me the roll of blueprints you'll find
on my desk."

As the lad neared the cottage he saw, standing in front of the place, a
small automobile. A man had just descended from it, and it needed but a
glance to show that he was Mr. Addison Berg.

"Ah, good morning, Mr. Swift," greeted Mr. Berg. "I wish to see your
father, but as I don't wish to lay myself open to suspicions by
entering the shop, perhaps you will ask him to step here."

"Certainly," answered the lad, wondering why the agent had returned.
Getting the blueprints, and asking Mr. Berg to sit down on the porch,
Tom delivered the message.

"You come back with me, Tom," said his father. "I want you to be a
witness to what he says. I'm not going to get into trouble with these
people."

Mr. Berg came to the point at once.

"Mr. Swift," he said, "I wish you would reconsider your determination
not to enter the Government trials. I'd like to see you compete. So
would my firm."

"There is no use going over that again," replied the aged inventor. "I
have another object in view now than trying for the Government prize.
What it is I can't say, but it may develop in time--if we are
successful," and he looked at his son, smiling the while.

Mr. Berg tried to argue, but it was of no avail. Then he changed his
manner, and said:

"Well, since you won't, you won't, I suppose. I'll go back and report
to my firm.  Have you anything special to do this morning?" he went on
to Tom.

"Well, I can always find something to keep me busy," replied the lad,
"but as for anything special--"

"I thought perhaps you'd like to go for a trip in my auto," interrupted
Mr. Berg. "I had asked a young man who is stopping at the same hotel
where I am to accompany me, but he has unexpectedly left, and I don't
like to go alone. His name was--let me see. I have a wretched memory
for names, but it was something like Roger or Moger."

"Foger!" cried Tom. "Was it Andy Foger?"

"Yes, that was it. Why, do you know him?" asked Mr. Berg in some
surprise.

"I should say so," replied Tom. "He was the cause of what might have
resulted in something serious for me," and the lad explained about
being imprisoned in the tank.

"You don't tell me!" cried Mr. Berg. "I had no idea he was that kind of
a lad. You see, his father is one of the directors of the firm by whom
I am employed. Andy came from home to spend a few weeks at the seaside,
and stopped at the same hotel that I did. He went off yesterday
afternoon, and I haven't seen him since, though he promised to go for a
ride with me. He must have come over here and entered your shop
unobserved. I remember now he asked me where the submarine was being
built that was going to compete with our firm's, and I told him. I
didn't think he was that kind of a lad. Well, since he's probably gone
back home, perhaps you will come for a ride with me, Tom."

"I'm afraid I can't go, thank you," answered the lad. "We are very busy
getting our submarine in shape for a trial.  But I can imagine why Andy
left so hurriedly. He probably learned that a doctor had been summoned
for me, though, as it happened, I didn't need one. But Andy probably
got frightened at what he had done, and left. I'll make him more sorry,
when I meet him."

"Don't blame you a bit," commented Mr. Berg. "Well, I must be getting
back."

He hastened out to his auto, while Tom and his father watched the agent.

"Tom, never trust that man," advised the aged inventor solemnly.

"Just what I was about to remark," said his son. "Well, let's get back
to work. Queer that he should come here again, and it's queer about
Andy Foger."

Father and son returned to the machine shop, while Mr. Berg puffed away
in his auto. A little later, Tom having occasion to go to a building
near the boundary line of the cottage property which his father had
hired for the season, saw, through the hedge that bordered it, an
automobile standing in the road. A second glance showed him that it was
Mr. Berg's machine. Something had gone wrong with it, and the agent had
alighted to make an adjustment.

The young inventor was close to the man, though the latter was unaware
of his presence.

"Hang it all!" Tom heard Mr. Berg exclaim to himself. "I wonder what
they can be up to? They won't enter the Government contests, and they
won't say why. I believe they're up to some game, and I've got to find
out what it is. I wonder if I couldn't use this Foger chap?"

"He seems to have it in for this Tom Swift," Mr. Berg went on, still
talking to himself, though not so low but that Tom could hear him. "I
think I'll try it. I'll get Andy Foger to sneak around and find out
what the game is. He'll do it, I know."

By this time the auto was in working order again, and the agent took
his seat and started off.

"So that's how matters lie, eh?" thought Tom. "Well, Mr. Berg, we'll be
doubly on the lookout for you after this. As for Andy Foger, I think
I'll make him wish he'd never locked me in that tank. So you expect to
find out our 'game,' eh, Mr. Berg? Well, when you do know it, I think
it will astonish you. I only hope you don't learn what it is until we
get at that sunken treasure, though."

But alas for Tom's hopes. Mr. Berg did learn of the object of the
treasure-seekers, and sought to defeat them, as we shall learn as our
story proceeds.




Chapter Six

Turning the Tables


When the young inventor informed his father what he had overheard Mr.
Berg saying, the aged inventor was not as much worried as his son
anticipated.

"All we'll have to do, Tom," he said, "is to keep quiet about where we
are going. Once we have the Advance afloat, and try her out, we can
start on our voyage for the South American Coast and search for the
sunken treasure. When we begin our voyage under water I defy any one to
tell where we are going, or what our plans are. No, I don't believe we
need worry about Mr. Berg, though he probably means mischief."

"Well, I'm going to keep my eyes open for him and Andy Foger," declared
Tom.

The days that followed were filled with work. Not only were there many
unexpected things to do about the submarine, but Mr. Sharp was kept
busy making inquiries about the sunken treasure ship. These inquiries
had to be made carefully, as the adventurers did not want their plans
talked of, and nothing circulates more quickly than rumors of an
expedition after treasure of any kind.

"What about the old sea captain you were going to get to go with us?"
asked Mr. Swift of the balloonist one afternoon.  "Have you succeeded
in finding one yet?"

"Yes; I am in communication with a man I think will be just the person
for us. His name is Captain Alden Weston, and he has sailed all over
the world. He has also taken part in more than one revolution, and, in
fact, is a soldier of fortune. I do not know him personally, but a
friend of mine knows him, and says he will serve us faithfully. I have
written to him, and he will be here in a few days."

"That's good. Now about the location of the wreck itself.  Have you
been able to learn any more details?"

"Well, not many. You see, the Boldero was abandoned in a storm, and the
captain did not take very careful observations. As nearly as it can be
figured out the treasure ship went to the bottom in latitude forty-five
degrees south, and longitude twenty-seven east from Washington. That's
a pretty indefinite location, but I hope, once we get off the Uruguay
coast, we can better it. We can anchor or lay outside the harbor, and
in the small boat we carry go ashore and possibly gain more details.
For it was at Montevideo that the shipwrecked passengers and sailors
landed."

"Does Captain Weston know our object?" inquired Tom.

"No, and I don't propose to tell him until we are ready to start,"
replied Mr. Sharp. "I don't know just how he'll consider a submarine
trip after treasure, but if I spring it on him suddenly he's less
likely to back out. Oh, I think he'll go."

Somewhat unexpectedly the next day it was discovered that certain tools
and appliances were needed for the submarine, and they had been left in
the house at Shopton, where Eradicate Sampson was in charge as
caretaker during the absence of Mr. Swift and his son and the
housekeeper.

"Well, I suppose we'll have to go back after them," remarked Tom.
"We'll take the airship, dad, and make a two-days' trip of it. Is there
anything else you want?"

"Well, you might bring a bundle of papers you'll find in the lower
right hand drawer of my desk. They contain some memoranda I need."

Tom and Mr. Sharp had become so used to traveling in the airship that
it seemed no novelty to them, though they attracted much attention
wherever they went. They soon had the Red Cloud in readiness for a
flight, and rising in the air above the shop that contained the
powerful submarine, a craft utterly different in type from the
aeroplane, the nose of the airship was pointed toward Shopton.

They made a good flight and landed near the big shed where the bird of
the air was kept. It was early evening when they got to the Swift
homestead, and Eradicate Sampson was glad to see them.

Eradicate was a good cook, and soon had a meal ready for the travelers.
Then, while Mr. Sharp selected the tools and other things needed, and
put them in the airship ready for the start back the next morning, Tom
concluded he would take a stroll into Shopton, to see if he could see
his friend, Ned Newton. It was early evening, and the close of a
beautiful day, a sharp shower in the morning having cooled the air.

Tom was greeted by a number of acquaintances as he strolled along, for,
since the episode of the bank robbery, when he had so unexpectedly
returned with the thieves and the cash, the lad was better known than
ever.

"I guess Ned must be home," thought our hero as he looked in vain for
his chum among the throng on the streets. "I've got time to take a
stroll down to his house."

Tom was about to cross the street when he was startled by the sound of
an automobile horn loudly blown just at his side. Then a voice called:

"Hey, there! Git out of the way if you don't want to be run over!"

He looked up, and saw a car careening along. At the wheel was the
red-haired bully, Andy Foger, and in the tonneau were Sam Snedecker and
Pete Bailey.

"Git out of the way," added Sam, and he grinned maliciously at Tom.

The latter stepped back, well out of the path of the car, which was not
moving very fast. Just in front of Tom was a puddle of muddy water.
There was no necessity for Andy steering into it, but he saw his
opportunity, and a moment later one of the big pneumatic tires had
plunged into the dirty fluid, spattering it all over Tom, some even
going as high as his face.

"Ha! ha!" laughed Andy. "Maybe you'll get out of my way next time, Tom
Swift."

The young inventor was almost speechless from righteous anger. He wiped
the mud from his face, glanced down at his clothes, which were all but
ruined, and called out:

"Hold on there, Andy Foger! I want to see you!" for he thought of the
time when Andy had shut him in the tank.

"Ta! ta!" shouted Pete Bailey.

"See you later," added Sam.

"Better go home and take a bath, and then sail away in your submarine,"
went on Andy. "I'll bet it will sink."

Before Tom could reply the auto had turned a corner.  Disgusted and
angry, he tried to sop up some of the muddy water with his
handkerchief. While thus engaged he heard his name called, and looked
up to see Ned Newton.

"What's the matter? Fall down?" asked his chum.

"Andy Foger," replied Tom.

"That's enough," retorted Ned. "I can guess the rest.  We'll have to
tar and feather him some day, and ride him out of town on a rail. I'd
kick him myself, only his father is a director in the bank where I
work, and I'd be fired if I did. Can't afford any such pleasure. But
some day I'll give Andy a good trouncing, and then resign before they
can discharge me. But I'll be looking for another job before I do that.
Come on to my house, Tom, and I'll help you clean up."

Tom was a little more presentable when he left his chum's residence,
after spending the evening there, but he was still burning for revenge
against Andy and his cronies. He had half a notion to go to Andy's
house and tell Mr. Foger how nearly serious the bully's prank at the
submarine had been, but he concluded that Mr. Foger could only uphold
his son. "No, I'll settle with him myself," decided Tom.

Bidding Eradicate keep a watchful eye about the house, and leaving word
for Mr. Damon to be sure to come to the coast if he again called at the
Shopton house, Tom and Mr. Sharp prepared to make their return trip
early the next morning.

The gas tank was filled and the Red Cloud arose in the air. Then, with
the propellers moving at moderate speed, the nose of the craft was
pointed toward the New Jersey coast.

A few miles out from Shopton, finding there was a contrary wind in the
upper regions where they were traveling, Mr. Sharp descended several
hundred feet. They were moving over a sparsely settled part of the
country, and looking down, Tom saw, speeding along a highway, an
automobile.

"I wonder who's in it?" he remarked, taking down a telescope and
peering over the window ledge of the cabin.  The next moment he uttered
a startled exclamation.

"Andy  Foger, Sam  Snedecker and Pete Bailey!" he cried.  "Oh, I wish I
had a bucket of water to empty on them."

"I know a better way to get even with them than that," said Mr. Sharp.

"How?" asked Tom eagerly.

"I'll show you," replied the balloonist. "It's a trick I once played on
a fellow who did me an injury. Here, you steer for a minute until I get
the thing fixed, then I'll take charge."

Mr. Sharp went to the storeroom and came back with a long, stout rope
and a small anchor of four prongs. It was carried to be used in
emergencies, but so far had never been called into requisition.
Fastening the grapple to the cable, the balloonist said:

"Now, Tom, they haven't seen you. You stand in the stern and pay out
the rope. I'll steer the airship, and what I want you to do is to catch
the anchor in the rear of their car. Then I'll show you some fun."

Tom followed instructions. Slowly he lowered the rope with the dangling
grapple. The airship was also sent down, as the cable was not quite
long enough to reach the earth from the height at which they were. The
engine was run at slow speed, so that the noise would not attract the
attention of the three cronies who were speeding along, all unconscious
of the craft in the air over their heads. The Red Cloud was moving in
the same direction as was the automobile.

The anchor was now close to the rear of Andy's car.  Suddenly it caught
on the tonneau and Tom called that fact to Mr. Sharp.

"Fasten the rope at the cleat," directed the balloonist.

Tom did so, and a moment later the aeronaut sent the airship up by
turning more gas into the container. At the same time he reversed the
engine and the Red Cloud began pulling the touring car backward, also
lifting the rear wheels clear from the earth.

A startled cry from the occupants of the machine told Tom and his
friend that Andy and his cronies were aware something was wrong. A
moment later Andy, looking up, saw the airship hovering in the air
above him. Then he saw the rope fast to his auto. The airship was not
rising now, or the auto would have been turned over, but it was slowly
pulling it backward, in spite of the fact that the motor of the car was
still going.

"Here! You let go of me!" cried Andy. "I'll have you arrested if you
damage my car."

"Come up here and cut the rope," called Tom leaning over and looking
down. He could enjoy the bully's discomfiture.  As for Sam and Pete,
they were much frightened, and cowered down on the floor of the tonneau.

"Maybe you'll shut me in the tank again and splash mud on me!" shouted
Tom.

The rear wheels of the auto were lifted still higher from the ground,
as Mr. Sharp turned on a little more gas. Andy was not proof against
this.

"Oh! oh!" he cried. "Please let me down, Tom. I'm awful sorry for what
I did! I'll never do it again! Please, please let me down! Don't! You'll
tip me over!"

He had shut off his motor now, and was frantically clinging to the
steering wheel.

"Do you admit that you're a sneak and a coward?" asked Tom, "rubbing it
in."

"Yes, yes!  Oh, please let me down!"

"Shall we?" asked Tom of Mr. Sharp.

"Yes," replied the balloonist. "We can afford to lose the rope and
anchor for the sake of turning the tables. Cut the cable."

Tom saw what was intended. Using a little hatchet, he severed the rope
with a single blow. With a crash that could be heard up in the air
where the Red Cloud hovered, the rear wheels of the auto dropped to the
ground. Then came two loud reports.

"Both tires busted!" commented Mr. Sharp dryly, and Tom, looking down,
saw the trio of lads ruefully contemplating the collapsed rubber of the
rear wheels. The tables had been effectually turned on Andy Foger. His
auto was disabled, and the airship, with a graceful sweep, mounted
higher and higher, continuing on its way to the coast.




Chapter Seven

Mr. Damon Will Go


"Well, I guess they've had their lesson," remarked Tom, as he took an
observation through the telescope and saw Andy and his cronies hard at
work trying to repair the ruptured tires. "That certainly was a corking
good trick."

"Yes," admitted Mr. Sharp modestly. "I once did something similar, only
it was a horse and wagon instead of an auto.  But let's try for another
speed record. The conditions are just right."

They arrived at the coast much sooner than they had dared to hope, the
Red Cloud proving herself a veritable wonder.

The remainder of that day, and part of the next, was spent in working
on the submarine.

"We'll launch her day after to-morrow," declared Mr. Swift
enthusiastically. "Then to see whether my calculations are right or
wrong."

"It won't be your fault if it doesn't work," said his son.  "You
certainly have done your best."

"And so have you and Mr. Sharp and the others, for that matter. Well, I
have no doubt but that everything will be all right, Tom."

"There!" exclaimed Mr. Sharp the next morning, as he was adjusting a
certain gage. "I knew I'd forget something. That special brand of
lubricating oil. I meant to bring it from Shopton, and I didn't."

"Maybe I can get it in Atlantis," suggested Tom, naming the coast city
nearest to them. "I'll take a walk over. It isn't far."

"Will you? I'll be glad to have you," resumed the balloonist. "A gallon
will be all we'll need."

Tom was soon on his way. He had to walk, as the roads were too poor to
permit him to use the motor-cycle, and the airship attracted too much
attention to use on a short trip.  He was strolling along, when from
the other side of a row of sand dunes, that lined the uncertain road to
Atlantis, he heard some one speaking. At first the tones were not
distinct, but as the lad drew nearer to the voice he heard an
exclamation.

"Bless my gold-headed cane! I believe I'm lost. He said it was out this
way somewhere, but I don't see anything of it.  If I had that Eradicate
Sampson here now I'd--bless my shoelaces I don't know what I would do
to him."

"Mr. Damon! Mr. Damon!" cried Tom. "Is that you?"

"Me? Of course it's me! Who else would it be?" answered the voice. "But
who are you. Why, bless my liver! If it isn't Tom Swift!" he cried.
"Oh, but I'm glad to see you! I was afraid I was shipwrecked! Bless my
gaiters, how are you, anyhow? How is your father? How is Mr. Sharp, and
all the rest of them?"

"Pretty well. And you?"

"Me? Oh, I'm all right; only a trifle nervous. I called at your house
in Shopton yesterday, and Eradicate told me, as well as he could, where
you were located. I had nothing to do, so I thought I'd take a run down
here. But what's this I hear about you? Are you going on a voyage?"

"Yes."

"In the air? May I go along again? I certainly enjoyed my other trip in
the Red Cloud. That is, all but the fire and being shot at. May I go?"

"We're going on a different sort of trip this time," said the youth.

"Where?"

"Under water."

"Under water?  Bless my sponge bath! You don't mean it!"

"Yes. Dad has completed the submarine he was working on when we were
off in the airship, and it will be launched the day after to-morrow."

"Oh, that's so. I'd forgotten about it. He's going to try for the
Government prize, isn't he? But tell me more about it. Bless my
scarf-pin, but I'm glad I met you! Going into town, I take it. Well, I
just came from there, but I'll walk back with you. Do you think--is
there any possibility--that I could go with you? Of course, I don't
want to crowd you, but--"

"Oh, there'll be plenty of room," replied the young inventor. "In fact,
more room than we had in the airship. We were talking only the other
day about the possibility of you going with us, but we didn't think
you'd risk it."

"Risk it? Bless my liver! Of course I'll risk' it! It can't be as bad
as sailing in the air. You can't fall, that's certain."

"No; but maybe you can't rise," remarked Tom grimly.

"Oh, we won't think of that. Of course, I'd like to go. I fully
expected to be killed in the Red Cloud, but as I wasn't. I'm ready to
take a chance in the water. On the whole, I think I prefer to be buried
at sea, anyhow. Now, then, will you take me?"

"I think I can safely promise," answered Tom with a smile at his
friend's enthusiasm.

The two were approaching the city, having walked along as they talked.
There were still some sand dunes near the road, and they kept on the
side of these, nearest the beach, where they could watch the breakers.

"But you haven't told me where you are going," went on Mr. Damon, after
blessing a few dozen objects. "Where do the Government trials take
place?"

"Well," replied the lad, "to be frank with you, we have abandoned our
intention of trying for the Government prize."

"Not going to try for it? Bless my slippers! Why not?  Isn't fifty
thousand dollars worth striving for? And, with the kind of a submarine
you say you have, you ought to be able to win."

"Yes, probably we could win," admitted the young inventor, "but we are
going to try for a better prize."

"A better one? I don't understand."

"Sunken treasure," explained Tom. "There's a ship sunk off the coast of
Uruguay, with three hundred thousand dollars in gold bullion aboard.
Dad and I are going to try to recover that in our submarine. We're
going to start day after to-morrow, and, if you like, you may go along."

"Go along! Of course I'll go along!" cried the eccentric man. "But I
never heard of such a thing. Sunken treasure!  Three hundred thousand
dollars in gold! My, what a lot of money! And to go after it in a
submarine! It's as good as a story!"

"Yes, we hope to recover all the treasure," said the lad.  "We ought to
be able to claim at least half of it."

"Bless my pocketbook!" cried Mr. Damon, but Tom did not hear him. At
that instant his attention was attracted by seeing two men emerge from
behind the sand dune near which he and Mr. Damon had halted
momentarily, when the youth explained about the treasure. The man
looked sharply at Tom.  A moment later the first man was joined by
another, and at the sight of him our hero could not repress an
exclamation of alarm. For the second man was none other than Addison
Berg.

The latter glanced quickly at Tom, and then, with a hasty word to his
companion, the two swung around and made off in the opposite direction
to that in which they had been walking.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Damon, seeing the young inventor was
strangely affected.

"That--that man," stammered the lad.

"You don't mean to tell me that was one the Happy Harry gang, do you?"

"No. But one, or both of those men, may prove to be worse.  That second
man was Addison Berg, and he's agent for a firm of submarine boat
builders who are rivals of dad's. Berg has been trying to find out why
we abandoned our intention of competing for the Government prize."

"I hope you didn't tell him."

"I didn't intend to," replied Tom, smiling grimly, "but I'm afraid I
have, however. He certainly overheard what I said. I spoke too loud.
Yes, he must have heard me. That's why he hurried off so."

"Possibly no harm is done. You didn't give the location of the sunken
ship."

"No; but I guess from what I said it will be easy enough to find. Well,
if we're going to have a fight for the possession of that sunken gold,
I'm ready for it. The Advance is well equipped for a battle. I must
tell dad of this. It's my fault."

"And partly mine, for asking you such leading questions in a public
place," declared Mr. Damon. "Bless my coat-tails, but I'm sorry! Maybe,
after all, those men were so interested in what they themselves were
saying that they didn't understand what you said."

But if there had been any doubts on this score they would have been
dissolved had Tom and his friend been able to see the actions of Mr.
Berg and his companion a little later.  The plans of the
treasure-hunters had been revealed to their ears.




Chapter Eight

Another Treasure Expedition


While Tom and Mr. Damon continued on to Atlantis after the oil, the
young inventor lamenting from time to time that his remarks about the
real destination of the Advance had been overheard by Mr. Berg, the
latter and his companion were hastening back along the path that ran on
one side of the sand dunes.

"What's your hurry?" asked Mr. Maxwell, who was with the submarine
agent. "You turned around as if you were shot when you saw that man and
the lad. There didn't appear to be any cause for such a hurry. From
what I could hear they were talking about a submarine. You're in the
same business. You might be friends."

"Yes, we might," admitted Mr. Berg with a peculiar smile; "but, unless
I'm very much mistaken, we're going to be rivals."

"Rivals? What do you mean?"

"I can't tell you now. Perhaps I may later. But if you don't mind, walk
a little faster, please. I want to get to a long-distance telephone."

"What for?"

"I have just overheard something that I wish to communicate to my
employers, Bentley & Eagert."

"Overheard something? I don't see what it could be, unless that lad--"

"You'll learn in good time," went on the submarine agent.  "But I must
telephone at once."

A little later the two men had reached a trolley line that ran into
Atlantis, and they arrived at the city before Mr. Damon and Tom got
there, as the latter had to go by a circuitous route. Mr. Berg lost no
time in calling up his firm by telephone.

"I have had another talk with Mr. Swift," he reported to Mr. Bentley,
who came to the instrument in Philadelphia.

"Well, what does he say?" was the impatient question. "I can't
understand his not wanting to try for the Government prize. It is
astonishing. You said you were going to discover the reason, Mr Berg,
but you haven't done so."

"I have."

"What is it?"

"Well, the reason Mr. Swift and his son don't care to try for the fifty
thousand dollar prize is that they are after one of three hundred
thousand dollars."

"Three hundred thousand dollars!" cried Mr. Bentley. "What government
is going to offer such a prize as that for submarines, when they are
getting almost as common as airships? We ought to have a try for that
ourselves. What government is it?"

"No government at all. But I think we ought to have a try for it, Mr.
Bentley."

"Explain."

"Well, I have just learned, most accidentally, that the Swifts are
going after sunken treasure--three hundred thousand dollars in gold
bullion."

"Sunken treasure? Where?

"I don't know exactly, but off the coast of Uruguay," and Mr. Berg
rapidly related what he had overheard Tom tell Mr. Damon. Mr. Bentley
was much excited and impatient for more details, but his agent could
not give them to him.

"Well," concluded the senior member of the firm of submarine boat
builders, "if the Swifts are going after treasure, so can we. Come to
Philadelphia at once, Mr. Berg, and we'll talk this matter over. There
is no time to lose.  We can afford to forego the Government prize for
the chance of getting a much larger one. We have as much right to
search for the sunken gold as the Swifts have. Come here at once, and
we will make our plans."

"All right," agreed the agent with a smile as he hung up the receiver.
"I guess," he murmured to himself, "that you won't be so high and
mighty with me after this, Tom Swift.  We'll see who has the best boat,
after all. We'll have a contest and a competition, but not for a
government prize.  It will be for the sunken gold."

It was easy to see that Mr. Berg was much pleased with himself.

Meanwhile, Tom and Mr. Damon had reached Atlantis, and had purchased
the oil. They started back, but Tom took a street leading toward the
center of the place, instead of striking for the beach path, along
which they had come.

"Where are you going?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I want to see if that Andy Foger has come back here," replied the lad,
and he told of having been shut in the tank by the bully.

"I've never properly punished him for that trick," he went on, "though
we did manage to burst his auto tires. I'm curious to know how he knew
enough to turn that gear and shut the tank door. He must have been
loitering near the shop, seen me go in the submarine alone, watched his
chance and sneaked in after me. But I'd like to get a complete
explanation, and if I once got hold of Andy I could make him talk," and
Tom clenched his fist in a manner that augured no good for the
squint-eyed lad. "He was stopping at the same hotel with Mr. Berg, and
he hurried away after the trick he played on me. I next saw him in
Shopton, but I thought perhaps he might have come back here. I'm going
to inquire at the hotel," he added.

Andy's name was not on the register since his hasty flight, however,
and Tom, after inquiring from the clerk and learning that Mr. Berg was
still a guest at the hostelry, rejoined Mr. Damon.

"Bless my hat!" exclaimed that eccentric individual as they started
back to the lonely beach where the submarine was awaiting her advent
into the water. "The more I think of the trip I'm going to take, the
more I like it."

"I hope you will," remarked Tom. "It will be a new experience for all
of us. There's only one thing worrying me, and that is about Mr. Berg
having overheard what I said."

"Oh, don't worry about that. Can't we slip away and leave no trace in
the water?"

"I hope so, but I must tell dad and Mr. Sharp about what happened."

The aged inventor was not a little alarmed at what his son related, but
he agreed with Mr. Damon, whom he heartily welcomed, that little was to
be apprehended from Berg and his employers.

"They know we're after a sunken wreck, but that's all they do know,"
said Tom's father. "We are only waiting for the arrival of Captain
Alden Weston, and then we will go. Even if Bentley & Eagert make a try
for the treasure we'll have the start of them, and this will be a case
of first come, first served. Don't worry, Tom. I'm glad you're going,
Mr Damon. Come, I will show you our submarine."

As father and son, with their guest, were going to the machine shop,
Mr. Sharp met them. He had a letter in his hand.

"Good news!" the balloonist cried. "Captain Weston will be with us
to-morrow. He will arrive at the Beach Hotel in Atlantis, and wants one
of us to meet him there. He has considerable information about the
wreck."

"The Beach Hotel," murmured Tom. "That is where Mr. Berg is stopping. I
hope he doesn't worm any of our secret from Captain Weston," and it was
with a feeling of uneasiness that the young inventor continued after
his father and Mr. Damon to where the submarine was.




Chapter Nine

Captain Weston's Advent


"Bless my water ballast, but that certainly is a fine boat!" cried Mr.
Damon, when he had been shown over the new craft.  "I think I shall
feel even safer in that than in the Red Cloud."

"Oh, don't go back on the airship!" exclaimed Mr Sharp. "I was counting
on taking you on another trip."

"Well, maybe after we get back from under the ocean," agreed Mr. Damon.
"I particularly like the cabin arrangements of the Advance. I think I
shall enjoy myself."

He would be hard to please who could not take pleasure from a trip in
the submarine. The cabin was particularly fine, and the sleeping
arrangements were good.

More supplies could be carried than was possible on the airship, and
there was more room in which to cook and serve food. Mr. Damon was fond
of good living, and the kitchen pleased him as much as anything else.

Early the next morning Tom set out for Atlantis, to meet Captain Weston
at the hotel. The young inventor inquired of the clerk whether the
seafaring man had arrived, and was told that he had come the previous
evening.

"Is he in his room?" asked Tom.

"No," answered the clerk with a peculiar grin. "He's an odd character.
Wouldn't go to bed last night until we had every window in his room
open, though it was blowing quite hard, and likely to storm. The
captain said he was used to plenty of fresh air. Well, I guess he got
it, all right."

"Where is he now?" asked the youth, wondering what sort of an
individual he was to meet.

"Oh, he was up before sunrise, so some of the scrubwomen told me. They
met him coming from his room, and he went right down to the beach with
a big telescope he always carries with him. He hasn't come back yet.
Probably he's down on the sand."

"Hasn't he had breakfast?"

"No. He left word he didn't want to eat until about four bells,
whatever time that is."

"It's ten o'clock," replied Tom, who had been studying up on sea terms
lately. "Eight bells is eight o'clock in the morning, or four in the
afternoon or eight at night, according to the time of day. Then there's
one bell for every half hour, so four bells this morning would be ten
o'clock in this watch, I suppose."

"Oh, that's the way it goes, eh?" asked the clerk. "I never could get
it through my head. What is twelve o'clock noon?"

"That's eight bells, too; so is twelve o'clock midnight.  Eight bells
is as high as they go on a ship. But I guess I'll go down and see if I
can meet the captain. It will soon be ten o'clock, or four bells, and
he must be hungry for breakfast. By the way, is that Mr. Berg still
here?"

"No; he went away early this morning. He and Captain Weston seemed to
strike up quite an acquaintance, the night clerk told me. They sat and
smoked together until long after midnight, or eight bells," and the
clerk smiled as he glanced down at the big diamond ring on his little
finger.

"They did?" fairly exploded Tom, for he had visions of what the wily
Mr. Berg might worm out of the simple captain.

"Yes. Why, isn't the captain a proper man to make friends with?" and
the clerk looked at Tom curiously.

"Oh, yes, of course," was the hasty answer. "I guess I'll go and see if
I can find him--the captain, I mean."

Tom hardly knew what to think. He wished his father, or Mr. Sharp, had
thought to warn Captain Weston against talking of the wreck. It might
be too late now.

The young inventor hurried to the beach, which was not far from the
hotel. He saw a solitary figure pacing up and down, and from the fact
that the man stopped, every now and then, and gazed seaward through a
large telescope, the lad concluded it was the captain for whom he was
in search. He approached, his footsteps making no sound on the sand.
The man was still gazing through the glass.

"Captain Weston?" spoke Tom.

Without a show of haste, though the voice must have startled him, the
captain turned. Slowly he lowered the telescope, and then he replied
softly:

"That's my name. Who are you, if I may ask?"

Tom was struck, more than by anything else, by the gentle voice of the
seaman. He had prepared himself, from the description of Mr. Sharp, to
meet a gruff, bewhiskered individual, with a voice like a crosscut saw,
and a rolling gait. Instead he saw a man of medium size, with a smooth
face, merry blue eyes, and the softest voice and gentlest manner
imaginable. Tom was very much disappointed. He had looked for a regular
sea-dog, and he met a landsman, as he said afterward. But it was not
long before our hero changed his mind regarding Captain Weston.

"I'm Tom Swift," the owner of that name said, "and I have been sent to
show you the way to where our ship is ready to launch." The young
inventor refrained from mentioning submarine, as it was the wish of Mr
Sharp to disclose this feature of the voyage to the sailor himself.

"Ha, I thought as much," resumed the captain quietly.  "It's a fine
day, if I may be permitted to say so," and he seemed to hesitate, as if
there was some doubt whether or not he might make that observation.

"It certainly is," agreed the lad. Then, with a smile he added: "It is
nearly four bells."

"Ha!" exclaimed the captain, also smiling, but even his manner of
saying "Ha!" was less demonstrative than that of most persons. "I
believe I am getting hungry, if I may be allowed the remark," and again
he seemed asking Tom's pardon for mentioning the fact.

"Perhaps you will come back to the cabin and have a little breakfast
with me," he went on. "I don't know what sort of a galley or cook they
have aboard the Beach Hotel, but it can't be much worse than some I've
tackled."

"No, thank you," answered the youth. "I've had my breakfast. But I'll
wait for you, and then I'd like to get back. Dad and Mr. Sharp are
anxious to meet you."

"And I am anxious to meet them, if you don't mind me mentioning it,"
was the reply, as the captain once more put the spyglass to his eye and
took an observation. "Not many sails in sight this morning," he added.
"But the weather is fine, and we ought to get off in good shape to hunt
for the treasure about which Mr. Sharp wrote me. I believe we are going
after treasure," he said; "that is, if you don't mind talking about it."

"Not in the least," replied Tom quickly, thinking this a good
opportunity for broaching a subject that was worrying him. "Did you
meet a Mr. Berg here last night, Captain Weston?" he went on.

"Yes. Mr. Berg and I had quite a talk. He is a well-informed man."

"Did he mention the sunken treasure?" asked the lad, eager to find out
if his suspicions were true.

"Yes, he did, if you'll excuse me putting it so plainly," answered the
seaman, as if Tom might be offended at so direct a reply. But the young
inventor was soon to learn that this was only an odd habit with the
seaman.

"Did he want to know where the wreck of the Boldero was located?"
continued the lad. "That is, did he try to discover if you knew
anything about it?"

"Yes," said Mr. Weston, "he did. He pumped me, if you are acquainted
with that term, and are not offended by it. You see, when I arrived
here I made inquiries as to where your father's place was located. Mr.
Berg overheard me, and introduced himself as agent for a shipbuilding
concern. He was very friendly, and when he said he knew you and your
parent, I thought he was all right."

Tom's heart sank. His worst fears were to be realized, he thought.

"Yes, he and I talked considerable, if I may be permitted to say so,"
went on the captain. "He seemed to know about the wreck of the Boldero,
and that she had three hundred thousand dollars in gold aboard. The
only thing he didn't know was where the wreck was located. He knew it
was off Uruguay somewhere, but just where he couldn't say. So he asked
me if I knew, since he must have concluded that I was going with you on
the gold-hunting expedition."

"And you do know, don't you?" asked Tom eagerly.

"Well, I have it pretty accurately charted out, if you will allow me
that expression," was the calm answer. "I took pains to look it up at
the request of Mr. Sharp."

"And he wanted to worm that information out of you?" inquired the youth
excitedly.

"Yes, I'm afraid he did."

"Did you give him the location?"

"Well," remarked the captain, as he took another observation before
closing up the telescope, "you see, while we were talking, I happened
to drop a copy of a map I'd made, showing the location of the wreck.
Mr. Berg picked it up to hand to me, and he looked at it."

"Oh!" cried Tom. "Then he knows just where the treasure is, and he may
get to it ahead of us. It's too bad."

"Yes," continued the seaman calmly, "Mr. Berg picked up that map, and
he looked very closely at the latitude and longitude I had marked as
the location of the wreck."

"Then he won't have any trouble finding it," murmured our hero.

"Eh? What's that?" asked the captain, "if I may be permitted to request
you to repeat what you said."

"I say he won't have any trouble locating the sunken Boldero," repeated
Tom.

"Oh, but I think he will, if he depends on that map," was the
unexpected reply. "You see," explained Mr. Weston, "I'm not so simple
as I look. I sensed what Mr. Berg was after, the minute he began to
talk to me. So I fixed up a little game on him. The map which I dropped
on purpose, not accidentally, where he would see it, did have the
location of the wreck marked. Only it didn't happen to be the right
location. It was about five hundred miles out of the way, and I rather
guess if Mr. Berg and his friends go there for treasure they'll find
considerable depth of water and quite a lonesome spot. Oh, no, I'm not
as easy as I look, if you don't mind me mentioning that fact; and when
a scoundrel sets out to get the best of me, I generally try to turn the
tables on him. I've seen such men as Mr. Berg before. I'm afraid, I'm
very much afraid, the sight he had of the fake map I made won't do him
much good. Well, I declare, it's past four bells. Let's go to
breakfast, if you don't mind me asking you," and with that the captain
started off up the beach, Tom following, his ideas all a whirl at the
unlooked-for outcome of the interview.




Chapter Ten

Trial of the Submarine


Tom felt such a relief at hearing of Captain Weston's ruse that his
appetite, sharpened by an early breakfast and the sea air, came to him
with a rush, and he had a second morning meal with the odd sea captain,
who chuckled heartily when he thought of how Mr Berg had been deceived.

"Yes," resumed Captain Weston, over his bacon and eggs, "I sized him up
for a slick article as soon as I laid eyes on him. But he evidently
misjudged me, if I may be permitted that term. Oh, well, we may meet
again, after we secure the treasure, and then I can show him the real
map of the location of the wreck."

"Then you have it?" inquired the lad eagerly.

Captain Weston nodded, before hiding his face behind a large cup of
coffee; his third, by the way.

"Let me see it?" asked Tom quickly. The captain set down his cup. He
looked carefully about the hotel dining-room.  There were several
guests, who, like himself, were having a late breakfast.

"It's a good plan," the sailor said slowly, "when you're going into
unknown waters, and don't want to leave a wake for the other fellow to
follow, to keep your charts locked up. If it's all the same to you," he
added diffidently, "I'd rather wait until we get to where your father
and Mr. Sharp are before displaying the real map. I've no objection to
showing you the one Mr. Berg saw," and again he chuckled.

The young inventor blushed at his indiscretion. He felt that the news
of the search for the treasure had leaked out through him, though he
was the one to get on the trail of it by seeing the article in the
paper. Now he had nearly been guilty of another break. He realized that
he must be more cautious. The captain saw his confusion, and said:

"I know how it is. You're eager to get under way. I don't blame you. I
was the same myself when I was your age. But we'll soon be at your
place, and then I'll tell you all I know. Sufficient now, to say that I
believe I have located the wreck within a few miles. I got on the track
of a sailor who had met one of the shipwrecked crew of the Boldero, and
he gave me valuable information. Now tell me about the craft we are
going in. A good deal depends on that."

Tom hardly knew what to answer. He recalled what Mr. Sharp had said
about not wanting to tell Captain Weston, until the last moment, that
they were going in a submarine, for fear the old seaman (for he was old
in point of service though not in years) might not care to risk an
under-water trip. Therefore Tom hesitated. Seeing it, Captain Weston
remarked quietly:

"I mean, what type is your submarine? Does it go by compressed air, or
water power?"

"How do you know it's a submarine?" asked the young inventor quickly,
and in some confusion.

"Easy enough. When Mr. Berg thought he was pumping me, I was getting a
lot of information from him. He told me about the submarine his firm
was building, and, naturally, he mentioned yours. One thing led to
another until I got a pretty good idea of your craft. What do you call
it?"

"The Advance."

"Good name. I like it, if you don't mind speaking of it."

"We were afraid you wouldn't like it," commented Tom.

"What, the name?"

"No, the idea of going in a submarine."

"Oh," and Captain Weston laughed. "Well, it takes more than that to
frighten me, if you'll excuse the expression.  I've always had a
hankering to go under the surface, after so many years spent on top.
Once or twice I came near going under, whether I wanted to or not, in
wrecks, but I think I prefer your way. Now, if you're all done, and
don't mind me speaking of it, I think we'll start for your place. We
must hustle, for Berg may yet get on our trail, even if he has got the
wrong route," and he laughed again.

It was no small relief to Mr Swift and Mr. Sharp to learn that Captain
Weston had no objections to a submarine, as they feared he might have.
The captain, in his diffident manner, made friends at once with the
treasure-hunters, and he and Mr. Damon struck up quite an acquaintance.
Tom told of his meeting with the seaman, and the latter related, with
much gusto, the story of how he had fooled Mr. Berg.

"Well, perhaps you'd like to come and take a look at the craft that is
to be our home while we're beneath the water," suggested Mr. Swift and
the sailor assenting, the aged inventor, with much pride, assisted by
Tom, pointed out on the Advance the features of interest. Captain
Weston gave hearty approval, making one or two minor suggestions, which
were carried out.

"And so you launch her to-morrow," he concluded, when he had completed
the inspection "Well, I hope it's a success, if I may be permitted to
say so."

There were busy times around the machine shop next day. So much secrecy
had been maintained that none of the residents, or visitors to the
coast resort, were aware that in their midst was such a wonderful craft
as the submarine. The last touches were put on the under-water ship;
the ways, leading from the shop to the creek, were well greased, and
all was in readiness for the launching. The tide would soon be at
flood, and then the boat would slide down the timbers (at least, that
was the hope of all), and would float in the element meant to receive
her. It was decided that no one should be aboard when the launching
took place, as there was an element of risk attached, since it was not
known just how buoyant the craft was. It was expected she would float,
until the filled tanks took her to the bottom, but there was no telling.

"It will be flood tide now in ten minutes," remarked Captain Weston
quietly, looking at his watch. Then he took an observation through the
telescope. "No hostile ships hanging in the offing," he reported. "All
is favorable, if you don't mind me saying so," and he seemed afraid
lest his remark might give offense.

"Get ready," ordered Mr. Swift. "Tom, see that the ropes are all
clear," for it had been decided to ease the Advance down into the water
by means of strong cables and windlasses, as the creek was so narrow
that the submarine, if launched in the usual way, would poke her nose
into the opposite mud bank and stick there.

"All clear," reported the young inventor.

"High tide!" exclaimed the captain a moment later, snapping shut his
watch.

"Let go!" ordered Mr. Swift, and the various windlasses manned by the
inventor, Tom and the others began to unwind their ropes. Slowly the
ship slid along the greased ways.  Slowly she approached the water. How
anxiously they all watched her! Nearer and nearer her blunt nose, with
the electric propulsion plate and the auxiliary propeller, came to the
creek, the waters of which were quiet now, awaiting the turn of the
tide.

Now little waves lapped the steel sides. It was the first contact of
the Advance with her native element.

"Pay out the rope faster!" cried Mr. Swift.

The windlasses were turned more quickly. Foot by foot the craft slid
along until, with a final rush, the stern left the ways and the
submarine was afloat. Now would come the test. Would she ride on an
even keel, or sink out of sight, or turn turtle? They all ran to the
water's edge, Tom in the lead.

"Hurrah!" suddenly yelled the lad, trying to stand on his head. "She
floats! She's a success! Come on! Let's get aboard!"

For, true enough, the Advance was riding like a duck on the water. She
had been proportioned just right, and her lines were perfect. She rode
as majestically as did any ship destined to sail on the surface, and
not intended to do double duty.

"Come on, we must moor her to the pier," directed Mr. Sharp. "The tide
will turn in a few minutes and take her out to sea."

He and Tom entered a small boat, and soon the submarine was tied to a
small dock that had been built for the purpose.

"Now to try the engine," suggested Mr. Swift, who was almost trembling
with eagerness; for the completion of the ship meant much to him.

"One moment," begged Captain Weston. "If you don't mind, I'll take an
observation," he went on, and he swept the horizon with his telescope.
"All clear," he reported. "I think we may go aboard and make a trial
trip."

Little time was lost in entering the cabin and engine-room, Garret
Jackson accompanying the party to aid with the machinery. It did not
take long to start the motors, dynamos and the big gasolene engine that
was the vital part of the craft. A little water was admitted to the
tanks for ballast, since the food and other supplies were not yet on
board. The Advance now floated with the deck aft of the conning tower
showing about two feet above the surface of the creek. Mr. Swift and
Tom entered the pilot house.

"Start the engines," ordered the aged inventor, "and we'll try my new
system of positive and negative electrical propulsion."

There was a hum and whir in the body of the ship beneath the feet of
Tom and his father. Captain Weston stood on the little deck near the
conning tower.

"All ready?" asked the youth through the speaking tube to Mr. Sharp and
Mr. Jackson in the engine-room.

"All ready," came the answer.

Tom threw over the connecting lever, while his father grasped the
steering wheel. The Advance shot forward, moving swiftly along, about
half submerged.

"She goes! She goes!" cried Tom.

"She certainly does, if I may be permitted to say so," was the calm
contribution of Captain Weston. "I congratulate you."

Faster and faster went the new craft. Mr. Swift headed her toward the
open sea, but stopped just before passing out of the creek, as he was
not yet ready to venture into deep water.

"I want to test the auxiliary propellers," he said. After a little
longer trial of the electric propulsion plates, which were found to
work satisfactorily, sending the submarine up and down the creek at a
fast rate, the screws, such as are used on most submarines, were put
into gear.  They did well, but were not equal to the plates, nor was so
much expected of them.

"I am perfectly satisfied," announced Mr. Swift as he once more headed
the boat to sea. "I think, Captain Weston, you had better go below now."

"Why so?"

"Because I am going to completely submerge the craft. Tom, close the
conning tower door. Perhaps you will come in here with us, Captain
Weston, though it will be rather a tight fit."

"Thank you, I will. I want to see how it feels to be in a pilot house
under water."

Tom closed the water-tight door of the conning tower. Word was sent
through the tube to the engine-room that a more severe test of the ship
was about to be made. The craft was now outside the line of breakers
and in the open sea.

"Is everything ready, Tom?" asked his father in a quiet voice.

"Everything," replied the lad nervously, for the anticipation of being
about to sink below the surface was telling on them all, even on the
calm, old sea captain.

"Then open the tanks and admit the water," ordered Mr. Swift.

His son turned a valve and adjusted some levers. There was a hissing
sound, and the Advance began sinking. She was about to dive beneath the
surface of the ocean, and those aboard her were destined to go through
a terrible experience before she rose again.




Chapter Eleven

On the Ocean Bed


Lower and lower sank the submarine. There was a swirling and foaming of
the water as she went down, caused by the air bubbles which the craft
carried with her in her descent.  Only the top of the conning tower was
out of water now, the ocean having closed over the deck and the rounded
back of the boat. Had any one been watching they would have imagined
that an accident was taking place.

In the pilot house, with its thick glass windows, Tom, his father and
Captain Weston looked over the surface of the ocean, which every minute
was coming nearer and nearer to them.

"We'll be all under in a few seconds," spoke Tom in a solemn voice, as
he listened to the water hissing into the tanks.

"Yes, and then we can see what sort of progress we will make," added
Mr. Swift. "Everything is going fine, though," he went on cheerfully.
"I believe I have a good boat."

"There is no doubt of it in my mind," remarked Captain Weston, and Tom
felt a little disappointed that the sailor did not shout out some such
expression as "Shiver my timbers!" or "Keel-haul the main braces,
there, you lubber!" But Captain Weston was not that kind of a sailor,
though his usually quiet demeanor could be quickly dropped on
necessity, as Tom learned later.

A few minutes more and the waters closed over the top of the conning
tower. The Advance was completely submerged.  Through the thick glass
windows of the pilot house the occupants looked out into the greenish
water that swirled about them; but it could not enter. Then, as the
boat went lower, the light from above gradually died out, and the
semi-darkness gave place to gloom.

"Turn on the electrics and the searchlight, Tom," directed his father.

There was the click of a switch, and the conning tower was flooded with
light. But as this had the effect of preventing the three from peering
out into the water, just as one in a lighted room cannot look out into
the night, Tom shut them off and switched on the great searchlight.
This projected its powerful beams straight ahead and there, under the
ocean, was a pathway of illumination for the treasure-seekers.

"Fine!" cried Captain Weston, with more enthusiasm than he had yet
manifested. "That's great, if you don't mind me mentioning it. How deep
are we?"

Tom glanced at a gage on the side of the pilot tower.

"Only about sixty feet," he answered.

"Then don't go any deeper!" cried the captain hastily. "I know these
waters around here, and that's about all the depth you've got. You'll
be on the bottom in a minute."

"I intend to get on the bottom after a while," said Mr. Swift, "but not
here. I want to try for a greater distance under water before I come to
rest on the ocean's bed. But I think we are deep enough for a test.
Tom, close the tank intake pipes and we'll see how the Advance will
progress when fully submerged."

The hissing stopped, and then, wishing to see how the motors and other
machinery would work, the aged inventor and his son, accompanied by
Captain Weston, descended from the conning tower, by means of an inner
stairway, to the interior of the ship. The submarine could be steered
and managed from below or above. She was now floating about sixty-five
feet below the surface of the bay.

"Well, how do you like it?" asked Tom of Mr. Damon, as he saw his
friend in an easy chair in the living-room or main cabin of the craft,
looking out of one of the plate-glass windows on the side.

"Bless my spectacles, it's the most wonderful thing I ever dreamed of!"
cried the queer character, as he peered at the mass of water before
him. "To think that I'm away down under the surface, and yet as dry as
a bone. Bless my necktie, but it's great! What are we going to do now?"

"Go forward," replied the young inventor.

"Perhaps I had better make an observation," suggested Captain Weston,
taking his telescope from under his arm, where he had carried it since
entering the craft, and opening it. "We may run afoul of something, if
you don't mind me mentioning such a disagreeable subject." Then, as he
thought of the impossibility of using his glass under water, he closed
it.

"I shall have little use for this here, I'm afraid," he remarked with a
smile. "Well, there's some consolation.  We're not likely to meet many
ships in this part of the ocean. Other vessels are fond enough of
remaining on the surface. I fancy we shall have the depths to
ourselves, unless we meet a Government submarine, and they are hardly
able to go as deep as we can. No, I guess we won't run into anything
and I can put this glass away."

"Unless we run into Berg and his crowd," suggested Tom in a low voice.

"Ha! ha!" laughed Captain Weston, for he did not want Mr. Swift to
worry over the unscrupulous agent. "No, I don't believe we'll meet
them, Tom. I guess Berg is trying to work out the longitude and
latitude I gave him. I wish I could see his face when he realizes that
he's been deceived by that fake map."

"Well, I hope he doesn't discover it too soon and trail us," went on
the lad. "But they're going to start the machinery now. I suppose you
and I had better take charge of the steering of the craft. Dad will
want to be in the engine-room."

"All right," replied the captain, and he moved forward with the lad to
a small compartment, shut off from the living-room, that served as a
pilot house when the conning tower was not used. The same levers,
wheels and valves were there as up above, and the submarine could be
managed as well from there as from the other place.

"Is everything all right?" asked Mr Swift as he went into the
engine-room, where Garret Jackson and Mr. Sharp were busy with oil cans.

"Everything," replied the balloonist. "Are you going to start now?"

"Yes, we're deep enough for a speed trial. We'll go out to sea,
however, and try for a lower depth record, as soon as there's enough
water. Start the engine."

A moment later the powerful electric currents were flowing into the
forward and aft plates, and the Advance began to gather way, forging
through the water.

"Straight ahead, out to sea, Tom," called his father to him.

"Aye, aye, sir," responded the youth.

"Ha! Quite seaman-like, if you don't mind a reference to it," commented
Captain Weston with a smile. "Mind your helm, boy, for you don't want
to poke her nose into a mud bank, or run up on a shoal."

"Suppose you steer?" suggested the lad. "I'd rather take lessons for a
while."

"All right. Perhaps it will be safer. I know these waters from the top,
though I can't say as much for the bottom.  However, I know where the
shoals are."

The powerful searchlight was turned, so as to send its beams along the
path which the submarine was to follow, and then, as she gathered
speed, she shot ahead, gliding through the waters like a fish.

Mr. Damon divided his time between the forward pilot-room, the
living-apartment, and the place where Mr. Swift, Garret Jackson and Mr.
Sharp were working over the engines. Every few minutes he would bless
some part of himself, his clothing, or the ship. Finally the old man
settled down to look through the plate-glass windows in the main
apartment.

On and on went the submarine. She behaved perfectly, and was under
excellent control. Some times Tom, at the request of his father, would
send her toward the surface by means of the deflecting rudder. Then she
would dive to the bottom again. Once, as a test, she was sent obliquely
to the surface, her tower just emerging, and then she darted downward
again, like a porpoise that had come up to roll over, and suddenly
concluded to seek the depths. In fact, had any one seen the maneuver
they would have imagined the craft was a big fish disporting itself.

Captain Weston remained at Tom's side, giving him instructions, and
watching the compass in order to direct the steering so as to avoid
collisions. For an hour or more the craft was sent almost straight
ahead at medium speed.  Then Mr. Swift, joining his son and the
captain, remarked:

"How about depth of water here, Captain Weston?"

"You've got more than a mile."

"Good! Then I'm going down to the bottom of the sea! Tom, fill the
tanks still more.

"Aye, aye, sir," answered the lad gaily. "Now for a new experience!"

"And use the deflecting rudder, also," advised his father.  "That will
hasten matters."

Five minutes later there was a slight jar noticeable.

"Bless my soul! What's that?" cried Mr. Damon. "Have we hit something?"

"Yes," answered Tom with a smile.

"What, for gracious sake?"

"The bottom of the sea. We're on the bed of the ocean."




Chapter Twelve

For a Breath of Air


They could hardly realize it, yet the depth-gage told the story. It
registered a distance below the surface of the ocean of five thousand
seven hundred feet--a little over a mile. The Advance had actually come
to rest on the bottom of the Atlantic.

"Hurrah!" cried Tom. "Let's get on the diving suits, dad, and walk
about on land under water for a change."

"No," said Mr. Swift soberly. "We will hardly have time for that now.
Besides, the suits are not yet fitted with the automatic air-tanks, and
we can't use them. There are still some things to do before we start on
our treasure cruise.  But I want to see how the plates are standing
this pressure."

The Advance was made with a triple hull, the spaces between the layers
of plates being filled with a secret material, capable of withstanding
enormous pressure, as were also the plates themselves. Mr. Swift, aided
by Mr. Jackson and Captain Weston, made a thorough examination, and
found that not a drop of water had leaked in, nor was there the least
sign that any of the plates had given way under the terrific strain.

"She's as tight as a drum, if you will allow me to make that
comparison," remarked Captain Weston modestly. "I couldn't ask for a
dryer ship."

"Well, let's take a look around by means the searchlight and the
observation windows, and then we'll go back," suggested Mr. Swift. "It
will take about two days to get the stores and provisions aboard and
rig up the diving suits; then we will start for the sunken treasure."

There were several powerful searchlights on the Advance, so arranged
that the bow, stern or either side could be illuminated independently.
There were also observation windows near each light.

In turn the powerful rays were cast first at the bow and then aft. In
the gleams could be seen the sandy bed of the ocean, covered with
shells of various kinds. Great crabs walked around on their long,
jointed legs, and Tom saw some lobsters that would have brought joy to
the heart of a fisherman.

"Look at the big fish!" cried Mr. Damon suddenly, and he pointed to
some dark, shadowy forms that swam up to the glass windows, evidently
puzzled by the light.

"Porpoises," declared Captain Weston briefly, "a whole school of them."

The fish seemed suddenly to multiply, and soon those in the submarine
felt curious tremors running through the whole craft.

"The fish are rubbing up against it," cried Tom. "They must think we
came down here to allow them to scratch their backs on the steel
plates."

For some time they remained on the bottom, watching the wonderful sight
of the fishes that swam all about them.

"Well, I think we may as well rise," announced Mr. Swift, after they
had been on the bottom about an hour, moving here and there. "We didn't
bring any provisions, and I'm getting hungry, though I don't know how
the others of you feel about it."

"Bless my dinner-plate, I could eat, too!" cried Mr. Damon. "Go up, by
all means. We'll get enough of under-water travel once we start for the
treasure."

"Send her up, Tom," called his father. "I want to make a few notes on
some needed changes and improvements."

Tom entered the lower pilot house, and turned the valve that opened the
tanks. He also pulled the lever that started the pumps, so that the
water ballast would be more quickly emptied, as that would render the
submarine buoyant, and she would quickly shoot to the surface. To the
surprise of the lad, however, there followed no outrushing of the
water. The Advance remained stationary on the ocean bed. Mr. Swift
looked up from his notes.

"Didn't you hear me ask you to send her up, Tom?" he inquired mildly.

"I did, dad, but something seems to be the matter," was the reply.

"Matter? What do you mean?" and the aged inventor hastened to where his
son and Captain Weston were at the wheels, valves and levers.

"Why, the tanks won't empty, and the pumps don't seem to work."

"Let me try," suggested Mr. Swift, and he pulled the various handles.
There was no corresponding action of the machinery.

"That's odd," he remarked in a curious voice "Perhaps something has
gone wrong with the connections. Go look in the engine-room, and ask
Mr. Sharp if everything is all right there."

Tom made a quick trip, returning to report that the dynamos, motors and
gas engine were running perfectly.

"Try to work the tank levers and pumps from the conning tower,"
suggested Captain Weston. "Sometimes I've known the steam steering gear
to play tricks like that."

Tom hurried up the circular stairway into the tower. He pulled the
levers and shifted the valves and wheels there.  But there was no
emptying of the water tanks. The weight and pressure of water in them
still held the submarine on the bottom of the sea, more than a mile
from the surface. The pumps in the engine-room were working at top
speed, but there was evidently something wrong in the connections.  Mr.
Swift quickly came to this conclusion.

"We must repair it at once," he said. "Tom, come to the engine-room.
You and I, with Mr. Jackson and Mr. Sharp, will soon have it in shape
again."

"Is there any danger?" asked Mr. Damon in a perturbed voice. "Bless my
soul, it's unlucky to have an accident on our trial trip."

"Oh, we must expect accidents," declared Mr. Swift with a smile. "This
is nothing."

But it proved to be more difficult than he had imagined to re-establish
the connection between the pumps and the tanks. The valves, too, had
clogged or jammed, and as the pressure outside the ship was so great,
the water would not run out of itself. It must be forced.

For an hour or more the inventor, his son and the others, worked away.
They could accomplish nothing. Tom looked anxiously at his parent when
the latter paused in his efforts.

"Don't worry," advised the aged inventor. "It's got to come right
sooner or later."

Just then Mr. Damon, who had been wandering about the ship, entered the
engine-room.

"Do you know," he said, "you ought to open a window, or something."

"Why, what's the matter?" asked Tom quickly, looking to see if the odd
man was joking.

"Well, of course I don't exactly mean a window," explained Mr. Damon,
"but we need fresh air."

"Fresh air!" There was a startled note in Mr. Swift's voice as he
repeated the words.

"Yes, I can hardly breathe in the living-room, and it's not much better
here."

"Why, there ought to be plenty of fresh air," went on the inventor. "It
is renewed automatically."

Tom jumped up and looked at an indicator. He uttered a startled cry.

"The air hasn't been changed in the last hour!" he exclaimed. "It is
bad. There's not enough oxygen in it. I notice it, now that I've
stopped working. The gage indicates it, too. The automatic air-changer
must have stopped working. I'll fix it."

He hurried to the machine which was depended on to supply fresh air to
the submarine.

"Why, the air tanks are empty!" the young inventor cried.  "We haven't
any more air except what is in the ship now!"

"And we're rapidly breathing that up," added Captain Weston solemnly.

"Can't you make more?" cried Mr. Damon. "I thought you said you could
make oxygen aboard the ship."

"We can," answered Mr. Swift, "but I did not bring along a supply of
the necessary chemicals. I did not think we would be submerged long
enough for that. But there should have been enough in the reserve tank
to last several days. How about it, Tom?"

"It's all leaked out, or else it wasn't filled," was the despairing
answer. "All the air we have is what's in the ship, and we can't make
more."

The treasure-seekers looked at each other. It was an awful situation.

"Then the only thing to do is to fix the machinery and rise to the
surface," said Mr. Sharp simply. "We can have all the air we want,
then."

"Yes, but the machinery doesn't seem possible of being fixed," spoke
Tom in a low voice.

"We must do it!" cried his father.

They set to work again with fierce energy, laboring for their very
lives. They all knew that they could not long remain in the ship
without oxygen. Nor could they desert it to go to the surface, for the
moment they left the protection of the thick steel sides the terrible
pressure of the water would kill them. Nor were the diving suits
available. They must stay in the craft and die a miserable death--unless
the machinery could be repaired and the Advance sent to the surface.
The emergency expanding lifting tank was not yet in working order.

More frantically they toiled, trying every device that was suggested to
the mechanical minds of Tom, his father, Mr. Sharp or Mr. Jackson, to
make the pumps work. But something was wrong. More and more foul grew
the air. They were fairly gasping now. It was  difficult to breathe, to
say nothing of working, in that atmosphere. The thought of their
terrible position was in the minds of all.

"Oh, for one breath of fresh air!" cried Mr. Damon, who seemed to
suffer more than any of the others. Grim death was hovering around
them, imprisoned as they were on the ocean's bed, over a mile from the
surface.




Chapter Thirteen

Off for the Treasure


Suddenly Tom, after a moment's pause, seized a wrench and began
loosening some nuts.

"What are you doing?" asked his father faintly, for he was being
weakened by the vitiated atmosphere.

"I'm going to take this valve apart," replied his son. "We haven't
looked there for the trouble. Maybe it's out of order."

He attacked the valve with energy, but his hands soon lagged. The lack
of oxygen was telling on him. He could no longer work quickly.

"I'll help," murmured Mr. Sharp thickly. He took a wrench, but no
sooner had he loosened one nut than he toppled over.  "I'm all in," he
murmured feebly.

"Is he dead?" cried Mr. Damon, himself gasping.

"No, only fainted. But he soon will be dead, and so will all of us, if
we don't get fresh air," remarked Captain Weston. "Lie down on the
floor, every one. There is a little fairly good air there. It's heavier
than the air we've breathed, and we can exist on it for a little
longer. Poor Sharp was so used to breathing the rarified air of high
altitudes that he can't stand this heavy atmosphere."

Mr. Damon was gasping worse than ever, and so was Mr. Swift. The
balloonist lay an inert heap on the floor, with Captain Weston trying
to force a few drops of stimulant down his throat.

With a fierce determination in his heart, but with fingers that almost
refused to do his bidding, Tom once more sought to open the big valve.
He felt sure the trouble was located there, as they had tried to locate
it in every other place without avail.

"I'll help," said Mr. Jackson in a whisper. He, too, was hardly able to
move.

More and more devoid of oxygen grew the air. It gave Tom a sense as if
his head was filled, and ready to burst with every breath he drew.
Still he struggled to loosen the nuts.  There were but four more now,
and he took off three while Mr. Jackson removed one. The young inventor
lifted off the valve cover, though it felt like a ton weight to him. He
gave a glance inside.

"Here's the trouble!" he murmured. "The valve's clogged.  No wonder it
wouldn't work. The pumps couldn't force the water out."

It was the work of only a minute to adjust the valve. Then Tom and the
engineer managed to get the cover back on.

How they inserted the bolts and screwed the nuts in place they never
could remember clearly afterward, but they managed it somehow, with
shaking, trembling hands and eyes that grew more and more dim.

"Now start the pumps!" cried Tom faintly. "The tanks will be emptied,
and we can get to the surface."

Mr. Sharp was still unconscious, nor was Mr. Swift able to help. He lay
with his eyes closed. Garret Jackson, however, managed to crawl to the
engine-room, and soon the clank of machinery told Tom that the pumps
were in motion. The lad staggered to the pilot house and threw the
levers over. An instant later there was the hissing of water as it
rushed from the ballast tanks. The submarine shivered, as though
disliking to leave the bottom of the sea, and then slowly rose. As the
pumps worked more rapidly, and the sea was sent from the tank in great
volumes, the boat fairly shot to the surface. Tom was ready to open the
conning tower and let in fresh air as soon as the top was above the
surface.

With a bound the Advance reached the top. Tom frantically worked the
worm gear that opened the tower. In rushed the fresh, life-giving air,
and the treasure-hunters filled their lungs with it.

And it was only just in time, for Mr. Sharp was almost gone. He quickly
revived, as did the others, when they could breathe as much as they
wished of the glorious oxygen.

"That was a close call," commented Mr. Swift. "We'll not go below again
until I have provided for all emergencies. I should have seen to the
air tanks and the expanding one before going below. We'll sail home on
the surface now."

The submarine was put about and headed for her dock. On the way she
passed a small steamer, and the passengers looked down in wonder at the
strange craft.

When the Advance reached the secluded creek where she had been
launched, her passengers had fully recovered from their terrible
experience, though the nerves of Mr. Swift and Mr. Damon were not at
ease for some days thereafter.

"I should never have made a submerged test without making sure that we
had a reserve supply of air," remarked the aged inventor. "I will not
be caught that way again. But I can't understand how the pump valve got
out of order."

"Maybe some one tampered with it," suggested Mr. Damon.  "Could Andy
Foger, any of the Happy Harry gang, or the rival gold-seekers have done
it?"

"I hardly think so," answered Tom. "The place has been too carefully
guarded since Berg and Andy once sneaked in. I think it was just an
accident, but I have thought of a plan whereby such accidents can be
avoided in the future. It needs a simple device."

"Better patent it," suggested Mr. Sharp with a smile.

"Maybe I will," replied the young inventor. "But not now.  We haven't
time, if we intend to get fitted out for our trip."

"No; I should say the sooner we started the better," remarked Captain
Weston. "That is, if you don't mind me speaking about it," he added
gently, and the others smiled, for his diffident comments were only a
matter of habit.

The first act of the adventurers, after tying the submarine at the
dock, was to proceed with the loading of the food and supplies. Tom and
Mr. Damon looked to this, while Mr. Swift and Mr. Sharp made some
necessary changes to the machinery. The next day the young inventor
attached his device to the pump valve, and the loading of the craft was
continued.

All was in readiness for the gold-seeking expedition a week later.
Captain Weston had carefully charted the route they were to follow, and
it was decided to move along on the surface for the first day, so as to
get well out to sea before submerging the craft. Then it would sink
below the surface, and run along under the water until the wreck was
reached, rising at times, as needed, to renew the air supply.

With sufficient stores and provisions aboard to last several months, if
necessary, though they did not expect to be gone more than sixty days
at most, the adventurers arose early one morning and went down to the
dock. Mr. Jackson was not to accompany them. He did not care about a
submarine trip, he said, and Mr. Swift desired him to remain at the
seaside cottage and guard the shops, which contained much valuable
machinery. The airship was also left there.

"Well, are we all ready?" asked Mr. Swift of the little party of
gold-seekers, as they were about to enter the conning tower hatchway of
the submarine.

"All ready, dad," responded his son.

"Then let's get aboard," proposed Captain Weston. "But first let me
take an observation."

He swept the horizon with his telescope, and Tom noticed that the
sailor kept it fixed on one particular spot for some time.

"Did you see anything?" asked the lad.

"Well, there is a boat lying off there," was the answer.  "And some one
is observing us through a glass. But I don't believe it matters.
Probably they're only trying to see what sort of an odd fish we are."

"All aboard, then," ordered Mr. Swift, and they went into the
submarine. Tom and his father, with Captain Weston, remained in the
conning tower. The signal was given, the electricity flowed into the
forward and aft plates, and the Advance shot ahead on the surface.

The sailor raised his telescope once more and peered through a window
in the tower. He uttered an exclamation.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom.

"That other ship--a small steamer--is weighing anchor and seems to be
heading this way," was the reply.

"Maybe it's some one hired by Berg to follow us and trace our
movements," suggested Tom.

"If it is we'll fool them," added his father. "Just keep an eye on
them, captain, and I think we can show them a trick or two in a few
minutes."

Faster shot the Advance through the water. She had started on her way
to get the gold from the sunken wreck, but already enemies were on the
trail of the adventurers, for the ship the sailor had noticed was
steaming after them.




Chapter Fourteen

In the Diving Suits


There was no doubt that the steamer was coming after the submarine.
Several observations Captain Weston made confirmed this, and he
reported the fact to Mr. Swift.

"Well, we'll change our plans, then," said the inventor.  "Instead of
sailing on the surface we'll go below. But first let them get near so
they may have the benefit of seeing what we do. Tom, go below, please,
and tell Mr. Sharp to get every thing in readiness for a quick descent.
We'll slow up a bit now, and let them get nearer to us."

The speed of the submarine was reduced, and in a short time the strange
steamer had overhauled her, coming to within hailing distance.

Mr. Swift signaled for the machinery to stop and the submarine came to
a halt on the surface, bobbing about like a half-submerged bottle. The
inventor opened a bull's-eye in the tower, and called to a man on the
bridge of the steamer:

"What are you following us for?"

"Following you?" repeated the man, for the strange vessel had also come
to a stop. "We're not following you."

"It looks like it," replied Mr. Swift. "You'd better give it up."

"I guess the waters are free," was the quick retort.  "We'll follow you
if we like."

"Will you? Then come on!" cried the inventor as he quickly closed the
heavy glass window and pulled a lever. An instant later the submarine
began to sink, and Mr. Swift could not help laughing as, just before
the tower went under water, he had a glimpse of the astonished face of
the man on the bridge. The latter had evidently not expected such a
move as that.

Lower and lower in the water went the craft, until it was about two
hundred feet below the surface. Then Mr. Swift left the conning tower,
descended to the main part of the ship, and asked Tom and Captain
Weston to take charge of the pilot house.

"Send her ahead, Tom," his father said. "That fellow up above is
rubbing his eyes yet, wondering where we are, I suppose."

Forward shot the Advance under water, the powerful electrical plates
pulling and pushing her on the way to secure the sunken gold.

All that morning a fairly moderate rate of speed was maintained, as it
was thought best not to run the new machinery too fast.

Dinner was eaten about a quarter of a mile below the surface, but no
one inside the submarine would ever have known it. Electric lights made
the place as brilliant as could be desired, and the food, which Tom and
Mr. Damon prepared, was equal to any that could have been served on
land. After the meal they opened the shutters over the windows in the
sides of the craft, and looked at the myriads of fishes swimming past,
as the creatures were disclosed in the glare of the searchlight.

That night they were several hundred miles on their journey, for the
craft was speedy, and leaving Tom and Captain Weston to take the first
watch, the others went to bed.

"Bless my soul, but it does seem odd, though, to go to bed under water,
like a fish," remarked Mr. Damon. "If my wife knew this she would worry
to death. She thinks I'm off automobiling. But this isn't half as
dangerous as riding in a car that's always getting out of order. A
submarine for mine, every time."

"Wait until we get to the end of this trip," advised Tom.  "I guess
you'll find almost as many things can happen in a submarine as can in
an auto," and future events were to prove the young inventor to be
right.

Everything worked well that night, and the ship made good progress.
They rose to the surface the next morning to make sure of their
position, and to get fresh air, though they did not really need the
latter, as the reserve supply had not been drawn on, and was sufficient
for several days, now that the oxygen machine had been put in running
order.

On the second day the ship was sent to the bottom and halted there, as
Mr. Swift wished to try the new diving suits. These were made of a new,
light, but very strong metal to withstand the pressure of a great depth.

Tom, Mr. Sharp and Captain Weston donned the suits, the others agreeing
to wait until they saw how the first trial resulted. Then, too, it was
necessary for some one acquainted with the machinery to remain in the
ship to operate the door and water chamber through which the divers had
to pass to get out.

The usual plan, with some changes, was followed in letting the three
out of the boat, and on to the bottom of the sea.  They entered a
chamber in the side of the submarine, water was gradually admitted
until it equaled in pressure that outside, then an outer door was
opened by means of levers, and they could step out.

It was a curious sensation to Tom and the others to feel that they were
actually walking along the bed of the ocean.  All around them was the
water, and as they turned on the small electric lights in their
helmets, which lights were fed by storage batteries fastened to the
diving suits, they saw the fish, big and little, swarm up to them,
doubtless astonished at the odd creatures which had entered their
domain. On the sand of the bottom, and in and out among the shells and
rocks, crawled great spider crabs, big eels and other odd creatures
seldom seen on the surface of the water.  The three divers found no
difficulty in breathing, as there were air tanks fastened to their
shoulders, and a constant supply of oxygen was fed through pipes into
the helmets. The pressure of water did not bother them, and after the
first sensation Tom began to enjoy the novelty of it. At first the
inability to speak to his companions seemed odd, but he soon got so he
could make signs and motions, and be understood.

They walked about for some time, and once the lad came upon a part of a
wrecked vessel buried deep in the sand.  There was no telling what ship
it was, nor how long it had been there, and after silently viewing it,
they continued on.

"It was great!" were the first words Tom uttered when he and the others
were once more inside the submarine and had removed the suits. "If we
can only walk around the wreck of the Boldero that way, we'll have all
the gold out of her in no time. There are no life-lines nor air-hose to
bother with in these diving suits."

"They certainly are a success," conceded Mr. Sharp.

"Bless my topknot!" cried Mr. Damon. "I'll try it next time. I've
always wanted to be a diver, and now I have the chance."

The trip was resumed after the diving chamber had been closed, and on
the third day Captain Weston announced, after a look at his chart, that
they were nearing the Bahama Islands.

"We'll have to be careful not to run into any of the small keys," he
said, that being the name for the many little points of land, hardly
large enough to be dignified by the name of island. "We must keep a
constant lookout."

Fortune favored them, though once, when Tom was steering, he narrowly
avoided ramming a coral reef with the submarine.  The searchlight
showed it to him just in time, and he sheered off with a thumping in
his heart.

The course was changed from south to east, so as to get ready to swing
out of the way of the big shoulder of South America where Brazil takes
up so much room, and as they went farther and farther toward the
equator, they noticed that the waters teemed more and more with fish,
some beautiful, some ugly and fear-inspiring, and some such monsters
that it made one shudder to look at them, even through the thick glass
of the bulls-eye windows.




Chapter Fifteen

At the Tropical Island


It was on the evening of the fourth day later that Captain Weston, who
was steering the craft, suddenly called out:

"Land ho!"

"Where away?" inquired Tom quickly, for he had read that this was the
proper response to make.

"Dead ahead," answered the sailor with a smile. "Shall we make for it,
if I may be allowed the question?"

"What land is it likely to be?" Mr. Swift wanted to know.

"Oh, some small tropical island," replied the seafaring man. "It isn't
down on the charts. Probably it's too small to note. I should say it
was a coral island, but we may be able to find a spring of fresh water
there, and some fruit."

"Then we'll land there," decided the inventor. "We can use some fresh
water, though our distilling and ice apparatus does very well."

They made the island just at dusk, and anchored in a little lagoon,
where there was a good depth of water.

"Now for shore!" cried Tom, as the submarine swung around on the chain.
"It looks like a fine place. I hope there are cocoanuts and oranges
here. Shall I get out the electric launch, dad?"

"Yes, you may, and we'll all go ashore. It will do us good to stretch
our legs a bit."

Carried in a sort of pocket on the deck of the submarine was a small
electric boat, capable of holding six. It could be slid from the
pocket, or depression, into the water without the use of davits, and,
with Mr. Sharp to aid him, Tom soon had the little craft afloat. The
batteries were already charged, and just as the sun was going down the
gold-seekers entered the launch and were soon on shore.

They found a good spring of water close at hand, and Tom's wish
regarding the cocoanuts was realized, though there were no oranges. The
lad took several of the delicious nuts, and breaking them open poured
the milk into a collapsible cup he carried, drinking it eagerly. The
others followed his example, and pronounced it the best beverage they
had tasted in a long time.

The island was a typical tropical one, not very large, and it did not
appear to have been often visited by man. There were no animals to be
seen, but myriads of birds flew here and there amid the trees, the
trailing vines and streamers of moss.

"Let's spend a day here to-morrow and explore it," proposed Tom, and
his father nodded an assent. They went back to the submarine as night
was beginning to gather, and in the cabin, after supper, talked over
the happenings of their trip so far.

"Do you think we'll have any trouble getting the gold out of the
wrecked vessel?" asked Tom of Captain Weston, after a pause.

"Well, it's hard to say. I couldn't learn just how the wreck lays,
whether it's on a sandy or a rocky bottom. If the latter, it won't be
so hard, but if the sand has worked in and partly covered it, we'll
have some difficulties, if I may be permitted to say so. However, don't
borrow trouble.  We're not there yet, though at the rate we're
traveling it won't be long before we arrive."

No watch was set that night, as it was not considered necessary. Tom
was the first to arise in the morning, and he went out on the deck for
a breath of fresh air before breakfast.

He looked off at the beautiful little island, and as his eye took in
all of the little lagoon where the submarine was anchored he uttered a
startled cry.

And well he might, for, not a hundred yards away, and nearer to the
island than was the Advance, floated another craft--another craft,
almost similar in shape and size to the one built by the Swifts. Tom
rubbed his eyes to make sure he was not seeing double. No, there could
be no mistake about it. There was another submarine at the tropical
island.

As he looked, some one emerged from the conning tower of the second
craft. The figure seemed strangely familiar. Tom knew in a moment who
it was--Addison Berg. The agent saw the lad, too, and taking off his
cap and making a mocking bow, he called out:

"Good morning! Have you got the gold yet?"

Tom did not know what to answer. Seeing the other submarine, at an
island where he had supposed they would not be disturbed, was
disconcerting enough, but to be greeted by Berg was altogether too
much, Tom thought. His fears that the rival boat builders would follow
had not been without foundation.

"Rather surprised to see us, aren't you?" went on Mr. Berg, smiling.

"Rather," admitted Tom, choking over the word.

"Thought you'd be," continued Berg. "We didn't expect to meet you so
soon, but we're glad we did. I don't altogether like hunting for sunken
treasure, with such indefinite directions as I have."

"You--are going to--" stammered Tom, and then he concluded it would be
best not to say anything. But his talk had been heard inside the
submarine. His father came to the foot of the conning tower stairway.

"To whom are you speaking, Tom?" he asked.

"They're here, dad," was the youth's answer.

"Here? Who are here?"

"Berg and his employers. They've followed us, dad."




Chapter Sixteen

"We'll Race You For It"


Mr. Swift hurried up on deck. He was accompanied by Captain Weston. At
the sight of Tom's father, Mr. Berg, who had been joined by two other
men, called out:

"You see we also concluded to give up the trial for the Government
prize, Mr. Swift. We decided there was more money in something else.
But we still will have a good chance to try the merits of our
respective boats. We hurried and got ours fitted up almost as soon as
you did yours, and I think we have the better craft."

"I don't care to enter into any competition with you," said Mr. Swift
coldly.

"Ah, but I'm afraid you'll have to, whether you want to or not," was
the insolent reply.

"What's that?  Do you mean to force this matter upon me?"

"I'm afraid I'll have to--my employers and I, that is. You see, we
managed to pick up your trail after you left the Jersey coast, having
an idea where you were bound, and we don't intend to lose you now."

"Do you mean to follow us?" asked Captain Weston softly.

"Well, you can put it that way if you like," answered one of the two
men with Mr. Berg.

"I forbid it!" cried Mr. Swift hotly. "You have no right to sneak after
us."

"I guess the ocean is free," continued the rascally agent.

"Why do you persist in keeping after us?" inquired the aged inventor,
thinking it well to ascertain, if possible, just how much the men knew.

"Because we're after that treasure as well as you," was the bold reply.
"You have no exclusive right to it. The sunken ship is awaiting the
first comer, and whoever gets there first can take the gold from the
wreck. We intend to be there first, but we'll be fair with you."

"Fair? What do you mean?" demanded Tom.

"This: We'll race you for it. The first one to arrive will have the
right to search the wreck for the gold bullion. Is that fair? Do you
agree to it?"

"We agree to nothing with you," interrupted Captain Weston, his usual
diffident manner all gone. "I happen to be in partial command of this
craft, and I warn you that if I find you interfering with us it won't
be healthy for you.  I'm not fond of fighting, but when I begin I don't
like to stop," and he smiled grimly. "You'd better not follow us."

"We'll do as we please," shouted the third member of the trio on the
deck of the other boat, which, as Tom could see, was named the Wonder.
"We intend to get that gold if we can."

"All right. I've warned you," went on the sailor, and then, motioning
to Tom and his father to follow, he went below.

"Well, what's to be done?" asked Mr. Swift when they were seated in the
living-room, and had informed the others of the presence of the rival
submarine.

"The only thing I see to do is to sneak away unobserved, go as deep as
possible, and make all haste for the wreck," advised the captain. "They
will depend on us, for they have evidently no chart of the wreck,
though of course the general location of it may be known to them from
reading the papers. I hoped I had thrown them off the track by the
false chart I dropped, but it seems they were too smart for us."

"Have they a right to follow us?" asked Tom.

"Legally, but not morally. We can't prevent them, I'm afraid. The only
thing to do is to get there ahead of them.  It will be a race for the
sunken treasure, and we must get there first."

"What do you propose doing, captain?" asked Mr. Damon.  "Bless my
shirt-studs, but can't we pull their ship up on the island and leave it
there?"

"I'm afraid such high-handed proceedings would hardly answer," replied
Mr. Swift. "No, as Captain Weston says, we must get there ahead of
them. What do you think will be the best scheme, captain?"

"Well, there's no need for us to forego our plan to get fresh water.
Suppose we go to the island, that is, some of us, leaving a guard on
board here. We'll fill our tanks with fresh water, and at night we'll
quietly sink below the surface and speed away."

They all voted that an excellent idea, and little time was lost putting
it into operation.

All the remainder of that day not a sign of life was visible about the
Wonder. She lay inert on the surface of the lagoon, not far away from
the Advance; but, though no one showed himself on the deck, Tom and his
friends had no doubt but that their enemies were closely watching them.

As dusk settled down over the tropical sea, and as the shadows of the
trees on the little island lengthened, those on board the Advance
closed the Conning tower. No lights were turned on, as they did not
want their movements to be seen, but Tom, his father and Mr. Sharp took
their positions near the various machines and apparatus, ready to open
the tanks and let the submarine sink to the bottom, as soon as it was
possible to do this unobserved.

"Luckily there's no moon," remarked Captain Weston, as he took his
place beside Tom. "Once below the surface and we can defy them to find
us. It is odd how they traced us, but I suppose that steamer gave them
the clue."

It rapidly grew dark, as it always does in the tropics, and when a
cautious observation from the conning tower did not disclose the
outlines of the other boat, those aboard the Advance rightly concluded
that their rivals were unable to see them.

"Send her down, Tom," called his father, and with a hiss the water
entered the tanks. The submarine quickly sank below the surface, aided
by the deflecting rudder.

But alas for the hopes of the gold-seekers. No sooner was she
completely submerged, with the engine started so as to send her out of
the lagoon and to the open sea, than the waters all about were made
brilliant by the phosphorescent phenomenon. In southern waters this
frequently occurs.  Millions of tiny creatures, which, it is said,
swarm in the warm currents, give an appearance of fire to the ocean,
and any object moving through it can plainly be seen. It was so with
the Advance. The motion she made in shooting forward, and the
undulations caused by her submersion, seemed to start into activity the
dormant phosphorus, and the submarine was afloat in a sea of fire.

"Quick!" cried Tom. "Speed her up! Maybe we can get out of this patch
of water before they see us."

But it was too late. Above them they could hear the electric siren of
the Wonder as it was blown to let them know that their escape had been
noticed. A moment later the water, which acted as a sort of
sounding-board, or telephone, brought to the ears of Tom Swift and his
friends the noise of the engines of the other craft in operation.  She
was coming after them. The race for the possession of three hundred
thousand dollars in gold was already under way. Fate seemed against
those on board the Advance.




Chapter Seventeen

The Race


Directed by Captain Weston, who glanced at the compass and told him
which way to steer to clear the outer coral reef, Tom sent the
submarine ahead, signaling for full speed to the engine-room, where his
father and Mr. Sharp were. The big dynamos purred like great cats, as
they sent the electrical energy into the forward and aft plates,
pulling and pushing the Advance forward. On and on she rushed under
water, but ever as she shot ahead the disturbance in the phosphorescent
water showed her position plainly. She would be easy to follow.

"Can't you get any more speed out of her?" asked the captain of the lad.

"Yes," was the quick reply; "by using the auxiliary screws I think we
can. I'll try it."

He signaled for the propellers, forward and aft, to be put in
operation, and the motor moving the twin screws was turned on. At once
there was a perceptible increase to the speed of the Advance.

"Are we leaving them behind?" asked Tom anxiously, as he glanced at the
speed gage, and noted that the submarine was now about five hundred
feet below the surface.

"Hard to tell," replied the Captain. "You'd have to take an observation
to make sure."

"I'll do it," cried the youth. "You steer, please, and I'll go in the
conning tower. I can look forward and aft there, as well as straight
up. Maybe I can see the Wonder."

Springing up the circular ladder leading into the tower, Tom glanced
through the windows all about the small pilot house. He saw a curious
sight. It was as if the submarine was in a sea of yellowish liquid
fire. She was immersed in water which glowed with the flames that
contained no heat.  So light was it, in fact, that there was no need of
the incandescents in the tower. The young inventor could have seen to
read a paper by the illumination of the phosphorus.  But he had
something else to do than observe this phenomenon. He wanted to see if
he could catch sight of the rival submarine.

At first he could make out nothing save the swirl and boiling of the
sea, caused by the progress of the Advance through it. But suddenly, as
he looked up, he was aware of some great, black body a little to the
rear and about ten feet above his craft.

"A shark!" he exclaimed aloud. "An immense one, too."

But the closer he looked the less it seemed like a shark.  The position
of the black object changed. It appeared to settle down, to be
approaching the top of the conning tower.  Then, with a suddenness that
unnerved him for the time being, Tom recognized what it was; it was the
underside of a ship. He could see the plates riveted together, and
then, as he noted the rounded, cylindrical shape, he knew that it was a
submarine. It was the Wonder. She was close at hand and was creeping up
on the Advance. But, what was more dangerous, she seemed to be slowly
settling in the water.  Another moment and her great screws might crash
into the Conning tower of the Swifts' boat and shave it off. Then the
water would rush in, drowning the treasure-seekers like rats in a trap.

With a quick motion Tom yanked over the lever that allowed more water
to flow into the ballast tanks. The effect was at once apparent. The
Advance shot down toward the bottom of the sea. At the same time the
young inventor signaled to Captain Weston to notify those in the
engine-room to put on a little more speed. The Advance fairly leaped
ahead, and the lad, looking up through the bull's-eye in the roof of
the conning tower, had the satisfaction of seeing the rival submarine
left behind.

The youth hurried down into the interior of the ship to tell what he
had seen, and explain the reason for opening the ballast tanks. He
found his father and Mr. Sharp somewhat excited over the unexpected
maneuver of the craft.

"So they're still following us," murmured Mr. Swift. "I don't see why
we can't shake them off."

"It's on account of this luminous water," explained Captain Weston.
"Once we are clear of that it will be easy, I think, to give them the
slip. That is, if we can get out of their sight long enough. Of course,
if they keep close after us, they can pick us up with their
searchlight, for I suppose they carry one."

"Yes," admitted the aged inventor, "they have as strong a one as we
have. In fact, their ship is second only to this one in speed and
power. I know, for Bentley & Eagert showed me some of the plans before
they started it, and asked my opinion. This was before I had the notion
of building a submarine. Yes, I am afraid we'll have trouble getting
away from them."

"I can't understand this phosphorescent glow keeping up so long,"
remarked Captain Weston. "I've seen it in this locality several times,
but it never covered such an extent of the ocean in my time.  There
must be changed conditions here now."

For an hour or more the race was kept up, and the two submarines forged
ahead through the glowing sea. The Wonder remained slightly above and
to the rear of the other, the better to keep sight of her, and though
the Advance was run to her limit of speed, her rival could not be
shaken off.  Clearly the Wonder was a speedy craft.

"It's too bad that we've got to fight them, as well as run the risk of
lots of other troubles which are always present when sailing under
water," observed Mr Damon, who wandered about the submarine like the
nervous person he was. "Bless my shirt-studs! Can't we blow them up, or
cripple them in some way? They have no right to go after our treasure."

"Well, I guess they've got as much right as we have," declared Tom. "It
goes to whoever reaches the wreck first.  But what I don't like is
their mean, sneaking way of doing it. If they went off on their own
hook and looked for it I wouldn't say a word. But they expect us to
lead them to the wreck, and then they'll rob us if they can. That's not
fair."

"Indeed, it isn't," agreed Captain Weston, "if I may be allowed the
expression. We ought to find some way of stopping them. But, if I'm not
mistaken," he added quickly, looking from one of the port bull's-eyes,
"the phosphorescent glow is lessening. I believe we are running beyond
that part of the ocean."

There was no doubt of it, the glow was growing less and less, and ten
minutes later the Advance was speeding along through a sea as black as
night. Then, to avoid running into some wreck, it was necessary to turn
on the searchlight.

"Are they still after us?" asked Mr. Swift of his son, as he emerged
from the engine-room, where he had gone to make some adjustments to the
machinery, with the hope of increasing the speed.

"I'll go look," volunteered the lad. He climbed up into the conning
tower again, and for a moment, as he gazed back into the black waters
swirling all about, he hoped that they had lost the Wonder. But a
moment later his heart sank as he caught sight, through the liquid
element, of the flickering gleams of another searchlight, the rays
undulating through the sea.

"Still following," murmured the young inventor. "They're not going to
give up. But we must make 'em--that's all."

He went down to report what he had seen, and a consultation was held.
Captain Weston carefully studied the charts of that part of the ocean,
and finding that there was a great depth of water at hand, proposed a
series of evolutions.

"We can go up and down, shoot first to one side and then to the other,"
he explained. "We can even drop down to the bottom and rest there for a
while. Perhaps, in that way, we can shake them off."

They tried it. The Advance was sent up until her conning tower was out
of the water, and then she was suddenly forced down until she was but a
few feet from the bottom. She darted to the left, to the right, and
even doubled and went back over the course she had taken. But all to no
purpose.  The Wonder proved fully as speedy, and those in her seemed to
know just how to handle the submarine, so that every evolution of the
Advance was duplicated. Her rival could not be shaken off.

All night this was kept up, and when morning came, though only the
clocks told it, for eternal night was below the surface, the rival
gold-seekers were still on the trail.

"They won't give up," declared Mr. Swift hopelessly.

"No, we've got to race them for it, just as Berg proposed," admitted
Tom. "But if they want a straightaway race we'll give it to 'em. Let's
run her to the limit, dad."

"That's what we've been doing, Tom."

"No, not exactly, for we've been submerged a little too much to get the
best speed out of our craft. Let's go a little nearer the surface, and
give them the best race they'll ever have."

Then the race began; and such a contest of speed as it was! With her
propellers working to the limit, and every volt of electricity that was
available forced into the forward and aft plates, the Advance surged
through the water, about ten feet below the surface. But the Wonder
kept after her, giving her knot for knot. The course of the leading
submarine was easy to trace now, in the morning light which penetrated
ten feet down.

"No use," remarked Tom again, when, after two hours, the Wonder was
still close behind them. "Our only chance is that they may have a
breakdown."

"Or run out of air, or something like that," added Captain Weston.
"They are crowding us pretty close. I had no idea they could keep up
this speed. If they don't look out," he went on as he looked from one
of the aft observation windows, "they'll foul us, and--"

His remarks were interrupted by a jar to the Advance. She seemed to
shiver and careened to one side. Then came another bump.

"Slow down!" cried the captain, rushing toward the pilot house.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom, as he threw the engines and electrical
machines out of gear. "Have we hit anything?"

"No. Something has hit us," cried the captain. "Their submarine has
rammed us."

"Rammed us!" repeated Mr. Swift. "Tom, run out the electric cannon!
They're trying to sink us! We'll have to fight them. Run out the stern
electric gun and we'll make them wish they'd not followed us."




Chapter Eighteen

The Electric Gun


There was much  excitement aboard the Advance. The submarine came to a
stop in the water, while the treasure-seekers waited anxiously for what
was to follow. Would they be rammed again? This time, stationary as
they were, and with the other boat coming swiftly on, a hole might be
stove through the Advance, in spite of her powerful sides.

They had not long to wait. Again there came a jar, and once more the
Swifts' boat careened. But the blow was a glancing one and,
fortunately, did little damage.

"They certainly must be trying to sink us," agreed Captain Weston.
"Come, Tom, we'll take a look from the stern and see what they're up
to."

"And get the stern electric gun ready to fire," repeated Mr. Swift. "We
must protect ourselves. Mr. Sharp and I will go to the bow. There is no
telling what they may do. They're desperate, and may ram us from in
front."

Tom and the captain hurried aft. Through the thick plate-glass windows
they could see the blunt nose of the Wonder not far away, the rival
submarine having come to a halt.  There she lay, black and silent, like
some monster fish waiting to devour its victim.

"There doesn't appear to be much damage done back here," observed Tom.
"No leaks. Guess they didn't puncture us."

"Perhaps it was due to an accident that they rammed us," suggested the
captain.

"Well, they wouldn't have done it if they hadn't followed us so close,"
was the opinion of the young inventor.  "They're taking too many
chances. We've got to stop 'em."

"What is this electric gun your father speaks of?"

"Why, it's a regular electric cannon. It fires a solid ball, weighing
about twenty-five pounds, but instead of powder, which would hardly do
under water, and instead of compressed air, which is used in the
torpedo tubes of the Government submarines, we use a current of
electricity. It forces the cannon ball out with great energy."

"I wonder what they will do next?" observed the captain, peering
through a bull'seye.

"We can soon tell," replied the youth. "We'll go ahead, and if they try
to follow I'm going to fire on them."

"Suppose you sink them?"

"I won't fire to do that; only to disable them. They brought it on
themselves. We can't risk having them damage us. Help me with the
cannon, will you please, captain?"

The electric cannon was a long, steel tube in the after part of the
submarine. It projected a slight distance from the sides of the ship,
and by an ingenious arrangement could be swung around in a ball and
socket joint, thus enabling it to shoot in almost any direction.

It was the work of but a few minutes to get it ready and, with the
muzzle pointing toward the Wonder, Tom adjusted the electric wires and
inserted the solid shot.

"Now we're prepared for them!" he cried. "I think a good plan will be
to start ahead, and if they try to follow to fire on them. They've
brought it on themselves."

"Correct," spoke Captain Weston.

Tom hurried forward to tell his father of this plan.

"We'll do it!" cried Mr. Swift. "Go ahead, Mr. Sharp, and we'll see if
those scoundrels will follow."

The young inventor returned on the run to the electric cannon. There
was a whir of machinery, and the Advance moved forward. She increased
her speed, and the two watchers in the stern looked anxiously out of
the windows to see what their rivals would do.

For a moment no movement was noticeable on the part of the Wonder.
Then, as those aboard her appeared to realize that the craft on which
they depended to pilot them to the sunken treasure was slipping away,
word was given to follow. The ship of Berg and his employers shot after
the Advance.

"Here they come!" cried Captain Weston. "They're going to ram us again!"

"Then I'm going to fire on them!" declared Tom savagely.

On came the Wonder, nearer and nearer. Her speed was rapidly
increasing. Suddenly she bumped the Advance, and then, as if it was an
unavoidable accident, the rear submarine sheered off to one side.

"They're certainly at it again!" cried Tom, and peering from the
bull's-eye he saw the Wonder shoot past the mouth of the electric
cannon. "Here it goes!" he added.

He shoved over the lever, making the proper connection.  There was no
corresponding report, for the cannon was noiseless, but there was a
slight jar as the projectile left the muzzle. The Wonder could be seen
to heel over.

"You hit her! You hit her!" cried Captain Weston. "A good shot!"

"I was afraid she was past me when I pulled the lever," explained Tom.
"She went like a flash."

"No, you caught her on the rudder," declared the captain.  "I think
you've put her out of business. Yes, they're rising to the surface."

The lad rapidly inserted another ball, and recharged the cannon. Then
he peered out into the water, illuminated by the light of day overhead,
as they were not far down. He could see the Wonder rising to the
surface. Clearly something had happened.

"Maybe they're going to drop down on us from above, and try to sink
us," suggested the youth, while he stood ready to fire again. "If they
do--"

His words were interrupted by a slight jar throughout the submarine.

"What was that?" cried the captain.

"Dad fired the bow gun at them, but I don't believe he hit them,"
answered the young inventor.

"I wonder what damage I did? Guess we'll go to the surface to find out."

Clearly the Wonder had given up the fight for the time being. In fact,
she had no weapon with which to respond to a fusillade from her rival.
Tom hastened forward and informed his father of what had happened.

"If her steering gear is out of order, we may have a chance to slip
away," said Mr. Swift "We'll go up and see what we can learn."

A few minutes later Tom, his father and Captain Weston stepped from the
conning tower, which was out of water, on to the little flat deck a
short distance away lay the Wonder, and on her deck was Berg and a
number of men, evidently members of the crew.

"Why did you fire on us?" shouted the agent angrily.

"Why did you follow us?" retorted Tom.

"Well, you've broken our rudder and disabled us," went on Berg, not
answering the question. "You'll suffer for this!  I'll have you
arrested."

"You only got what you deserved," added Mr. Swift. "You were acting
illegally, following us, and you tried to sink us by ramming my craft
before we retaliated by firing on you."

"It was an accident, ramming you," said Berg. "We couldn't help it. I
now demand that you help us make repairs."

"Well, you've got nerve!" cried Captain Weston, his eyes flashing. "I'd
like to have a personal interview with you for about ten minutes. Maybe
something besides your ship would need repairs then."

Berg turned away, scowling, but did not reply. He began directing the
crew what to do about the broken rudder.

"Come on," proposed Tom in a low voice, for sounds carry very easily
over water. "Let's go below and skip out while we have a chance. They
can't follow now, and we can get to the sunken treasure ahead of them."

"Good advice," commented his father. "Come, Captain Weston, we'll go
below and close the conning tower."

Five minutes later the Advance sank from sight, the last glimpse Tom
had of Berg and his men being a sight of them standing on the deck of
their floating boat, gazing in the direction of their successful rival.
The Wonder was left behind, while Tom and his friends were soon once
more speeding toward the treasure wreck.




Chapter Nineteen

Captured


"Down deep," advised Captain Weston, as he stood beside Tom and Mr.
Swift in the pilot house. "As far as you can manage her, and then
forward. We'll take no more chances with these fellows."

"The only trouble is," replied the young inventor, "that the deeper we
go the slower we have to travel. The water is so dense that it holds us
back."

"Well, there is no special need of hurrying now," went on the sailor.
"No one is following you, and two or three days difference in reaching
the wreck will not amount to anything."

"Unless they repair their rudder, and take after us again," suggested
Mr. Swift.

"They're not very likely to do that," was the captain's opinion. "It
was more by luck than good management that they picked us up before.
Now, having to delay, as they will, to repair their steering gear,
while we can go as deep as we please and speed ahead, it is practically
impossible for them to catch up to us. No, I think we have nothing to
fear from them."

But though danger from Berg and his crowd was somewhat remote, perils
of another sort were hovering around the treasure-seekers, and they
were soon to experience them.

It was much different from sailing along in the airship, Tom thought,
for there was no blue sky and fleecy clouds to see, and they could not
look down and observe, far below them, cities and villages. Nor could
they breathe the bracing atmosphere of the upper regions.

But if there was lack of the rarefied air of the clouds, there was no
lack of fresh atmosphere. The big tanks carried a large supply, and
whenever more was needed the oxygen machine would supply it.

As there was no need, however, of remaining under water for any great
stretch of time, it was their practice to rise every day and renew the
air supply, also to float along on the surface for a while, or speed
along, with only the conning tower out, in order to afford a view, and
to enable Captain Weston to take observations. But care was always
exercised to make sure no ships were in sight when emerging on the
surface, for the gold-seekers did not want to be hailed and questioned
by inquisitive persons.

It was about four days after the disabling of the rival submarine, and
the Advance was speeding along about a mile and a half under water. Tom
was in the pilot house with Captain Weston, Mr. Damon was at his
favorite pastime of looking out of the glass side windows into the
ocean and its wonders, and Mr. Swift and the balloonist were, as
usual, in the engine-room.

"How near do you calculate we are to the sunken wreck?" asked Tom of
his companion.

"Well, at the calculation we made yesterday, we are within about a
thousand miles of it now. We ought to reach it in about four more days,
if we don't have any accidents."

"And how deep do you think it is?" went on the lad.

"Well, I'm afraid it's pretty close to two miles, if not more. It's
quite a depth, and of course impossible for ordinary divers to reach.
But it will be possible in this submarine and in the strong diving
suits your father has invented for us to get to it. Yes, I don't
anticipate much trouble in getting out the gold, once we reach the
wreck of course--"

The captain's remark was not finished. From the engine-room there came
a startled shout:

"Tom! Tom! Your father is hurt! Come here, quick!"

"Take the wheel!" cried the lad to the captain. "I must go to my
father." It was Mr. Sharp's voice he had heard.

Racing to the engine-room, Tom saw his parent doubled up over a dynamo,
while to one side, his hand on a copper switch, stood Mr. Sharp.

"What's the matter?" shouted the lad.

"He's held there by a current of electricity," replied the balloonist.
"The wires are crossed."

"Why don't you shut off the current?" demanded the youth, as he
prepared to pull his parent from the whirring machine.  Then he
hesitated, for he feared he, too, would be glued fast by the terrible
current, and so be unable to help Mr. Swift.

"I'm held fast here, too," replied the balloonist. "I started to cut
out the current at this switch, but there's a short circuit somewhere,
and I can't let go, either. Quick, shut off all power at the main
switchboard forward."

Tom realized that this was the only thing to do. He ran forward and
with a yank cut out all the electric wires. With a sigh of relief Mr.
Sharp pulled his hands from the copper where he had been held fast as
if by some powerful magnet, his muscles cramped by the current.
Fortunately the electricity was of low voltage, and he was not burned.
The body of Mr. Swift toppled backward from the dynamo, as Tom sprang
to reach his father.

"He's dead!" he cried, as he saw the pale face and the closed eyes.

"No, only badly shocked, I hope," spoke Mr. Sharp. "But we must get him
to the fresh air at once. Start the tank pumps.  We'll rise to the
surface."

The youth needed no second bidding. Once more turning on the electric
current, he set the powerful pumps in motion and the submarine began to
rise. Then, aided by Captain Weston and Mr. Damon, the young inventor
carried his father to a couch in the main cabin. Mr. Sharp took charge
of the machinery.

Restoratives were applied, and there was a flutter of the eyelids of
the aged inventor.

"I think he'll come around all right," said the sailor kindly, as he
saw Tom's grief. "Fresh air will be the thing for him. We'll be on the
surface in a minute."

Up shot the Advance, while Mr. Sharp stood ready to open the conning
tower as soon as it should be out of water. Mr. Swift seemed to be
rapidly reviving. With a bound the submarine, forced upward from the
great depth, fairly shot out of the water. There was a clanking sound
as the aeronaut opened the airtight door of the tower, and a breath of
fresh air came in.

"Can you walk, dad, or shall we carry you?" asked Tom solicitously.

"Oh, I--I'm feeling better now," was the inventor's reply.  "I'll soon
be all right when I get out on deck. My foot slipped as I was adjusting
a wire that had gotten out of order, and I fell so that I received a
large part of the current. I'm glad I was not burned. Was Mr. Sharp
hurt? I saw him run to the switch, just before I lost consciousness."

"No, I'm all right," answered the balloonist. "But allow us to get you
out to the fresh air. You'll feel much better then."

Mr. Swift managed to walk slowly to the ladder leading to the conning
tower, and thence to the deck. The others followed him. As all emerged
from the submarine they uttered a cry of astonishment.

There, not one hundred yards away, was a great warship, flying a flag
which, in a moment, Tom recognized as that of Brazil. The cruiser was
lying off a small island, and all about were small boats, filled with
natives, who seemed to be bringing supplies from land to the ship. At
the unexpected sight of the submarine, bobbing up from the bottom of
the ocean, the natives uttered cries of fright.  The attention of those
on the warship was attracted, and the bridge and rails were lined with
curious officers and men.

"It's a good thing we didn't come up under that ship," observed Tom.
"They would have thought we were trying to torpedo her. Do you feel
better, dad?" he asked, his wonder over the sight of the big vessel
temporarily eclipsed in his anxiety for his parent.

"Oh, yes, much better. I'm all right now. But I wish we hadn't
disclosed ourselves to these people. They may demand to know where we
are going, and Brazil is too near Uruguay to make it safe to tell our
errand. They may guess it, however, from having read of the wreck, and
our departure."

"Oh, I guess it will be all right," replied Captain Weston. "We can
tell them we are on a pleasure trip. That's true enough. It would give
us great pleasure to find that gold."

"There's a boat, with some officers in it, to judge by the amount of
gold lace on them, putting off from the ship," remarked Mr. Sharp.

"Ha! Yes! Evidently they intend to pay us a formal visit," observed Mr.
Damon. "Bless my gaiters, though. I'm not dressed to receive company. I
think I'll put on my dress suit."

"It's too late," advised Tom. "They'll be here in a minute."

Urged on by the lusty arms of the Brazilian sailors, the boat,
containing several officers, neared the floating submarine rapidly.

"Ahoy there!" called an officer in the bow, his accent betraying his
unfamiliarity with the English language. "What craft are you?"

"Submarine, Advance, from New Jersey," replied Tom. "Who are you?"

"Brazilian cruiser San Paulo," was the reply. "Where are you bound?"
went on the officer.

"On pleasure," answered Captain Weston quickly. "But why do you ask? We
are an American ship, sailing under American colors. Is this Brazilian
territory?"

"This island is--yes," came back the answer, and by this time the small
boat was at the side of the submarine. Before the adventurers could
have protested, had they a desire to do so, there were a number of
officers and the crew of the San Paulo on the small deck.

With a flourish, the officer who had done the questioning drew his
sword. Waving it in the air with a dramatic gesture, he exclaimed:

"You're our prisoners! Resist and my men shall cut you down like dogs!
Seize them, men!"

The sailors sprang forward, each one stationing himself at the side of
one of our friends, and grasping an arm.

"What does this mean?" cried Captain Weston indignantly.  "If this is a
joke, you're carrying it too far. If you're in earnest, let me warn you
against interfering with Americans!"

"We know what we are doing," was the answer from the officer.

The sailor who had hold of Captain Weston endeavored to secure a
tighter grip. The captain turned suddenly, and seizing the man about
the waist, with an exercise of tremendous strength hurled him over his
head and into the sea, the man making a great splash.

"That's the way I'll treat any one else who dares lay a hand on me!"
shouted the captain, who was transformed from a mild-mannered
individual into an angry, modern giant. There was a gasp of
astonishment at his feat, as the ducked sailor crawled back into the
small boat. And he did not again venture on the deck of the submarine.

"Seize them, men!" cried the gold-laced officer again, and this time he
and his fellows, including the crew, crowded so closely around Tom and
his friends that they could do nothing. Even Captain Weston found it
impossible to offer any resistance, for three men grabbed hold of him
but his spirit was still a fighting one, and he struggled desperately
but uselessly.

"How dare you do this?" he cried.

"Yes," added Tom, "what right have you to interfere with us?"

"Every right," declared the gold-laced officer.

"You are in Brazilian territory, and I arrest you."

"What for?" demanded Mr. Sharp.

"Because your ship is an American submarine, and we have received word
that you intend to damage our shipping, and may try to torpedo our
warships. I believe you tried to disable us a little while ago, but
failed. We consider that an act of war and you will be treated
accordingly. Take them on board the San Paulo," the officer went on,
turning to his aides. "We'll try them by court-marital here. Some of
you remain and guard this submarine. We will teach these filibustering
Americans a lesson."




Chapter Twenty

Doomed to Death


There was no room on the small deck of the submarine to make a stand
against the officers and crew of the Brazilian warship. In fact, the
capture of the gold-seekers had been effected so suddenly that their
astonishment almost deprived them of the power to think clearly.

At another command from the officer, who was addressed as Admiral
Fanchetti, several of the sailors began to lead Tom and his friends
toward the small boat.

"Do you feel all right, father?" inquired the lad anxiously, as he
looked at his parent. "These scoundrels have no right to treat us so."

"Yes, Tom, I'm all right as far as the electric shock is concerned, but
I don't like to be handled in this fashion."

"We ought not to submit!" burst out Mr. Damon. "Bless the stars and
stripes! We ought to fight."

"There's no chance," said Mr. Sharp. "We are right under the guns of
the ship. They could sink us with one shot. I guess we'll have to give
in for the time being."

"It is most unpleasant, if I may be allowed the expression," commented
Captain Weston mildly. He seemed to have lost his sudden anger, but
there was a steely glint in his eyes, and a grim, set look around his
month that showed his temper was kept under control only by an effort.
It boded no good to the sailors who had hold of the doughty captain if
he should once get loose, and it was noticed that they were on their
guard.

As for Tom, he submitted quietly to the two Brazilians who had hold of
either arm, and Mr. Swift was held by only one, for it was seen that he
was feeble.

"Into the boat with them!" cried Admiral Fanchetti. "And guard them
well, Lieutenant Drascalo, for I heard them plotting to escape," and
the admiral signaled to a younger officer, who was in charge of the men
guarding the prisoners.

"Lieutenant Drascalo, eh?" murmured Mr. Damon. "I think they made a
mistake naming him. It ought to be Rascalo. He looks like a rascal."

"Silenceo!" exclaimed the lieutenant, scowling at the odd character.

"Bless my spark plug! He's a regular fire-eater!" went on Mr. Damon,
who appeared to have fully recovered his spirits.

"Silenceo!" cried the lieutenant, scowling again, but Mr. Damon did not
appear to mind.

Admiral Fanchetti and several others of the gold-laced officers
remained aboard the submarine, while Tom and his friends were hustled
into the small boat and rowed toward the warship.

"I hope they don't damage our craft," murmured the young inventor, as
he saw the admiral enter the conning tower.

"If they do, we'll complain to the United States consul and demand
damages," said Mr. Swift.

"I'm afraid we won't have a chance to communicate with the consul,"
remarked Captain Weston.

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Damon. "Bless my shoelaces, but will
these scoundrels--"

"Silenceo!" cried Lieutenant Drascalo quickly. "Dogs of Americans, do
you wish to insult us?"

"Impossible; you wouldn't appreciate a good, genuine United States
insult," murmured Tom under his breath.

"What I mean," went on the captain, "is that these people may carry the
proceedings off with a high hand. You heard the admiral speak of a
court-martial."

"Would they dare do that?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"They would dare anything in this part of the world, I'm afraid,"
resumed Captain Weston. "I think I see their plan, though. This admiral
is newly in command; his uniform shows that. He wants to make a name for
himself, and he seizes on our submarine as an excuse. He can send word
to his government that he destroyed a torpedo craft that sought to
wreck his ship. Thus he will acquire a reputation."

"But would his government support him in such a hostile act against the
United States, a friendly nation?" asked Tom.

"Oh, he would not claim to have acted against the United States as a
power. He would say that it was a private submarine, and, as a matter
of fact, it is. While we are under the protection of the stars and
stripes, our vessel is not a Government one," and Captain Weston spoke
the last in a low voice, so the scowling lieutenant could not hear.

"What will they do with us?" inquired Mr. Swift.

"Have some sort of a court-martial, perhaps," went on the captain, "and
confiscate our craft. Then they will send us back home, I expect for
they would not dare harm us."

"But take our submarine!" cried Tom. "The villains--"

"Silenceo!" shouted Lieutenant Drascalo and he drew his sword.

By this time the small boat was under the big guns of the San Paulo,
and the prisoners were ordered, in broken English, to mount a companion
ladder that hung over the side. In a short time they were on deck, amid
a crowd of sailors, and they could see the boat going back to bring off
the admiral, who signaled from the submarine. Tom and his friends were
taken below to a room that looked like a prison, and there, a little
later, they were visited by Admiral Fanchetti and several officers.

"You will be tried at once," said the admiral. "I have examined your
submarine and I find she carries two torpedo tubes. It is a wonder you
did not sink me at once."

"Those are not torpedo tubes!" cried Tom, unable to keep silent, though
Captain Weston motioned him to do so.

"I know torpedo tubes when I see them," declared the admiral. "I
consider I had a very narrow escape. Your country is fortunate that
mine does not declare war against it for this act. But I take it you
are acting privately, for you fly no flag, though you claim to be from
the United States."

"There's no place for a flag on the submarine," went on Tom. "What good
would it be under water?"

"Silenceo!" cried Lieutenant Drascalo, the admonition to silence
seeming to be the only command of which he was capable.

"I shall confiscate your craft for my government," went on the admiral,
"and shall punish you as the court-martial may direct. You will be
tried at once."

It was in vain for the prisoners to protest. Matters were carried with
a high hand. They were allowed a spokesman, and Captain Weston, who
understood Spanish, was selected, that language being used. But the
defense was a farce, for he was scarcely listened to. Several officers
testified before the admiral, who was judge, that they had seen the
submarine rise out of the water, almost under the prow of the San
Paulo. It was assumed that the Advance had tried to wreck the warship,
but had failed. It was in vain that Captain Weston and the others told
of the reason for their rapid ascent from the ocean depths--that Mr.
Swift had been shocked, and needed fresh air. Their story was not
believed.

"We have heard enough!" suddenly exclaimed the admiral.  "The evidence
against you is over-whelming--er--what you Americans call conclusive,"
and he was speaking then in broken English. "I find you guilty, and the
sentence of this court-martial is that you be shot at sunrise, three
days hence!"

"Shot!" cried Captain Weston, staggering back at this unexpected
sentence. His companions turned white, and Mr. Swift leaned against his
son for support.

"Bless my stars! Of all the scoundrelly!" began Mr. Damon.

"Silenceo!" shouted the lieutenant, waving his sword.

"You will be shot," proceeded the admiral. "Is not that the verdict of
the honorable court?" he asked, looking at his fellow officers. They
all nodded gravely.

"But look here!" objected Captain Weston. "You don't dare do that! We
are citizens of the United States, and--"

"I consider you no better than pirates," interrupted the admiral. "You
have an armed submarine--a submarine with torpedo tubes. You invade our
harbor with it, and come up almost under my ship. You have forfeited
your right to the protection of your country, and I have no fear on
that score. You will be shot within three days. That is all.  Remove
the prisoners."

Protests were in vain, and it was equally useless to struggle. The
prisoners were taken out on deck, for which they were thankful, for the
interior of the ship was close and hot, the weather being intensely
disagreeable. They were told to keep within a certain space on deck,
and a guard of sailors, all armed, was placed near them. From where
they were they could see their submarine floating on the surface of the
little bay, with several Brazilians on the small deck. The Advance had
been anchored, and was surrounded by a flotilla of the native boats,
the brown-skinned paddlers gazing curiously at the odd craft.

"Well, this is tough luck!" murmured Tom. "How do you feel, dad?"

"As well as can be expected under the circumstances," was the reply.
"What do you think about this, Captain Weston?"

"Not very much, if I may be allowed the expression," was the answer.

"Do you think they will dare carry out that threat?" asked Mr. Sharp.

The captain shrugged his shoulders. "I hope it is only a bluff," he
replied, "made to scare us so we will consent to giving up the
submarine, which they have no right to confiscate. But these fellows
look ugly enough for anything," he went on.

"Then if there's any chance of them attempting to carry it out," spoke
Tom, "we've got to do something."

"Bless my gizzard, of course!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "But what? That's
the question. To be shot! Why, that's a terrible threat! The villains--"

"Silenceo!" shouted Lieutenant Drascalo, coming up at that moment.




Chapter Twenty-One

The Escape


Events had happened so quickly that day that the gold-hunters could
scarcely comprehend them. It seemed only a short time since Mr. Swift
had been discovered lying disabled on the dynamo, and what had
transpired since seemed to have taken place in a few minutes, though it
was, in reality, several hours. This was made manifest by the feeling
of hunger on the part of Tom and his friends.

"I wonder if they're going to starve us, the scoundrels?" asked Mr.
Sharp, when the irate lieutenant was beyond hearing. "It's not fair to
make us go hungry and shoot us in the bargain."

"That's so, they ought to feed us," put in Tom. As yet neither he nor
the others fully realized the meaning of the sentence passed on them.

From where they were on deck they could look off to the little island.
From it boats manned by natives were constantly putting off, bringing
supplies to the ship. The place appeared to be a sort of calling
station for Brazilian warships, where they could get fresh water and
fruit and other food.

From the island the gaze of the adventurers wandered to the submarine,
which lay not far away. They were chagrined to see several of the
bolder natives clambering over the deck.

"I hope they keep out of the interior," commented Tom. "If they get to
pulling or hauling on the levers and wheels they may open the tanks and
sink her, with the Conning tower open."

"Better that, perhaps, than to have her fall into the hands of a
foreign power," commented Captain Weston.  "Besides, I don't see that
it's going to matter much to us what becomes of her after we're--"

He did not finish, but every one knew what he meant, and a grim silence
fell upon the little group.

There came a welcome diversion, however, in the shape of three sailors,
bearing trays of food, which were placed on the deck in front of the
prisoners, who were sitting or lying in the shade of an awning, for the
sun was very hot.

"Ha! Bless my napkin-ring!" cried Mr. Damon with something of his
former gaiety. "Here's a meal, at all events. They don't intend to
starve us. Eat hearty, every one."

"Yes, we need to keep up our strength," observed Captain Weston.

"Why?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"Because we're going to try to escape!" exclaimed Tom in a low voice,
when the sailors who had brought the food had gone. "Isn't that what
you mean, captain?"

"Exactly. We'll try to give these villains the slip, and we'll need all
our strength and wits to do it. We'll wait until night, and see what we
can do."

"But where will we escape to?" asked Mr. Swift. "The island will afford
no shelter, and--"

"No, but our submarine will," went on the sailor.

"It's in the possession of the Brazilians," objected Tom.

"Once I get aboard the Advance twenty of those brown-skinned villains
won't keep me prisoner," declared Captain Weston fiercely. "If we can
only slip away from here, get into the small boat, or even swim to the
submarine, I'll make those chaps on board her think a hurricane has
broken loose."

"Yes, and I'll help," said Mr. Damon.

"And I," added Tom and the balloonist.

"That's the way to talk," commented the captain. "Now let's eat, for I
see that rascally lieutenant coming this way, and we mustn't appear to
be plotting, or he'll be suspicious."

The day passed slowly, and though the prisoners seemed to be allowed
considerable liberty, they soon found that it was only apparent. Once
Tom walked some distance from that portion of the deck where he and the
others had been told to remain. A sailor with a gun at once ordered him
back. Nor could they approach the rails without being directed, harshly
enough at times, to move back amidships.

As night approached the gold-seekers were on the alert for any chance
that might offer to slip away, or even attack their guard, but the
number of Brazilians around them was doubled in the evening, and after
supper, which was served to them on deck by the light of swinging
lanterns, they were taken below and locked in a stuffy cabin. They
looked helplessly at each other.

"Don't give up," advised Captain Weston. "It's a long night. We may be
able to get out of here."

But this hope was in vain. Several times he and Tom, thinking the
guards outside the cabin were asleep, tried to force the lock of the
door with their pocket-knives, which had not been taken from them. But
one of the sailors was aroused each time by the noise, and looked in
through a barred window, so they had to give it up. Slowly the night
passed, and morning found the prisoners pale, tired and discouraged.
They were brought up on deck again, for which they were thankful, as in
that tropical climate it was stifling below.

During the day they saw Admiral Fanchetti and several of his officers
pay a visit to the submarine. They went below through the opened
conning tower, and were gone some time.

"I hope they don't disturb any of the machinery," remarked Mr. Swift.
"That could easily do great damage."

Admiral Fanchetti seemed much pleased with himself when he returned
from his visit to the submarine.

"You have a fine craft," he said to the prisoners. "Or, rather, you had
one. My government now owns it. It seems a pity to shoot such good boat
builders, but you are too dangerous to be allowed to go."

If there had been any doubt in the minds of Tom and his friends that
the sentence of the court-martial was only for effect, it was dispelled
that day. A firing squad was told off in plain view of them, and the
men were put through their evolutions by Lieutenant Drascalo, who had
them load, aim and fire blank cartridges at an imaginary line of
prisoners. Tom could not repress a shudder as he noted the leveled
rifles, and saw the fire and smoke spurt from the muzzles.

"Thus we shall do to you at sunrise to-morrow," said the lieutenant,
grinning, as he once more had his men practice their grim work.

It seemed hotter than ever that day. The sun was fairly broiling, and
there was a curious haziness and stillness to the air. It was noticed
that the sailors on the San Paulo were busy making fast all loose
articles on deck with extra lashings, and hatch coverings were doubly
secured.

"What do you suppose they are up to?" asked Tom of Captain Weston.

"I think it is coming on to blow," he replied, "and they don't want to
be caught napping. They have fearful storms down in this region at this
season of the year, and I think one is about due."

"I hope it doesn't wreck the submarine," spoke Mr. Swift.  "They ought
to close the hatch of the conning tower, for it won't take much of a
sea to make her ship considerable water."

Admiral Fanchetti had thought of this, however, and as the afternoon
wore away and the storm signs multiplied, he sent word to close the
submarine. He left a few sailors aboard inside on guard.

"It's too hot to eat," observed Tom, when their supper had been brought
to them, and the others felt the same way about it. They managed to
drink some cocoanut milk, prepared in a palatable fashion by the
natives of the island, and then, much to their disgust, they were taken
below again and locked in the cabin.

"Whew! But it certainly is hot!" exclaimed Mr. Damon as he sat down on
a couch and fanned himself. "This is awful!"

"Yes, something is going to happen pretty soon," observed Captain
Weston. "The storm will break shortly, I think."

They sat languidly about the cabin. It was so oppressive that even the
thought of the doom that awaited them in the morning could hardly seem
worse than the terrible heat. They could hear movements going on about
the ship, movements which indicated that preparations were being made
for something unusual. There was a rattling of a chain through a hawse
hole, and Captain Weston remarked:

"They're putting down another anchor. Admiral Fanchetti had better get
away from the island, though, unless he wants to be wrecked. He'll be
blown ashore in less than no time. No cable or chain will hold in such
storms as they have here."

There came a period of silence, which was suddenly broken by a howl as
of some wild beast.

"What's that?" cried Tom, springing up from where he was stretched out
on the cabin floor.

"Only the wind," replied the captain. "The storm has arrived."

The howling kept up, and soon the ship began to rock. The wind
increased, and a little later there could be heard, through an opened
port in the prisoners' cabin, the dash of rain.

"It's a regular hurricane!" exclaimed the captain. "I wonder if the
cables will hold?"

"What about the submarine?" asked Mr. Swift anxiously.

"I haven't much fear for her. She lies so low in the water that the
wind can't get much hold on her. I don't believe she'll drag her
anchor."

Once more came a fierce burst of wind, and a dash of rain, and then,
suddenly above the outburst of the elements, there sounded a crash on
deck. It was followed by excited cries.

"Something's happened!" yelled Tom. The prisoners gathered in a
frightened group in the middle of the cabin. The cries were repeated,
and then came a rush of feet just outside the cabin door.

"Our guards! They're leaving!" shouted Tom.

"Right!" exclaimed Captain Weston. "Now's our chance! Come on! If we're
going to escape we must do it while the storm is at its height, and all
is in confusion. Come on!"

Tom tried the door. It was locked.

"One side!" shouted the captain, and this time he did not pause to say
"by your leave." He came at the portal on the run, and his shoulder
struck it squarely. There was a splintering and crashing of wood, and
the door was burst open.

"Follow me!" cried the valiant sailor, and Tom and the others rushed
after him. They could hear the wind howling more loudly than ever, and
as they reached the deck the rain dashed into their faces with such
violence that they could hardly see. But they were aware that something
had occurred.  By the light of several lanterns swaying in the terrific
blast they saw that one of the auxiliary masts had broken off near the
deck.

It had fallen against the chart house, smashing it, and a number of
sailors were laboring to clear away the wreckage.

"Fortune favors us!" cried Captain Weston. "Come on! Make for the small
boat. It's near the side ladder. We'll lower the boat and pull to the
submarine."

There came a flash of lightning, and in its glare Tom saw something
that caused him to cry out.

"Look!" he shouted. "The submarine. She's dragged her anchors!"

The Advance was much closer to the warship than she had been that
afternoon. Captain Weston looked over the side.

"It's the San Paulo that's dragging her anchors, not the submarine!" he
shouted. "We're bearing down on her! We must act quickly. Come on,
we'll lower the boat!"

In the rush of wind and the dash of rain the prisoners crowded to the
accommodation companion ladder, which was still over the side of the
big ship. No one seemed to be noticing them, for Admiral Fanchetti was
on the bridge, yelling orders for the clearing away of the wreckage.
But Lieutenant Drascalo, coming up from below at that moment, caught
sight of the fleeing ones. Drawing his sword, he rushed at them,
shouting:

"The prisoners! The prisoners! They are escaping!"

Captain Weston leaped toward the lieutenant.

"Look out for his sword!" cried Tom. But the doughty sailor did not
fear the weapon. Catching up a coil of rope, he cast it at the
lieutenant. It struck him in the chest, and he staggered back, lowering
his sword.

Captain Weston leaped forward, and with a terrific blow sent Lieutenant
Drascalo to the deck.

"There!" cried the sailor. "I guess you won't yell 'Silenceo!' for a
while now."

There was a rush of Brazilians toward the group of prisoners. Tom
caught one with a blow on the chin, and felled him, while Captain
Weston disposed of two more, and Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon one each. The
savage fighting of the Americans was too much for the foreigners, and
they drew back.

"Come on!" cried Captain Weston again. "The storm is getting worse. The
warship will crash into the submarine in a few minutes. Her anchors
aren't holding. I didn't think they would."

He made a dash for the ladder, and a glance showed him that the small
boat was in the water at the foot of it. The craft had not been hoisted
on the davits.

"Luck's with us at last!" cried Tom, seeing it also.  "Shall I help
you, dad?"

"No; I think I'm all right. Go ahead."

There came such a gust of wind that the San Paulo was heeled over, and
the wreck of the mast, rolling about, crashed into the side of a deck
house, splintering it. A crowd of sailors, led by Admiral Fanchetti,
who were again rushing on the escaping prisoners, had to leap back out
of the way of the rolling mast.

"Catch them! Don't let them get away!" begged the commander, but the
sailors evidently had no desire to close in with the Americans.

Through the rush of wind and rain Tom and his friends staggered down
the ladder. It was hard work to maintain one's footing, but they
managed it. On account of the high side of the ship the water was
comparatively calm under her lee, and, though the small boat was
bobbing about, they got aboard. The oars were in place, and in another
moment they had shoved off from the landing stage which formed the foot
of the accommodation ladder.

"Now for the Advance!" murmured Captain Weston.

"Come back! Come back, dogs of Americans!" cried a voice at the rail
over their heads, and looking up, Tom saw Lieutenant Drascalo. He had
snatched a carbine from a marine, and was pointing it at the recent
prisoners. He fired, the flash of the gun and a dazzling chain of
lightning coming together. The thunder swallowed up the report of the
carbine, but the bullet whistled uncomfortable close to Tom's head. The
blackness that followed the lightning shut out the view of everything
for a few seconds, and when the next flash came the adventurers saw
that they were close to their submarine.

A fusillade of shots sounded from the deck of the warship, but as the
marines were poor marksmen at best, and as the swaying of the ship
disconcerted them, our friends were in little danger.

There was quite a sea once they were beyond the protection of the side
of the warship, but Captain Weston, who was rowing, knew how to manage
a boat skillfully, and he soon had the craft alongside the bobbing
submarine.

"Get aboard, now, quick!" he cried.

They leaped to the small deck, casting the rowboat adrift.  It was the
work of but a moment to open the conning tower.  As they started to
descend they were met by several Brazilians coming up.

"Overboard with 'em!" yelled the captain. "Let them swim ashore or to
their ship!"

With almost superhuman strength he tossed one big sailor from the small
deck. Another showed fight, but he went to join his companion in the
swirling water. A man rushed at Tom, seeking the while to draw his
sword, but the young inventor, with a neat left-hander, sent him to
join the other two, and the remainder did not wait to try conclusions.
They leaped for their lives, and soon all could be seen, in the
frequent lightning flashes, swimming toward the warship which was now
closer than ever to the submarine.

"Get inside and we'll sink below the surface!" called Tom.  "Then we
don't care what happens."

They closed the steel door of the conning tower. As they did so they
heard the patter of bullets from carbines fired from the San Paulo.
Then came a violent tossing of the Advance; the waves were becoming
higher as they caught the full force of the hurricane. It took but an
instant to sever, from within, the cable attached to the anchor, which
was one belonging to the warship. The Advance began drifting.

"Open the tanks, Mr. Sharp!" cried Tom. "Captain Weston and I will
steer. Once below we'll start the engines."

Amid a crash of thunder and dazzling flashes of lightning, the
submarine began to sink. Tom, in the conning tower had a sight of the
San Paulo as it drifted nearer and nearer under the influence of the
mighty wind. As one bright flash came he saw Admiral Fanchetti and
Lieutenant Drascalo leaning over the rail and gazing at the Advance.

A moment later the view faded from sight as the submarine sank below
the surface of the troubled sea. She was tossed about for some time
until deep enough to escape the surface motion. Waiting until she was
far enough down so that her lights would not offer a mark for the guns
of the warship, the electrics were switched on.

"We're safe now!" cried Tom, helping his father to his cabin. "They've
got too much to attend to themselves to follow us now, even if they
could. Shall we go ahead, Captain Weston?"

"I think so, yes, if I may be allowed to express my opinion," was the
mild reply, in strange contrast to the strenuous work in which the
captain had just been engaged.

Tom signaled to Mr. Sharp in the engine-room, and in a few seconds the
Advance was speeding away from the island and the hostile vessel. Nor,
deep as she was now, was there any sign of the hurricane. In the
peaceful depths she was once more speeding toward the sunken treasure.




Chapter Twenty-Two

At the Wreck


"Well," remarked Mr. Damon, as the submarine hurled herself forward
through the ocean, "I guess that firing party will have something else
to do to-morrow morning besides aiming those rifles at us."

"Yes, indeed," agreed Tom. "They'll be lucky if they save their ship.
My, how that wind did blow!"

"You're right," put in Captain Weston. "When they get a hurricane down
in this region it's no cat's paw. But they were a mighty careless lot
of sailors. The idea of leaving the ladder over the side, and the boat
in the water."

"It was a good thing for us, though," was Tom's opinion.

"Indeed it was," came from the captain. "But as long as we are safe now
I think we'd better take a look about the craft to see if those chaps
did any damage. They can't have done much, though, or she wouldn't be
running so smoothly.  Suppose you go take a look, Tom, and ask your
father and Mr. Sharp what they think. I'll steer for a while, until we
get well away from the island."

The young inventor found his father and the balloonist busy in the
engine-room. Mr. Swift had already begun an inspection of the
machinery, and so far found that it had not been injured. A further
inspection showed that no damage had been done by the foreign guard
that had been in temporary possession of the Advance, though the
sailors had made free in the cabins, and had broken into the food
lockers, helping themselves plentifully. But there was still enough for
the gold-seekers.

"You'd never know there was a storm raging up above," observed Tom as
he rejoined Captain Weston in the lower pilot house, where he was
managing the craft. "It's as still and peaceful here as one could wish."

"Yes, the extreme depths are seldom disturbed by a surface storm. But
we are over a mile deep now. I sent her down a little while you were
gone, as I think she rides a little more steadily."

All that night they speeded forward, and the next day, rising to the
surface to take an observation, they found no traces of the storm,
which had blown itself out. They were several hundred miles away from
the hostile warship, and there was not a vessel in sight on the broad
expanse of blue ocean.

The air tanks were refilled, and after sailing along on the surface for
an hour or two, the submarine was again sent below, as Captain Weston
sighted through his telescope the smoke of a distant steamer.

"As long as it isn't the Wonder, we're all right," said Tom. "Still, we
don't want to answer a lot of questions about ourselves and our object."

"No. I fancy the Wonder will give up the search," remarked the captain,
as the Advance was sinking to the depths.

"We must be getting pretty near to the end of our search ourselves,"
ventured the young inventor.

"We are within five hundred miles of the intersection of the
forty-fifth parallel and the twenty-seventh meridian, east from
Washington," said the captain. "That's as near as I could locate the
wreck. Once we reach that point we will have to search about under
water, for I don't fancy the other divers left any buoys to mark the
spot."

It was two days later, after uneventful sailing, partly on the surface,
and partly submerged, that Captain Weston, taking a noon observation,
announced:

"Well, we're here!"

"Do you mean at the wreck?" asked Mr. Swift eagerly.

"We're at the place where she is supposed to lie, in about two miles of
water," replied the captain. "We are quite a distance off the coast of
Uruguay, about opposite the harbor of Rio de La Plata. From now on we
shall have to nose about under water, and trust to luck."

With her air tanks filled to their capacity, and Tom having seen that
the oxygen machine and other apparatus was in perfect working order,
the submarine was sent below on her search. Though they were in the
neighborhood of the wreck, the adventurers might still have to do
considerable searching before locating it. Lower and lower they sank
into the depths of the sea, down and down, until they were deeper than
they had ever gone before. The pressure was tremendous, but the steel
sides of the Advance withstood it.

Then began a search that lasted nearly a week. Back and forth they
cruised, around in great circles, with the powerful searchlight focused
to disclose the sunken treasure ship. Once Tom, who was observing the
path of light in the depths from the conning tower, thought he had seen
the remains of the Boldero, for a misty shape loomed up in front of the
submarine, and he signaled for a quick stop. It was a wreck, but it had
been on the ocean bed for a score of years, and only a few timbers
remained of what had been a great ship. Much disappointed, Tom rang for
full speed ahead again, and the current was sent into the great
electric plates that pulled and pushed the submarine forward.

For two days more nothing happened. They searched around under the
green waters, on the alert for the first sign, but they saw nothing.
Great fish swam about them, sometimes racing with the Advance. The
adventurers beheld great ocean caverns, and skirted immense rocks,
where dwelt monsters of the deep. Once a great octopus tried to do
battle with the submarine and crush it in its snaky arms, but Tom saw
the great white body, with saucer-shaped eyes, in the path of light and
rammed him with the steel point. The creature died after a struggle.

They were beginning to despair when a full week had passed and they
were seemingly as far from the wreck as ever. They went to the surface
to enable Captain Weston to take another observation. It only confirmed
the other, and showed that they were in the right vicinity. But it was
like looking for a needle in a haystack, almost, to find the sunken ship
in that depth of water.

"Well, we'll try again," said Mr. Swift, as they sank once more beneath
the surface.

It was toward evening, on the second day after this, that Tom, who was
on duty in the conning tower, saw a black shape looming up in front of
the submarine, the searchlight revealing it to him far enough away so
that he could steer to avoid it. He thought at first that it was a
great rock, for they were moving along near the bottom, but the
peculiar shape of it soon convinced him that this could not be. It came
more plainly into view as the submarine approached it more slowly, then
suddenly, out of the depths in the illumination from the searchlight,
the young inventor saw the steel sides of a steamer. His heart gave a
great thump, but he would not call out yet, fearing that it might be
some other vessel than the one containing the treasure.

He steered the Advance so as to circle it. As he swept past the bows he
saw in big letters near the sharp prow the word, Boldero.

"The wreck! The wreck!" he cried, his voice ringing through the craft
from end to end. "We've found the wreck at last!"

"Are you sure?" cried his father, hurrying to his son, Captain Weston
following.

"Positive," answered the lad. The submarine was slowing up now, and Tom
sent her around on the other side. They had a good view of the sunken
ship. It seemed to be intact, no gaping holes in her sides, for only
her plates had started, allowing her to sink gradually.

"At last," murmured Mr. Swift. "Can it be possible we are about to get
the treasure?"

"That's the Boldero, all right," affirmed Captain Weston.  "I recognize
her, even if the name wasn't on her bow. Go right down on the bottom,
Tom, and we'll get out the diving suits and make an examination."

The submarine settled to the ocean bed. Tom glanced at the depth gage.
It showed over two miles and a half. Would they be able to venture out
into water of such enormous pressure in the comparatively frail diving
suits, and wrest the gold from the wreck? It was a serious question.

The Advance came to a stop. In front of her loomed the great bulk of
the Boldero, vague and shadowy in the flickering gleam of the
searchlight. As the gold-seekers looked at her through the bull's-eyes
of the conning tower, several great forms emerged from beneath the
wreck's bows.

"Deep-water sharks!" exclaimed  Captain Weston, "and monsters, too. But
they can't bother us. Now to get out the gold!"




Chapter Twenty-Three

Attacked by Sharks


For a few minutes after reaching the wreck, which had so occupied their
thoughts for the past weeks, the adventurers did nothing but gaze at it
from the ports of the submarine.  The appearance of the deep-water
sharks gave them no concern, for they did not imagine the ugly
creatures would attack them. The treasure-seekers were more engrossed
with the problem of getting out the gold.

"How are we going to get at it?" asked Tom, as he looked at the high
sides of the sunken ship, which towered well above the comparatively
small Advance.

"Why, just go in and get it," suggested Mr. Damon. "Where is gold in a
cargo usually kept, Captain Weston? You ought to know, I should think.
Bless my pocketbook!"

"Well, I should say that in this case the bullion would be kept in a
safe in the captain's cabin," replied the sailor.  "Or, if not there,
in some after part of the vessel, away from where the crew is
quartered. But it is going to be quite a problem to get at it. We can't
climb the sides of the wreck, and it will be impossible to lower her
ladder over the side. However, I think we had better get into the
diving suits and take a closer look. We can walk around her."

"That's my idea," put in Mr. Sharp. "But who will go, and who will stay
with the ship?"

"I think Tom and Captain Weston had better go," suggested Mr. Swift.
"Then, in case anything happens, Mr. Sharp, you and I will be on board
to manage matters."

"You don't think anything will happen, do you, dad?" asked his son with
a laugh, but it was not an easy one, for the lad was thinking of the
shadowy forms of the ugly sharks.

"Oh, no, but it's best to be prepared," answered his father.

The captain and the young inventor lost no time in donning the diving
suits. They each took a heavy metal bar, pointed at one end, to use in
assisting them to walk on the bed of the ocean, and as a protection in
case the sharks might attack them. Entering the diving chamber, they
were shut in, and then water was admitted until the pressure was seen,
by gauges, to be the same as that outside the submarine. Then the
sliding steel door was opened. At first Tom and the captain could
barely move, so great was the pressure of water on their bodies. They
would have been crushed but for the protection afforded by the strong
diving suits.

In a few minutes they became used to it, and stepped out on the floor
of the ocean. They could not, of course, speak to each other, but Tom
looked through the glass eyes of his helmet at the captain, and the
latter motioned for the lad to follow. The two divers could breathe
perfectly, and by means of small, but powerful lights on the helmets,
the way was lighted for them as they advanced.

Slowly they approached the wreck, and began a circuit of her. They
could see several places where the pressure of the water, and the
strain of the storm in which she had foundered, had opened the plates
of the ship, but in no case were the openings large enough to admit a
person.  Captain Weston put his steel bar in one crack, and tried to
pry it farther open, but his strength was not equal to the task. He
made some peculiar motions, but Tom could not understand them.

They looked for some means by which they could mount to the decks of
the Boldero, but none was visible. It was like trying to scale a
fifty-foot smooth steel wall. There was no place for a foothold. Again
the sailor made some peculiar motions, and the lad puzzled over them.
They had gone nearly around the wreck now, and as yet had seen no way
in which to get at the gold. As they passed around the bow, which was
in a deep shadow from a great rock, they caught sight of the submarine
lying a short distance away. Light streamed from many hull's-eyes, and
Tom felt a sense of security as he looked at her, for it was lonesome
enough in that great depth of water, unable to speak to his companion,
who was a few feet in advance.

Suddenly there was a swirling of the water, and Tom was nearly thrown
off his feet by the rush of some great body. A long, black shadow
passed over his head, and an instant later he saw the form of a great
shark launched at Captain Weston. The lad involuntarily cried in alarm,
but the result was surprising. He was nearly deafened by his own voice,
confined as the sound was in the helmet he wore. But the sailor, too,
had felt the movement of the water, and turned just in time. He thrust
upward with his pointed bar. But he missed the stroke, and Tom, a
moment later, saw the great fish turn over so that its mouth, which is
far underneath its snout, could take in the queer shape which the shark
evidently thought was a choice morsel. The big fish did actually get
the helmet of Captain Weston inside its jaws, but probably it would
have found it impossible to crush the strong steel. Still it might have
sprung the joints, and water would have entered, which would have been
as fatal as though the sailor had been swallowed by the shark. Tom
realized this and, moving as fast as he could through the water, he
came up behind the monster and drove his steel bar deep into it.

The sea was crimsoned with blood, and the savage creature, opening its
mouth, let go of the captain. It turned on Tom, who again harpooned it.
Then the fish darted off and began a wild flurry, for it was dying. The
rush of water nearly threw Tom off his feet, but he managed to make his
way over to his friend, and assist him to rise. A confident look from
the sailor showed the lad that Captain Weston was uninjured, though he
must have been frightened. As the two turned to make their way back to
the submarine, the waters about them seemed alive with the horrible
monsters.

It needed but a glance to show what they were, Sharks!  Scores of them,
long, black ones, with their ugly, undershot mouths. They had been
attracted by the blood of the one Tom had killed, but there was not a
meal for all of them off the dying creature, and the great fish might
turn on the young inventor and his companion.

The two shrank closer toward the wreck. They might get under the prow
of that and be safe. But even as they started to move, several of the
sea wolves darted quickly at them.  Tom glanced at the captain. What
could they do? Strong as were the diving suits, a combined attack by
the sharks, with their powerful jaws, would do untold damage.

At that moment there seemed some movement on board the submarine. Tom
could see his father looking from the conning tower, and the aged
inventor seemed to be making some motions. Then Tom understood. Mr.
Swift was directing his son and Captain Weston to crouch down. The lad
did so, pulling the sailor after him. Then Tom saw the bow electric gun
run out, and aimed at the mass of sharks, most of whom were congregated
about the dead one. Into the midst of the monsters was fired a number
of small projectiles, which could be used in the electric cannon in
place of the solid shot. Once more the waters were red with blood, and
those sharks which were not killed swirled off. Tom and Captain Weston
were saved. They were soon inside the submarine again, telling their
thrilling story.

"It's lucky you saw us, dad," remarked the lad, blushing at the praise
Mr. Damon bestowed on him for killing the monster which had attacked
the captain.

"Oh, I was on the lookout," said the inventor. "But what about getting
into the wreck?"

"I think the only way we can do it will be to ram a hole in her side,"
said Captain Weston. "That was what I tried to tell Tom by motions, but
he didn't seem to understand me."

"No," replied the lad, who was still a little nervous from his recent
experience. "I thought you meant for us to turn it over, bottom side
up," and he laughed.

"Bless my gizzard!  Just like a shark," commented Mr. Damon.

"Please don't mention them," begged Tom. "I hope we don't see any more
of them."

"Oh, I fancy they have been driven far enough away from this
neighborhood now," commented the captain. "But now about the wreck. We
may be able to approach it from above.  Suppose we try to lower the
submarine on it? That will save ripping it open."

This was tried a little later, but would not work. There were strong
currents sweeping over the top of the Boldero, caused by a submerged
reef near which she had settled. It was a delicate task to sink the
submarine on her decks, and with the deep waters swirling about was
found to be impossible, even with the use of the electric plates and
the auxiliary screws. Once more the Advance settled to the ocean bed,
near the wreck.

"Well, what's to be done?" asked Tom, as he looked at the high steel
sides.

"Ram her, tear a hole, and then use dynamite," decided Captain Weston
promptly. "You have some explosive, haven't you, Mr. Swift?"

"Oh, yes. I came prepared for emergencies."

"Then we'll blow up the wreck and get at the gold."




Chapter Twenty-Four

Ramming the Wreck


Fitted with a long, sharp steel ram in front, the Advance was
peculiarly adapted for this sort of work. In designing the ship this
ram was calculated to be used against hostile vessels in war time, for
the submarine was at first, as we know, destined for a Government boat.
Now the ram was to serve a good turn.

To make sure that the attempt would be a success, the machinery of the
craft was carefully gone over. It was found to be in perfect order,
save for a few adjustments which were needed. Then, as it was night,
though there was no difference in the appearance of things below the
surface, it was decided to turn in, and begin work in the morning. Nor
did the gold-seekers go to the surface, for they feared they might
encounter a storm.

"We had trouble enough locating the wreck," said Captain Weston, "and
if we go up we may be blown off our course. We have air enough to stay
below, haven't we, Tom?"

"Plenty," answered the lad, looking at the gages.

After a hearty breakfast the next morning, the submarine crew got ready
for their hard task. The craft was backed away as far as was practical,
and then, running at full speed, she rammed the wreck. The shock was
terrific, and at first it was feared some damage had been done to the
Advance, but she stood the strain.

"Did we open up much of a hole?" anxiously asked Mr. Swift.

"Pretty good," replied Tom, observing it through the conning tower
bull's-eyes, when the submarine had backed off again. "Let's give her
another."

Once more the great steel ram hit into the side of the Boldero, and
again the submarine shivered from the shock.  But there was a bigger
hole in the wreck now, and after Captain Weston had viewed it he
decided it was large enough to allow a person to enter and place a
charge of dynamite so that the treasure ship would be broken up.

Tom and the captain placed the explosive. Then the Advance was
withdrawn to a safe distance. There was a dull rumble, a great swirling
of the water, which was made murky; but when it cleared, and the
submarine went back, it was seen that the wreck was effectively broken
up. It was in two parts, each one easy of access.

"That's the stuff!" cried Tom. "Now to get at the gold!"

"Yes, get out the diving suits," added Mr. Damon. "Bless my
watch-charm, I think I'll chance it in one myself! Do you think the
sharks are all gone, Captain Weston?"

"I think so."

In a short time Tom, the captain, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon were attired
in the diving suits, Mr. Swift not caring to venture into such a great
depth of water. Besides, it was necessary for at least one person to
remain in the submarine to operate the diving chamber.

Walking slowly along the bottom of the sea the four gold-seekers
approached the wreck. They looked on all sides for a sight of the
sharks, but the monster fish seemed to have deserted that part of the
ocean. Tom was the first to reach the now disrupted steamer. He found
he could easily climb up, for boxes and barrels from the cargo holds
were scattered all about by the explosion. Captain Weston soon joined
the lad. The sailor motioned Tom to follow him, and being more familiar
with ocean craft the captain was permitted to take the lead. He headed
aft, seeking to locate the captain's cabin. Nor was he long in finding
it. He motioned for the others to enter, that the combined illumination
of the lamps in their helmets would make the place bright enough so a
search could be made for the gold.  Tom suddenly seized the arm of the
captain, and pointed to one corner of the cabin. There stood a small
safe, and at the sight of it Captain Weston moved toward it. The door
was not locked, probably having been left open when the ship was
deserted. Swinging it back the interior was revealed.

It was empty. There was no gold bullion in it.

There was no mistaking the dejected air of Captain Weston.  The others
shared his feelings, but though they all felt like voicing their
disappointment, not a word could be spoken. Mr. Sharp, by vigorous
motions, indicated to his companions to seek further.

They did so, spending all the rest of the day in the wreck, save for a
short interval for dinner. But no gold rewarded their search.

Tom, late that afternoon, wandered away from the others, and found
himself in the captain's cabin again, with the empty safe showing dimly
in the water that was all about.

"Hang it all!" thought the lad, "we've had all our trouble for nothing!
They must have taken the gold with them."

Idly he raised his steel bar, and struck it against the partition back
of the safe. To his astonishment the partition seemed to fall inward,
revealing a secret compartment. The lad leaned forward to bring the
light for his helmet to play on the recess. He saw a number of boxes,
piled one upon the other. He had accidentally touched a hidden spring
and opened a secret receptacle. But what did it contain?

Tom reached in and tried to lift one of the boxes. He found it beyond
his strength. Trembling from excitement, he went in search of the
others. He found them delving in the after part of the wreck, but by
motions our hero caused them to follow him. Captain Weston showed the
excitement he felt as soon as he caught sight of the boxes. He and Mr.
Sharp lifted one out, and placed it on the cabin floor. They pried off
the top with their bars.

There, packed in layers, were small yellow bars; dull, gleaming, yellow
bars! It needed but a glance to show that they were gold bullion. Tom
had found the treasure. The lad tried to dance around there in the
cabin of the wreck, nearly three miles below the surface of the ocean,
but the pressure of water was too much for him. Their trip had been
successful.




Chapter Twenty-Five

Home With the Gold


There was no time to be lost. They were in a treacherous part of the
ocean, and strong currents might at any time further break up the
wreck, so that they could not come at the gold. It was decided, by
means of motions, to at once transfer the treasure to the submarine. As
the boxes were too heavy to carry easily, especially as two men, who
were required to lift one, could not walk together in the uncertain
footing afforded by the wreck, another plan was adopted. The boxes were
opened and the bars, a few at a time, were dropped on a firm, sandy
place at the side of the wreck. Tom and Captain Weston did this work,
while Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon carried the bullion to the diving chamber
of the Advance. They put the yellow bars inside, and when quite a
number had been thus shifted, Mr. Swift, closing the chamber, pumped
the water out and removed the gold. Then he opened the chamber to the
divers again, and the process was repeated, until all the bullion had
been secured.

Tom would have been glad to make a further examination of the wreck,
for he thought he could get some of the rifles the ship carried, but
Captain Weston signed to him not to attempt this.

The lad went to the pilot house, while his father and Mr. Sharp took
their places in the engine-room. The gold had been safely stowed in Mr.
Swift's cabin.

Tom took a last look at the wreck before he gave the starting signal.
As he gazed at the bent and twisted mass of steel that had once been a
great ship, he saw something long, black and shadowy moving around from
the other side, coming across the bows.

"There's another big shark," he observed to Captain Weston. "They're
coming back after us."

The captain did not speak. He was staring at the dark form. Suddenly,
from what seemed the pointed nose of it, there gleamed a light, as from
some great eye.

"Look at that!" cried Tom. "That's no shark!"

"If you want my opinion," remarked the sailor, "I should say it was the
other submarine--that of Berg and his friends--the Wonder. They've
managed to fix up their craft and are after the gold."

"But they're too late!" cried Tom excitedly. "Let's tell them so."

"No," advised the captain. "We don't want any trouble with them."

Mr. Swift came forward to see why his son had not given the signal to
start. He was shown the other submarine, for now that the Wonder had
turned on several searchlights, there was no doubt as to the identity
of the craft.

"Let's get away unobserved if we can," he suggested. "We have had
trouble enough."

It was easy to do this, as the Advance was hidden behind the wreck, and
her lights were glowing but dimly. Then, too, those in the other
submarine were so excited over the finding of what they supposed was
the wreck containing the treasure, that they paid little attention to
anything else.

"I wonder how they'll feel when they find the gold gone?" asked Tom as
he pulled the lever starting the pumps.

"Well, we may have a chance to learn, when we get back to
civilization," remarked the captain.

The surface was soon reached, and then, under fair skies, and on a calm
sea, the voyage home was begun. Part of the time the Advance sailed on
the top, and part of the time submerged.

They met with but a single accident, and that was when the forward
electrical plate broke. But with the aft one still in commission, and
the auxiliary screws, they made good time. Just before reaching home
they settled down to the bottom and donned the diving suits again, even
Mr. Swift taking his turn. Mr. Damon caught some large lobsters, of
which he was very fond, or, rather, to be more correct, the lobsters
caught him. When he entered the diving chamber there were four fine
ones clinging to different parts of his diving suit. Some of them were
served for dinner.

The adventurers safely reached the New Jersey coast, and the submarine
was docked. Mr. Swift at once communicated with the proper authorities
concerning the recovery of the gold. He offered to divide with the
actual owners, after he and his friends had been paid for their
services, but as the revolutionary party to whom the bullion was
intended had gone out of existence, there was no one to officially
claim the treasure, so it all went to Tom and his friends, who made an
equitable distribution of it. The young inventor did not forget to buy
Mrs. Baggert a fine diamond ring, as he had promised.

As for Berg and his employers, they were, it was learned later, greatly
chagrined at finding the wreck valueless.  They tried to make trouble
for Tom and his father, but were not successful.

A few days after arriving at the seacoast cottage, Tom, his father and
Mr. Damon went to Shopton in the airship.  Captain Weston, Garret
Jackson and Mr Sharp remained behind in charge of the submarine. It was
decided that the Swifts would keep the craft and not sell it to the
Government, as Tom said they might want to go after more treasure some
day.

"I must first deposit this gold," said Mr. Swift as the airship landed
in front of the shed at his home. "It won't do to keep it in the house
over night, even if the Happy Harry gang is in jail."

Tom helped him take it to the bank. As they were making perhaps the
largest single deposit ever put in the institution, Ned Newton came out.

"Well, Tom," he cried to his chum, "it seems that you are never going
to stop doing things. You've conquered the air, the earth and the
water."

"What have you been doing while I've been under water, Ned?" asked the
young inventor.

"Oh, the same old thing. Running errands and doing all sorts of work in
the bank."

Tom had a sudden idea. He whispered to his father and Mr. Swift nodded.
A little later he was closeted with Mr. Prendergast, the bank
president. It was not long before Ned and Tom were called in.

"I have some good news for you, Ned," said Mr. Prendergast, while Tom
smiled. "Mr. Swift er--ahem--one of our largest depositors, has spoken
to me about you, Ned. I find that you have been very faithful. You are
hereby appointed assistant cashier, and of course you will get a much
larger salary."

Ned could hardly believe it, but he knew then what Tom had whispered to
Mr. Swift. The wishes of a depositor who brings much gold bullion to a
bank can hardly be ignored.

"Come on out and have some soda," invited Tom, and when Ned looked
inquiringly at the president, the latter nodded an assent.

As the two lads were crossing the street to a drug store, something
whizzed past them, nearly running them down.

"What sort of an auto was that?" cried Tom.

"That? Oh, that was Andy Foger's new car," answered Ned.  "He's been
breaking the speed laws every day lately, but no one seems to bother
him. It's because his father is rich, I suppose. Andy says he has the
fastest car ever built."

"He has, eh?" remarked Tom, while a curious look came into his eyes.
"Well, maybe I can build one that will beat his."

And whether the young inventor did or not you can learn by reading the
fifth volume of this series, to be called "Tom Swift and His Electric
Runabout; Or, The Speediest Car on the Road."

"Well, Tom, I certainly appreciate what you did for me in getting me a
better position," remarked Ned as they left the drug store. "I was
beginning to think I'd never get promoted. Say, have you anything to do
this evening? If you haven't, I wish you'd come over to my house. I've
got a lot of pictures I took while you were away."

"Sorry, but I can't," replied Tom.

"Why, are you going to build another airship or submarine?"

"No, but I'm going to see-- Oh, what do you want to know for, anyhow?"
demanded the young inventor with a blush.  "Can't a fellow go see a
girl without being cross-questioned?"

"Oh, of course," replied Ned with a laugh. "Give Miss Nestor my
regards," and at this Tom blushed still more. But, as he said, that was
his own affair.


