

DUBLINERS




THE SISTERS

THERE was no hope for him this time: it was the third stroke. Night
after night I had passed the house (it was vacation time) and studied
the lighted square of window: and night after night I had found it
lighted in the same way, faintly and evenly. If he was dead, I thought,
I would see the reflection of candles on the darkened blind for I knew
that two candles must be set at the head of a corpse. He had often said
to me: "I am not long for this world," and I had thought his words idle.
Now I knew they were true. Every night as I gazed up at the window
I said softly to myself the word paralysis. It had always sounded
strangely in my ears, like the word gnomon in the Euclid and the word
simony in the Catechism. But now it sounded to me like the name of some
maleficent and sinful being. It filled me with fear, and yet I longed to
be nearer to it and to look upon its deadly work.

Old Cotter was sitting at the fire, smoking, when I came downstairs
to supper. While my aunt was ladling out my stirabout he said, as if
returning to some former remark of his:

"No, I wouldn't say he was exactly... but there was something queer...
there was something uncanny about him. I'll tell you my opinion...."

He began to puff at his pipe, no doubt arranging his opinion in his
mind. Tiresome old fool! When we knew him first he used to be rather
interesting, talking of faints and worms; but I soon grew tired of him
and his endless stories about the distillery.

"I have my own theory about it," he said. "I think it was one of
those... peculiar cases.... But it's hard to say...."

He began to puff again at his pipe without giving us his theory. My
uncle saw me staring and said to me:

"Well, so your old friend is gone, you'll be sorry to hear."

"Who?" said I.

"Father Flynn."

"Is he dead?"

"Mr. Cotter here has just told us. He was passing by the house."

I knew that I was under observation so I continued eating as if the news
had not interested me. My uncle explained to old Cotter.

"The youngster and he were great friends. The old chap taught him a
great deal, mind you; and they say he had a great wish for him."

"God have mercy on his soul," said my aunt piously.

Old Cotter looked at me for a while. I felt that his little beady black
eyes were examining me but I would not satisfy him by looking up from my
plate. He returned to his pipe and finally spat rudely into the grate.

"I wouldn't like children of mine," he said, "to have too much to say to
a man like that."

"How do you mean, Mr. Cotter?" asked my aunt.

"What I mean is," said old Cotter, "it's bad for children. My idea is:
let a young lad run about and play with young lads of his own age and
not be... Am I right, Jack?"

"That's my principle, too," said my uncle. "Let him learn to box his
corner. That's what I'm always saying to that Rosicrucian there: take
exercise. Why, when I was a nipper every morning of my life I had a cold
bath, winter and summer. And that's what stands to me now. Education
is all very fine and large.... Mr. Cotter might take a pick of that leg
mutton," he added to my aunt.

"No, no, not for me," said old Cotter.

My aunt brought the dish from the safe and put it on the table.

"But why do you think it's not good for children, Mr. Cotter?" she
asked.

"It's bad for children," said old Cotter, "because their minds are so
impressionable. When children see things like that, you know, it has an
effect...."

I crammed my mouth with stirabout for fear I might give utterance to my
anger. Tiresome old red-nosed imbecile!

It was late when I fell asleep. Though I was angry with old Cotter for
alluding to me as a child, I puzzled my head to extract meaning from his
unfinished sentences. In the dark of my room I imagined that I saw again
the heavy grey face of the paralytic. I drew the blankets over my head
and tried to think of Christmas. But the grey face still followed me. It
murmured; and I understood that it desired to confess something. I felt
my soul receding into some pleasant and vicious region; and there again
I found it waiting for me. It began to confess to me in a murmuring
voice and I wondered why it smiled continually and why the lips were so
moist with spittle. But then I remembered that it had died of paralysis
and I felt that I too was smiling feebly as if to absolve the simoniac
of his sin.

The next morning after breakfast I went down to look at the little house
in Great Britain Street. It was an unassuming shop, registered under
the vague name of Drapery. The drapery consisted mainly of children's
bootees and umbrellas; and on ordinary days a notice used to hang in the
window, saying: Umbrellas Re-covered. No notice was visible now for
the shutters were up. A crape bouquet was tied to the doork-nocker with
ribbon. Two poor women and a telegram boy were reading the card pinned
on the crape. I also approached and read:

    July 1st, 1895
    The Rev. James Flynn (formerly of
    S. Catherine's Church, Meath Street),
    aged sixty-five years.
    R. I. P.

The reading of the card persuaded me that he was dead and I was
disturbed to find myself at check. Had he not been dead I would have
gone into the little dark room behind the shop to find him sitting in
his arm-chair by the fire, nearly smothered in his great-coat. Perhaps
my aunt would have given me a packet of High Toast for him and this
present would have roused him from his stupefied doze. It was always I
who emptied the packet into his black snuff-box for his hands trembled
too much to allow him to do this without spilling half the snuff about
the floor. Even as he raised his large trembling hand to his nose little
clouds of smoke dribbled through his fingers over the front of his coat.
It may have been these constant showers of snuff which gave his ancient
priestly garments their green faded look for the red handkerchief,
blackened, as it always was, with the snuff-stains of a week, with which
he tried to brush away the fallen grains, was quite inefficacious.

I wished to go in and look at him but I had not the courage to knock. I
walked away slowly along the sunny side of the street, reading all the
theatrical advertisements in the shopwindows as I went. I found it
strange that neither I nor the day seemed in a mourning mood and I felt
even annoyed at discovering in myself a sensation of freedom as if I had
been freed from something by his death. I wondered at this for, as my
uncle had said the night before, he had taught me a great deal. He had
studied in the Irish college in Rome and he had taught me to pronounce
Latin properly. He had told me stories about the catacombs and about
Napoleon Bonaparte, and he had explained to me the meaning of the
different ceremonies of the Mass and of the different vestments worn
by the priest. Sometimes he had amused himself by putting difficult
questions to me, asking me what one should do in certain circumstances
or whether such and such sins were mortal or venial or only
imperfections. His questions showed me how complex and mysterious were
certain institutions of the Church which I had always regarded as
the simplest acts. The duties of the priest towards the Eucharist and
towards the secrecy of the confessional seemed so grave to me that I
wondered how anybody had ever found in himself the courage to undertake
them; and I was not surprised when he told me that the fathers of the
Church had written books as thick as the Post Office Directory and as
closely printed as the law notices in the newspaper, elucidating all
these intricate questions. Often when I thought of this I could make
no answer or only a very foolish and halting one upon which he used
to smile and nod his head twice or thrice. Sometimes he used to put me
through the responses of the Mass which he had made me learn by heart;
and, as I pattered, he used to smile pensively and nod his head, now and
then pushing huge pinches of snuff up each nostril alternately. When he
smiled he used to uncover his big discoloured teeth and let his tongue
lie upon his lower lip--a habit which had made me feel uneasy in the
beginning of our acquaintance before I knew him well.

As I walked along in the sun I remembered old Cotter's words and tried
to remember what had happened afterwards in the dream. I remembered
that I had noticed long velvet curtains and a swinging lamp of antique
fashion. I felt that I had been very far away, in some land where the
customs were strange--in Persia, I thought.... But I could not remember
the end of the dream.

In the evening my aunt took me with her to visit the house of mourning.
It was after sunset; but the window-panes of the houses that looked
to the west reflected the tawny gold of a great bank of clouds. Nannie
received us in the hall; and, as it would have been unseemly to have
shouted at her, my aunt shook hands with her for all. The old woman
pointed upwards interrogatively and, on my aunt's nodding, proceeded to
toil up the narrow staircase before us, her bowed head being scarcely
above the level of the banister-rail. At the first landing she stopped
and beckoned us forward encouragingly towards the open door of the
dead-room. My aunt went in and the old woman, seeing that I hesitated to
enter, began to beckon to me again repeatedly with her hand.

I went in on tiptoe. The room through the lace end of the blind was
suffused with dusky golden light amid which the candles looked like pale
thin flames. He had been coffined. Nannie gave the lead and we three
knelt down at the foot of the bed. I pretended to pray but I could not
gather my thoughts because the old woman's mutterings distracted me. I
noticed how clumsily her skirt was hooked at the back and how the heels
of her cloth boots were trodden down all to one side. The fancy came to
me that the old priest was smiling as he lay there in his coffin.

But no. When we rose and went up to the head of the bed I saw that he
was not smiling. There he lay, solemn and copious, vested as for the
altar, his large hands loosely retaining a chalice. His face was very
truculent, grey and massive, with black cavernous nostrils and circled
by a scanty white fur. There was a heavy odour in the room--the flowers.

We blessed ourselves and came away. In the little room downstairs we
found Eliza seated in his arm-chair in state. I groped my way towards my
usual chair in the corner while Nannie went to the sideboard and brought
out a decanter of sherry and some wine-glasses. She set these on the
table and invited us to take a little glass of wine. Then, at her
sister's bidding, she filled out the sherry into the glasses and passed
them to us. She pressed me to take some cream crackers also but I
declined because I thought I would make too much noise eating them. She
seemed to be somewhat disappointed at my refusal and went over quietly
to the sofa where she sat down behind her sister. No one spoke: we all
gazed at the empty fireplace.

My aunt waited until Eliza sighed and then said:

"Ah, well, he's gone to a better world."

Eliza sighed again and bowed her head in assent. My aunt fingered the
stem of her wine-glass before sipping a little.

"Did he... peacefully?" she asked.

"Oh, quite peacefully, ma'am," said Eliza. "You couldn't tell when the
breath went out of him. He had a beautiful death, God be praised."

"And everything...?"

"Father O'Rourke was in with him a Tuesday and anointed him and prepared
him and all."

"He knew then?"

"He was quite resigned."

"He looks quite resigned," said my aunt.

"That's what the woman we had in to wash him said. She said he just
looked as if he was asleep, he looked that peaceful and resigned. No one
would think he'd make such a beautiful corpse."

"Yes, indeed," said my aunt.

She sipped a little more from her glass and said:

"Well, Miss Flynn, at any rate it must be a great comfort for you to
know that you did all you could for him. You were both very kind to him,
I must say."

Eliza smoothed her dress over her knees.

"Ah, poor James!" she said. "God knows we done all we could, as poor as
we are--we wouldn't see him want anything while he was in it."

Nannie had leaned her head against the sofa-pillow and seemed about to
fall asleep.

"There's poor Nannie," said Eliza, looking at her, "she's wore out. All
the work we had, she and me, getting in the woman to wash him and then
laying him out and then the coffin and then arranging about the Mass in
the chapel. Only for Father O'Rourke I don't know what we'd have done at all.
It was him brought us all them flowers and them two candlesticks out of
the chapel and wrote out the notice for the Freeman's General and took
charge of all the papers for the cemetery and poor James's insurance."

"Wasn't that good of him?" said my aunt.

Eliza closed her eyes and shook her head slowly.

"Ah, there's no friends like the old friends," she said, "when all is
said and done, no friends that a body can trust."

"Indeed, that's true," said my aunt. "And I'm sure now that he's gone to
his eternal reward he won't forget you and all your kindness to him."

"Ah, poor James!" said Eliza. "He was no great trouble to us. You
wouldn't hear him in the house any more than now. Still, I know he's
gone and all to that...."

"It's when it's all over that you'll miss him," said my aunt.

"I know that," said Eliza. "I won't be bringing him in his cup of
beef-tea any more, nor you, ma'am, sending him his snuff. Ah, poor James!"

She stopped, as if she were communing with the past and then said
shrewdly:

"Mind you, I noticed there was something queer coming over him latterly.
Whenever I'd bring in his soup to him there I'd find him with his
breviary fallen to the floor, lying back in the chair and his mouth
open."

She laid a finger against her nose and frowned: then she continued:

"But still and all he kept on saying that before the summer was over
he'd go out for a drive one fine day just to see the old house again
where we were all born down in Irishtown and take me and Nannie with
him. If we could only get one of them new-fangled carriages that makes
no noise that Father O'Rourke told him about--them with the rheumatic
wheels--for the day cheap--he said, at Johnny Rush's over the way there
and drive out the three of us together of a Sunday evening. He had his
mind set on that.... Poor James!"

"The Lord have mercy on his soul!" said my aunt.

Eliza took out her handkerchief and wiped her eyes with it. Then she put
it back again in her pocket and gazed into the empty grate for some time
without speaking.

"He was too scrupulous always," she said. "The duties of the priesthood
was too much for him. And then his life was, you might say, crossed."

"Yes," said my aunt. "He was a disappointed man. You could see that."

A silence took possession of the little room and, under cover of it, I
approached the table and tasted my sherry and then returned quietly to
my chair in the comer. Eliza seemed to have fallen into a deep revery.
We waited respectfully for her to break the silence: and after a long
pause she said slowly:

"It was that chalice he broke.... That was the beginning of it. Of
course, they say it was all right, that it contained nothing, I mean.
But still.... They say it was the boy's fault. But poor James was so
nervous, God be merciful to him!"

"And was that it?" said my aunt. "I heard something...."

Eliza nodded.

"That affected his mind," she said. "After that he began to mope by
himself, talking to no one and wandering about by himself. So one night
he was wanted for to go on a call and they couldn't find him anywhere.
They looked high up and low down; and still they couldn't see a sight
of him anywhere. So then the clerk suggested to try the chapel. So
then they got the keys and opened the chapel and the clerk and Father
O'Rourke and another priest that was there brought in a light for to
look for him.... And what do you think but there he was, sitting up by
himself in the dark in his confession-box, wide-awake and laughing-like
softly to himself?"

She stopped suddenly as if to listen. I too listened; but there was no
sound in the house: and I knew that the old priest was lying still in
his coffin as we had seen him, solemn and truculent in death, an idle
chalice on his breast.

Eliza resumed:

"Wide-awake and laughing-like to himself.... So then, of course, when
they saw that, that made them think that there was something gone wrong
with him...."




AN ENCOUNTER

IT WAS Joe Dillon who introduced the Wild West to us. He had a little
library made up of old numbers of The Union Jack, Pluck and The
Halfpenny Marvel. Every evening after school we met in his back garden
and arranged Indian battles. He and his fat young brother Leo, the
idler, held the loft of the stable while we tried to carry it by storm;
or we fought a pitched battle on the grass. But, however well we fought,
we never won siege or battle and all our bouts ended with Joe Dillon's
war dance of victory. His parents went to eight-o'clock mass every
morning in Gardiner Street and the peaceful odour of Mrs. Dillon was
prevalent in the hall of the house. But he played too fiercely for us
who were younger and more timid. He looked like some kind of an Indian
when he capered round the garden, an old tea-cosy on his head, beating a
tin with his fist and yelling:

"Ya! yaka, yaka, yaka!"

Everyone was incredulous when it was reported that he had a vocation for
the priesthood. Nevertheless it was true.

A spirit of unruliness diffused itself among us and, under its
influence, differences of culture and constitution were waived. We
banded ourselves together, some boldly, some in jest and some almost in
fear: and of the number of these latter, the reluctant Indians who
were afraid to seem studious or lacking in robustness, I was one. The
adventures related in the literature of the Wild West were remote from
my nature but, at least, they opened doors of escape. I liked better
some American detective stories which were traversed from time to time
by unkempt fierce and beautiful girls. Though there was nothing wrong
in these stories and though their intention was sometimes literary
they were circulated secretly at school. One day when Father Butler was
hearing the four pages of Roman History clumsy Leo Dillon was discovered
with a copy of The Halfpenny Marvel.

"This page or this page? This page Now, Dillon, up! 'Hardly had the
day'... Go on! What day? 'Hardly had the day dawned'... Have you studied
it? What have you there in your pocket?"

Everyone's heart palpitated as Leo Dillon handed up the paper and
everyone assumed an innocent face. Father Butler turned over the pages,
frowning.

"What is this rubbish?" he said. "The Apache Chief! Is this what you
read instead of studying your Roman History? Let me not find any more
of this wretched stuff in this college. The man who wrote it, I suppose,
was some wretched fellow who writes these things for a drink. I'm
surprised at boys like you, educated, reading such stuff. I could
understand it if you were... National School boys. Now, Dillon, I advise
you strongly, get at your work or..."

This rebuke during the sober hours of school paled much of the glory of
the Wild West for me and the confused puffy face of Leo Dillon awakened
one of my consciences. But when the restraining influence of the school
was at a distance I began to hunger again for wild sensations, for the
escape which those chronicles of disorder alone seemed to offer me. The
mimic warfare of the evening became at last as wearisome to me as the
routine of school in the morning because I wanted real adventures to
happen to myself. But real adventures, I reflected, do not happen to
people who remain at home: they must be sought abroad.

The summer holidays were near at hand when I made up my mind to break
out of the weariness of school-life for one day at least. With Leo Dillon
and a boy named Mahony I planned a day's miching. Each of us saved up
sixpence. We were to meet at ten in the morning on the Canal Bridge.
Mahony's big sister was to write an excuse for him and Leo Dillon was to
tell his brother to say he was sick. We arranged to go along the Wharf
Road until we came to the ships, then to cross in the ferryboat and walk
out to see the Pigeon House. Leo Dillon was afraid we might meet Father
Butler or someone out of the college; but Mahony asked, very sensibly,
what would Father Butler be doing out at the Pigeon House. We were
reassured: and I brought the first stage of the plot to an end by
collecting sixpence from the other two, at the same time showing them
my own sixpence. When we were making the last arrangements on the eve we
were all vaguely excited. We shook hands, laughing, and Mahony said:

"Till tomorrow, mates!"

That night I slept badly. In the morning I was first-comer to the bridge
as I lived nearest. I hid my books in the long grass near the ashpit at
the end of the garden where nobody ever came and hurried along the canal
bank. It was a mild sunny morning in the first week of June. I sat up
on the coping of the bridge admiring my frail canvas shoes which I had
diligently pipeclayed overnight and watching the docile horses pulling
a tramload of business people up the hill. All the branches of the tall
trees which lined the mall were gay with little light green leaves and
the sunlight slanted through them on to the water. The granite stone of
the bridge was beginning to be warm and I began to pat it with my hands
in time to an air in my head. I was very happy.

When I had been sitting there for five or ten minutes I saw Mahony's
grey suit approaching. He came up the hill, smiling, and clambered
up beside me on the bridge. While we were waiting he brought out
the catapult which bulged from his inner pocket and explained some
improvements which he had made in it. I asked him why he had brought it
and he told me he had brought it to have some gas with the birds. Mahony
used slang freely, and spoke of Father Butler as Old Bunser. We waited
on for a quarter of an hour more but still there was no sign of Leo
Dillon. Mahony, at last, jumped down and said:

"Come along. I knew Fatty'd funk it."

"And his sixpence...?" I said.

"That's forfeit," said Mahony. "And so much the better for us--a bob and
a tanner instead of a bob."

We walked along the North Strand Road till we came to the Vitriol Works
and then turned to the right along the Wharf Road. Mahony began to play
the Indian as soon as we were out of public sight. He chased a crowd
of ragged girls, brandishing his unloaded catapult and, when two ragged
boys began, out of chivalry, to fling stones at us, he proposed that we
should charge them. I objected that the boys were too small and so we
walked on, the ragged troop screaming after us: "Swaddlers!
Swaddlers!" thinking that we were Protestants because Mahony, who was
dark-complexioned, wore the silver badge of a cricket club in his cap.
When we came to the Smoothing Iron we arranged a siege; but it was a
failure because you must have at least three. We revenged ourselves on
Leo Dillon by saying what a funk he was and guessing how many he would
get at three o'clock from Mr. Ryan.

We came then near the river. We spent a long time walking about the
noisy streets flanked by high stone walls, watching the working of
cranes and engines and often being shouted at for our immobility by the
drivers of groaning carts. It was noon when we reached the quays and, as
all the labourers seemed to be eating their lunches, we bought two big
currant buns and sat down to eat them on some metal piping beside the
river. We pleased ourselves with the spectacle of Dublin's commerce--the
barges signalled from far away by their curls of woolly smoke, the brown
fishing fleet beyond Ringsend, the big white sailing-vessel which was
being discharged on the opposite quay. Mahony said it would be right
skit to run away to sea on one of those big ships and even I, looking at
the high masts, saw, or imagined, the geography which had been scantily
dosed to me at school gradually taking substance under my eyes. School
and home seemed to recede from us and their influences upon us seemed to
wane.

We crossed the Liffey in the ferryboat, paying our toll to be
transported in the company of two labourers and a little Jew with a bag.
We were serious to the point of solemnity, but once during the short
voyage our eyes met and we laughed. When we landed we watched the
discharging of the graceful threemaster which we had observed from the
other quay. Some bystander said that she was a Norwegian vessel. I went
to the stern and tried to decipher the legend upon it but, failing to do
so, I came back and examined the foreign sailors to see had any of them
green eyes for I had some confused notion.... The sailors' eyes were
blue and grey and even black. The only sailor whose eyes could have been
called green was a tall man who amused the crowd on the quay by calling
out cheerfully every time the planks fell:

"All right! All right!"

When we were tired of this sight we wandered slowly into Ringsend. The
day had grown sultry, and in the windows of the grocers' shops musty
biscuits lay bleaching. We bought some biscuits and chocolate which
we ate sedulously as we wandered through the squalid streets where the
families of the fishermen live. We could find no dairy and so we went
into a huckster's shop and bought a bottle of raspberry lemonade each.
Refreshed by this, Mahony chased a cat down a lane, but the cat escaped
into a wide field. We both felt rather tired and when we reached the
field we made at once for a sloping bank over the ridge of which we
could see the Dodder.

It was too late and we were too tired to carry out our project of
visiting the Pigeon House. We had to be home before four o'clock lest
our adventure should be discovered. Mahony looked regretfully at his
catapult and I had to suggest going home by train before he regained
any cheerfulness. The sun went in behind some clouds and left us to our
jaded thoughts and the crumbs of our provisions.

There was nobody but ourselves in the field. When we had lain on the
bank for some time without speaking I saw a man approaching from the far
end of the field. I watched him lazily as I chewed one of those green
stems on which girls tell fortunes. He came along by the bank slowly. He
walked with one hand upon his hip and in the other hand he held a stick
with which he tapped the turf lightly. He was shabbily dressed in a suit
of greenish-black and wore what we used to call a jerry hat with a high
crown. He seemed to be fairly old for his moustache was ashen-grey. When
he passed at our feet he glanced up at us quickly and then continued his
way. We followed him with our eyes and saw that when he had gone on for
perhaps fifty paces he turned about and began to retrace his steps. He
walked towards us very slowly, always tapping the ground with his stick,
so slowly that I thought he was looking for something in the grass.

He stopped when he came level with us and bade us good-day. We answered
him and he sat down beside us on the slope slowly and with great care.
He began to talk of the weather, saying that it would be a very hot
summer and adding that the seasons had changed greatly since he was a
boy--a long time ago. He said that the happiest time of one's life was
undoubtedly one's school-boy days and that he would give anything to be
young again. While he expressed these sentiments which bored us a little
we kept silent. Then he began to talk of school and of books. He asked
us whether we had read the poetry of Thomas Moore or the works of Sir
Walter Scott and Lord Lytton. I pretended that I had read every book he
mentioned so that in the end he said:

"Ah, I can see you are a bookworm like myself. Now," he added, pointing
to Mahony who was regarding us with open eyes, "he is different; he goes
in for games."

He said he had all Sir Walter Scott's works and all Lord Lytton's works
at home and never tired of reading them. "Of course," he said, "there
were some of Lord Lytton's works which boys couldn't read." Mahony asked
why couldn't boys read them--a question which agitated and pained me
because I was afraid the man would think I was as stupid as Mahony. The
man, however, only smiled. I saw that he had great gaps in his mouth
between his yellow teeth. Then he asked us which of us had the most
sweethearts. Mahony mentioned lightly that he had three totties. The man
asked me how many had I. I answered that I had none. He did not believe
me and said he was sure I must have one. I was silent.

"Tell us," said Mahony pertly to the man, "how many have you yourself?"

The man smiled as before and said that when he was our age he had lots
of sweethearts.

"Every boy," he said, "has a little sweetheart."

His attitude on this point struck me as strangely liberal in a man
of his age. In my heart I thought that what he said about boys and
sweethearts was reasonable. But I disliked the words in his mouth and I
wondered why he shivered once or twice as if he feared something or felt
a sudden chill. As he proceeded I noticed that his accent was good. He
began to speak to us about girls, saying what nice soft hair they had
and how soft their hands were and how all girls were not so good as they
seemed to be if one only knew. There was nothing he liked, he said, so
much as looking at a nice young girl, at her nice white hands and her
beautiful soft hair. He gave me the impression that he was repeating
something which he had learned by heart or that, magnetised by some
words of his own speech, his mind was slowly circling round and round in
the same orbit. At times he spoke as if he were simply alluding to some
fact that everybody knew, and at times he lowered his voice and spoke
mysteriously as if he were telling us something secret which he did not
wish others to overhear. He repeated his phrases over and over again,
varying them and surrounding them with his monotonous voice. I continued
to gaze towards the foot of the slope, listening to him.

After a long while his monologue paused. He stood up slowly, saying
that he had to leave us for a minute or so, a few minutes, and, without
changing the direction of my gaze, I saw him walking slowly away from us
towards the near end of the field. We remained silent when he had gone.
After a silence of a few minutes I heard Mahony exclaim:

"I say! Look what he's doing!"

As I neither answered nor raised my eyes Mahony exclaimed again:

"I say... He's a queer old josser!"

"In case he asks us for our names," I said, "let you be Murphy and I'll
be Smith."

We said nothing further to each other. I was still considering whether
I would go away or not when the man came back and sat down beside us
again. Hardly had he sat down when Mahony, catching sight of the cat
which had escaped him, sprang up and pursued her across the field. The
man and I watched the chase. The cat escaped once more and Mahony began
to throw stones at the wall she had escaladed. Desisting from this, he
began to wander about the far end of the field, aimlessly.

After an interval the man spoke to me. He said that my friend was a very
rough boy and asked did he get whipped often at school. I was going to
reply indignantly that we were not National School boys to be whipped,
as he called it; but I remained silent. He began to speak on the subject
of chastising boys. His mind, as if magnetised again by his speech,
seemed to circle slowly round and round its new centre. He said that
when boys were that kind they ought to be whipped and well whipped. When
a boy was rough and unruly there was nothing would do him any good but a
good sound whipping. A slap on the hand or a box on the ear was no good:
what he wanted was to get a nice warm whipping. I was surprised at this
sentiment and involuntarily glanced up at his face. As I did so I met
the gaze of a pair of bottle-green eyes peering at me from under a
twitching forehead. I turned my eyes away again.

The man continued his monologue. He seemed to have forgotten his recent
liberalism. He said that if ever he found a boy talking to girls or
having a girl for a sweetheart he would whip him and whip him; and that
would teach him not to be talking to girls. And if a boy had a girl
for a sweetheart and told lies about it then he would give him such
a whipping as no boy ever got in this world. He said that there was
nothing in this world he would like so well as that. He described to
me how he would whip such a boy as if he were unfolding some elaborate
mystery. He would love that, he said, better than anything in this
world; and his voice, as he led me monotonously through the mystery,
grew almost affectionate and seemed to plead with me that I should
understand him.

I waited till his monologue paused again. Then I stood up abruptly. Lest
I should betray my agitation I delayed a few moments pretending to fix
my shoe properly and then, saying that I was obliged to go, I bade him
good-day. I went up the slope calmly but my heart was beating quickly
with fear that he would seize me by the ankles. When I reached the top
of the slope I turned round and, without looking at him, called loudly
across the field:

"Murphy!"

My voice had an accent of forced bravery in it and I was ashamed of my
paltry stratagem. I had to call the name again before Mahony saw me
and hallooed in answer. How my heart beat as he came running across the
field to me! He ran as if to bring me aid. And I was penitent; for in my
heart I had always despised him a little.




ARABY

NORTH RICHMOND STREET, being blind, was a quiet street except at the hour
when the Christian Brothers' School set the boys free. An uninhabited
house of two storeys stood at the blind end, detached from its
neighbours in a square ground The other houses of the street,
conscious of decent lives within them, gazed at one another with brown
imperturbable faces.

The former tenant of our house, a priest, had died in the back
drawing-room. Air, musty from having been long enclosed, hung in all
the rooms, and the waste room behind the kitchen was littered with old
useless papers. Among these I found a few paper-covered books, the pages
of which were curled and damp: The Abbot, by Walter Scott, The Devout
Communicant and The Memoirs of Vidocq. I liked the last best because
its leaves were yellow. The wild garden behind the house contained a
central apple-tree and a few straggling bushes under one of which
I found the late tenant's rusty bicycle-pump. He had been a very
charitable priest; in his will he had left all his money to institutions
and the furniture of his house to his sister.

When the short days of winter came dusk fell before we had well eaten
our dinners. When we met in the street the houses had grown sombre. The
space of sky above us was the colour of ever-changing violet and towards
it the lamps of the street lifted their feeble lanterns. The cold air
stung us and we played till our bodies glowed. Our shouts echoed in the
silent street. The career of our play brought us through the dark muddy
lanes behind the houses where we ran the gauntlet of the rough tribes
from the cottages, to the back doors of the dark dripping gardens where
odours arose from the ashpits, to the dark odorous stables where a
coachman smoothed and combed the horse or shook music from the buckled
harness. When we returned to the street light from the kitchen windows
had filled the areas. If my uncle was seen turning the corner we hid in
the shadow until we had seen him safely housed. Or if Mangan's sister
came out on the doorstep to call her brother in to his tea we watched
her from our shadow peer up and down the street. We waited to see
whether she would remain or go in and, if she remained, we left our
shadow and walked up to Mangan's steps resignedly. She was waiting
for us, her figure defined by the light from the half-opened door. Her
brother always teased her before he obeyed and I stood by the railings
looking at her. Her dress swung as she moved her body and the soft rope
of her hair tossed from side to side.

Every morning I lay on the floor in the front parlour watching her door.
The blind was pulled down to within an inch of the sash so that I could
not be seen. When she came out on the doorstep my heart leaped. I ran
to the hall, seized my books and followed her. I kept her brown figure
always in my eye and, when we came near the point at which our ways
diverged, I quickened my pace and passed her. This happened morning
after morning. I had never spoken to her, except for a few casual words,
and yet her name was like a summons to all my foolish blood.

Her image accompanied me even in places the most hostile to romance. On
Saturday evenings when my aunt went marketing I had to go to carry
some of the parcels. We walked through the flaring streets, jostled
by drunken men and bargaining women, amid the curses of labourers, the
shrill litanies of shop-boys who stood on guard by the barrels of pigs'
cheeks, the nasal chanting of street-singers, who sang a come-all-you
about O'Donovan Rossa, or a ballad about the troubles in our native
land. These noises converged in a single sensation of life for me: I
imagined that I bore my chalice safely through a throng of foes. Her
name sprang to my lips at moments in strange prayers and praises which I
myself did not understand. My eyes were often full of tears (I could not
tell why) and at times a flood from my heart seemed to pour itself out
into my bosom. I thought little of the future. I did not know whether I
would ever speak to her or not or, if I spoke to her, how I could tell
her of my confused adoration. But my body was like a harp and her words
and gestures were like fingers running upon the wires.

One evening I went into the back drawing-room in which the priest had
died. It was a dark rainy evening and there was no sound in the house.
Through one of the broken panes I heard the rain impinge upon the earth,
the fine incessant needles of water playing in the sodden beds. Some
distant lamp or lighted window gleamed below me. I was thankful that I
could see so little. All my senses seemed to desire to veil themselves
and, feeling that I was about to slip from them, I pressed the palms of
my hands together until they trembled, murmuring: "O love! O love!" many
times.

At last she spoke to me. When she addressed the first words to me I was
so confused that I did not know what to answer. She asked me was I going
to Araby. I forgot whether I answered yes or no. It would be a splendid
bazaar, she said;s she would love to go.

"And why can't you?" I asked.

While she spoke she turned a silver bracelet round and round her wrist.
She could not go, she said, because there would be a retreat that week
in her convent. Her brother and two other boys were fighting for their
caps and I was alone at the railings. She held one of the spikes, bowing
her head towards me. The light from the lamp opposite our door caught
the white curve of her neck, lit up her hair that rested there and,
falling, lit up the hand upon the railing. It fell over one side of her
dress and caught the white border of a petticoat, just visible as she
stood at ease.

"It's well for you," she said.

"If I go," I said, "I will bring you something."

What innumerable follies laid waste my waking and sleeping thoughts
after that evening! I wished to annihilate the tedious intervening days.
I chafed against the work of school. At night in my bedroom and by day
in the classroom her image came between me and the page I strove to
read. The syllables of the word Araby were called to me through the
silence in which my soul luxuriated and cast an Eastern enchantment over
me. I asked for leave to go to the bazaar on Saturday night. My aunt
was surprised and hoped it was not some Freemason affair. I answered few
questions in class. I watched my master's face pass from amiability to
sternness; he hoped I was not beginning to idle. I could not call my
wandering thoughts together. I had hardly any patience with the serious
work of life which, now that it stood between me and my desire, seemed
to me child's play, ugly monotonous child's play.

On Saturday morning I reminded my uncle that I wished to go to the
bazaar in the evening. He was fussing at the hallstand, looking for the
hat-brush, and answered me curtly:

"Yes, boy, I know."

As he was in the hall I could not go into the front parlour and lie at
the window. I left the house in bad humour and walked slowly towards the
school. The air was pitilessly raw and already my heart misgave me.

When I came home to dinner my uncle had not yet been home. Still it was
early. I sat staring at the clock for some time and, when its ticking
began to irritate me, I left the room. I mounted the staircase and
gained the upper part of the house. The high cold empty gloomy rooms
liberated me and I went from room to room singing. From the front window
I saw my companions playing below in the street. Their cries reached me
weakened and indistinct and, leaning my forehead against the cool glass,
I looked over at the dark house where she lived. I may have stood
there for an hour, seeing nothing but the brown-clad figure cast by my
imagination, touched discreetly by the lamplight at the curved neck, at
the hand upon the railings and at the border below the dress.

When I came downstairs again I found Mrs. Mercer sitting at the fire.
She was an old garrulous woman, a pawnbroker's widow, who collected
used stamps for some pious purpose. I had to endure the gossip of the
tea-table. The meal was prolonged beyond an hour and still my uncle did
not come. Mrs. Mercer stood up to go: she was sorry she couldn't wait
any longer, but it was after eight o'clock and she did not like to be
out late as the night air was bad for her. When she had gone I began to
walk up and down the room, clenching my fists. My aunt said:

"I'm afraid you may put off your bazaar for this night of Our Lord."

At nine o'clock I heard my uncle's latchkey in the halldoor. I heard him
talking to himself and heard the hallstand rocking when it had received
the weight of his overcoat. I could interpret these signs. When he was
midway through his dinner I asked him to give me the money to go to the
bazaar. He had forgotten.

"The people are in bed and after their first sleep now," he said.

I did not smile. My aunt said to him energetically:

"Can't you give him the money and let him go? You've kept him late
enough as it is."

My uncle said he was very sorry he had forgotten. He said he believed in
the old saying: "All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy." He asked
me where I was going and, when I had told him a second time he asked me
did I know The Arab's Farewell to his Steed. When I left the kitchen he
was about to recite the opening lines of the piece to my aunt.

I held a florin tightly in my hand as I strode down Buckingham Street
towards the station. The sight of the streets thronged with buyers and
glaring with gas recalled to me the purpose of my journey. I took my
seat in a third-class carriage of a deserted train. After an intolerable
delay the train moved out of the station slowly. It crept onward among
ruinous houses and over the twinkling river. At Westland Row Station a
crowd of people pressed to the carriage doors; but the porters moved
them back, saying that it was a special train for the bazaar. I remained
alone in the bare carriage. In a few minutes the train drew up beside an
improvised wooden platform. I passed out on to the road and saw by the
lighted dial of a clock that it was ten minutes to ten. In front of me
was a large building which displayed the magical name.

I could not find any sixpenny entrance and, fearing that the bazaar
would be closed, I passed in quickly through a turnstile, handing a
shilling to a weary-looking man. I found myself in a big hall girdled at
half its height by a gallery. Nearly all the stalls were closed and the
greater part of the hall was in darkness. I recognised a silence like
that which pervades a church after a service. I walked into the centre
of the bazaar timidly. A few people were gathered about the stalls which
were still open. Before a curtain, over which the words Cafe Chantant
were written in coloured lamps, two men were counting money on a salver.
I listened to the fall of the coins.

Remembering with difficulty why I had come I went over to one of the
stalls and examined porcelain vases and flowered tea-sets. At the
door of the stall a young lady was talking and laughing with two young
gentlemen. I remarked their English accents and listened vaguely to
their conversation.

"O, I never said such a thing!"

"O, but you did!"

"O, but I didn't!"

"Didn't she say that?"

"Yes. I heard her."

"O, there's a... fib!"

Observing me the young lady came over and asked me did I wish to buy
anything. The tone of her voice was not encouraging; she seemed to have
spoken to me out of a sense of duty. I looked humbly at the great jars
that stood like eastern guards at either side of the dark entrance to
the stall and murmured:

"No, thank you."

The young lady changed the position of one of the vases and went back to
the two young men. They began to talk of the same subject. Once or twice
the young lady glanced at me over her shoulder.

I lingered before her stall, though I knew my stay was useless, to make
my interest in her wares seem the more real. Then I turned away slowly
and walked down the middle of the bazaar. I allowed the two pennies to
fall against the sixpence in my pocket. I heard a voice call from one
end of the gallery that the light was out. The upper part of the hall
was now completely dark.

Gazing up into the darkness I saw myself as a creature driven and
derided by vanity; and my eyes burned with anguish and anger.




EVELINE

SHE sat at the window watching the evening invade the avenue. Her head
was leaned against the window curtains and in her nostrils was the odour
of dusty cretonne. She was tired.

Few people passed. The man out of the last house passed on his way
home; she heard his footsteps clacking along the concrete pavement and
afterwards crunching on the cinder path before the new red houses. One
time there used to be a field there in which they used to play every
evening with other people's children. Then a man from Belfast bought
the field and built houses in it--not like their little brown houses but
bright brick houses with shining roofs. The children of the avenue used
to play together in that field--the Devines, the Waters, the Dunns,
little Keogh the cripple, she and her brothers and sisters. Ernest,
however, never played: he was too grown up. Her father used often to
hunt them in out of the field with his blackthorn stick; but usually
little Keogh used to keep nix and call out when he saw her father
coming. Still they seemed to have been rather happy then. Her father was
not so bad then; and besides, her mother was alive. That was a long time
ago; she and her brothers and sisters were all grown up; her mother
was dead. Tizzie Dunn was dead, too, and the Waters had gone back to
England. Everything changes. Now she was going to go away like the
others, to leave her home.

Home! She looked round the room, reviewing all its familiar objects
which she had dusted once a week for so many years, wondering where on
earth all the dust came from. Perhaps she would never see again those
familiar objects from which she had never dreamed of being divided.
And yet during all those years she had never found out the name of the
priest whose yellowing photograph hung on the wall above the broken
harmonium beside the coloured print of the promises made to Blessed
Margaret Mary Alacoque. He had been a school friend of her father.
Whenever he showed the photograph to a visitor her father used to pass
it with a casual word:

"He is in Melbourne now."

She had consented to go away, to leave her home. Was that wise? She
tried to weigh each side of the question. In her home anyway she had
shelter and food; she had those whom she had known all her life about
her. Of course she had to work hard, both in the house and at business.
What would they say of her in the Stores when they found out that she
had run away with a fellow? Say she was a fool, perhaps; and her place
would be filled up by advertisement. Miss Gavan would be glad. She
had always had an edge on her, especially whenever there were people
listening.

"Miss Hill, don't you see these ladies are waiting?"

"Look lively, Miss Hill, please."

She would not cry many tears at leaving the Stores.

But in her new home, in a distant unknown country, it would not be like
that. Then she would be married--she, Eveline. People would treat her
with respect then. She would not be treated as her mother had been. Even
now, though she was over nineteen, she sometimes felt herself in danger
of her father's violence. She knew it was that that had given her the
palpitations. When they were growing up he had never gone for her like
he used to go for Harry and Ernest, because she was a girl; but latterly
he had begun to threaten her and say what he would do to her only for
her dead mother's sake. And now she had nobody to protect her. Ernest was
dead and Harry, who was in the church decorating business, was nearly
always down somewhere in the country. Besides, the invariable squabble
for money on Saturday nights had begun to weary her unspeakably. She
always gave her entire wages--seven shillings--and Harry always sent up
what he could but the trouble was to get any money from her father.
He said she used to squander the money, that she had no head, that
he wasn't going to give her his hard-earned money to throw about the
streets, and much more, for he was usually fairly bad of a Saturday night.
In the end he would give her the money and ask her had she any intention
of buying Sunday's dinner. Then she had to rush out as quickly as she
could and do her marketing, holding her black leather purse tightly in
her hand as she elbowed her way through the crowds and returning home
late under her load of provisions. She had hard work to keep the house
together and to see that the two young children who had been left to her
charge went to school regularly and got their meals regularly. It was
hard work--a hard life--but now that she was about to leave it she did
not find it a wholly undesirable life.

She was about to explore another life with Frank. Frank was very kind,
manly, open-hearted. She was to go away with him by the night-boat to
be his wife and to live with him in Buenos Ayres where he had a home
waiting for her. How well she remembered the first time she had seen
him; he was lodging in a house on the main road where she used to visit.
It seemed a few weeks ago. He was standing at the gate, his peaked cap
pushed back on his head and his hair tumbled forward over a face of
bronze. Then they had come to know each other. He used to meet her
outside the Stores every evening and see her home. He took her to see
The Bohemian Girl and she felt elated as she sat in an unaccustomed part
of the theatre with him. He was awfully fond of music and sang a little.
People knew that they were courting and, when he sang about the lass
that loves a sailor, she always felt pleasantly confused. He used to
call her Poppens out of fun. First of all it had been an excitement for
her to have a fellow and then she had begun to like him. He had tales of
distant countries. He had started as a deck boy at a pound a month on a
ship of the Allan Line going out to Canada. He told her the names of
the ships he had been on and the names of the different services. He had
sailed through the Straits of Magellan and he told her stories of the
terrible Patagonians. He had fallen on his feet in Buenos Ayres, he
said, and had come over to the old country just for a holiday. Of
course, her father had found out the affair and had forbidden her to
have anything to say to him.

"I know these sailor chaps," he said.

One day he had quarrelled with Frank and after that she had to meet her
lover secretly.

The evening deepened in the avenue. The white of two letters in her lap
grew indistinct. One was to Harry; the other was to her father. Ernest
had been her favourite but she liked Harry too. Her father was becoming
old lately, she noticed; he would miss her. Sometimes he could be very
nice. Not long before, when she had been laid up for a day, he had read
her out a ghost story and made toast for her at the fire. Another day,
when their mother was alive, they had all gone for a picnic to the Hill
of Howth. She remembered her father putting on her mother's bonnet to
make the children laugh.

Her time was running out but she continued to sit by the window,
leaning her head against the window curtain, inhaling the odour of dusty
cretonne. Down far in the avenue she could hear a street organ playing.
She knew the air. Strange that it should come that very night to remind
her of the promise to her mother, her promise to keep the home together
as long as she could. She remembered the last night of her mother's
illness; she was again in the close dark room at the other side of the
hall and outside she heard a melancholy air of Italy. The organ-player
had been ordered to go away and given sixpence. She remembered her
father strutting back into the sickroom saying:

"Damned Italians! coming over here!"

As she mused the pitiful vision of her mother's life laid its spell on
the very quick of her being--that life of commonplace sacrifices closing
in final craziness. She trembled as she heard again her mother's voice
saying constantly with foolish insistence:

"Derevaun Seraun! Derevaun Seraun!"

She stood up in a sudden impulse of terror. Escape! She must escape!
Frank would save her. He would give her life, perhaps love, too. But she
wanted to live. Why should she be unhappy? She had a right to happiness.
Frank would take her in his arms, fold her in his arms. He would save
her.

She stood among the swaying crowd in the station at the North Wall. He
held her hand and she knew that he was speaking to her, saying something
about the passage over and over again. The station was full of soldiers
with brown baggages. Through the wide doors of the sheds she caught a
glimpse of the black mass of the boat, lying in beside the quay wall,
with illumined portholes. She answered nothing. She felt her cheek pale
and cold and, out of a maze of distress, she prayed to God to direct
her, to show her what was her duty. The boat blew a long mournful
whistle into the mist. If she went, tomorrow she would be on the sea
with Frank, steaming towards Buenos Ayres. Their passage had been
booked. Could she still draw back after all he had done for her? Her
distress awoke a nausea in her body and she kept moving her lips in
silent fervent prayer.

A bell clanged upon her heart. She felt him seize her hand:

"Come!"

All the seas of the world tumbled about her heart. He was drawing her
into them: he would drown her. She gripped with both hands at the iron
railing.

"Come!"

No! No! No! It was impossible. Her hands clutched the iron in frenzy.
Amid the seas she sent a cry of anguish!

"Eveline! Evvy!"

He rushed beyond the barrier and called to her to follow. He was shouted
at to go on but he still called to her. She set her white face to him,
passive, like a helpless animal. Her eyes gave him no sign of love or
farewell or recognition.




AFTER THE RACE

THE cars came scudding in towards Dublin, running evenly like pellets
in the groove of the Naas Road. At the crest of the hill at Inchicore
sightseers had gathered in clumps to watch the cars careering homeward
and through this channel of poverty and inaction the Continent sped its
wealth and industry. Now and again the clumps of people raised the cheer
of the gratefully oppressed. Their sympathy, however, was for the blue
cars--the cars of their friends, the French.

The French, moreover, were virtual victors. Their team had finished
solidly; they had been placed second and third and the driver of the
winning German car was reported a Belgian. Each blue car, therefore,
received a double measure of welcome as it topped the crest of the hill
and each cheer of welcome was acknowledged with smiles and nods by those
in the car. In one of these trimly built cars was a party of four
young men whose spirits seemed to be at present well above the level
of successful Gallicism: in fact, these four young men were almost
hilarious. They were Charles Segouin, the owner of the car; Andre
Riviere, a young electrician of Canadian birth; a huge Hungarian named
Villona and a neatly groomed young man named Doyle. Segouin was in good
humour because he had unexpectedly received some orders in advance (he
was about to start a motor establishment in Paris) and Riviere was in
good humour because he was to be appointed manager of the establishment;
these two young men (who were cousins) were also in good humour because
of the success of the French cars. Villona was in good humour because he
had had a very satisfactory luncheon; and besides he was an optimist by
nature. The fourth member of the party, however, was too excited to be
genuinely happy.

He was about twenty-six years of age, with a soft, light brown moustache
and rather innocent-looking grey eyes. His father, who had begun life as
an advanced Nationalist, had modified his views early. He had made his
money as a butcher in Kingstown and by opening shops in Dublin and in
the suburbs he had made his money many times over. He had also been
fortunate enough to secure some of the police contracts and in the end
he had become rich enough to be alluded to in the Dublin newspapers as a
merchant prince. He had sent his son to England to be educated in a big
Catholic college and had afterwards sent him to Dublin University to
study law. Jimmy did not study very earnestly and took to bad courses
for a while. He had money and he was popular; and he divided his time
curiously between musical and motoring circles. Then he had been sent
for a term to Cambridge to see a little life. His father, remonstrative,
but covertly proud of the excess, had paid his bills and brought him
home. It was at Cambridge that he had met Segouin. They were not much
more than acquaintances as yet but Jimmy found great pleasure in the
society of one who had seen so much of the world and was reputed to
own some of the biggest hotels in France. Such a person (as his father
agreed) was well worth knowing, even if he had not been the charming
companion he was. Villona was entertaining also--a brilliant
pianist--but, unfortunately, very poor.

The car ran on merrily with its cargo of hilarious youth. The two
cousins sat on the front seat; Jimmy and his Hungarian friend sat
behind. Decidedly Villona was in excellent spirits; he kept up a deep
bass hum of melody for miles of the road. The Frenchmen flung their
laughter and light words over their shoulders and often Jimmy had
to strain forward to catch the quick phrase. This was not altogether
pleasant for him, as he had nearly always to make a deft guess at the
meaning and shout back a suitable answer in the face of a high wind.
Besides Villona's humming would confuse anybody; the noise of the car,
too.

Rapid motion through space elates one; so does notoriety; so does
the possession of money. These were three good reasons for Jimmy's
excitement. He had been seen by many of his friends that day in the
company of these Continentals. At the control Segouin had presented him
to one of the French competitors and, in answer to his confused murmur
of compliment, the swarthy face of the driver had disclosed a line of
shining white teeth. It was pleasant after that honour to return to the
profane world of spectators amid nudges and significant looks. Then as
to money--he really had a great sum under his control. Segouin, perhaps,
would not think it a great sum but Jimmy who, in spite of temporary
errors, was at heart the inheritor of solid instincts knew well with
what difficulty it had been got together. This knowledge had previously
kept his bills within the limits of reasonable recklessness, and, if he
had been so conscious of the labour latent in money when there had been
question merely of some freak of the higher intelligence, how much more
so now when he was about to stake the greater part of his substance! It
was a serious thing for him.

Of course, the investment was a good one and Segouin had managed to give
the impression that it was by a favour of friendship the mite of Irish
money was to be included in the capital of the concern. Jimmy had a
respect for his father's shrewdness in business matters and in this case
it had been his father who had first suggested the investment; money to
be made in the motor business, pots of money. Moreover Segouin had the
unmistakable air of wealth. Jimmy set out to translate into days' work
that lordly car in which he sat. How smoothly it ran. In what style they
had come careering along the country roads! The journey laid a magical
finger on the genuine pulse of life and gallantly the machinery of human
nerves strove to answer the bounding courses of the swift blue animal.

They drove down Dame Street. The street was busy with unusual
traffic, loud with the horns of motorists and the gongs of impatient
tram-drivers. Near the Bank Segouin drew up and Jimmy and his friend
alighted. A little knot of people collected on the footpath to pay
homage to the snorting motor. The party was to dine together that
evening in Segouin's hotel and, meanwhile, Jimmy and his friend, who was
staying with him, were to go home to dress. The car steered out slowly
for Grafton Street while the two young men pushed their way through
the knot of gazers. They walked northward with a curious feeling of
disappointment in the exercise, while the city hung its pale globes of
light above them in a haze of summer evening.

In Jimmy's house this dinner had been pronounced an occasion. A certain
pride mingled with his parents' trepidation, a certain eagerness, also,
to play fast and loose for the names of great foreign cities have at
least this virtue. Jimmy, too, looked very well when he was dressed and,
as he stood in the hall giving a last equation to the bows of his dress
tie, his father may have felt even commercially satisfied at having
secured for his son qualities often unpurchaseable. His father,
therefore, was unusually friendly with Villona and his manner expressed
a real respect for foreign accomplishments; but this subtlety of his
host was probably lost upon the Hungarian, who was beginning to have a
sharp desire for his dinner.

The dinner was excellent, exquisite. Segouin, Jimmy decided, had a very
refined taste. The party was increased by a young Englishman named Routh
whom Jimmy had seen with Segouin at Cambridge. The young men supped in
a snug room lit by electric candle-lamps. They talked volubly and with
little reserve. Jimmy, whose imagination was kindling, conceived the
lively youth of the Frenchmen twined elegantly upon the firm framework
of the Englishman's manner. A graceful image of his, he thought, and a
just one. He admired the dexterity with which their host directed the
conversation. The five young men had various tastes and their tongues
had been loosened. Villona, with immense respect, began to discover to
the mildly surprised Englishman the beauties of the English madrigal,
deploring the loss of old instruments. Riviere, not wholly ingenuously,
undertook to explain to Jimmy the triumph of the French mechanicians.
The resonant voice of the Hungarian was about to prevail in ridicule of
the spurious lutes of the romantic painters when Segouin shepherded his
party into politics. Here was congenial ground for all. Jimmy, under
generous influences, felt the buried zeal of his father wake to life
within him: he aroused the torpid Routh at last. The room grew doubly
hot and Segouin's task grew harder each moment: there was even danger
of personal spite. The alert host at an opportunity lifted his glass
to Humanity and, when the toast had been drunk, he threw open a window
significantly.

That night the city wore the mask of a capital. The five young men
strolled along Stephen's Green in a faint cloud of aromatic smoke. They
talked loudly and gaily and their cloaks dangled from their shoulders.
The people made way for them. At the corner of Grafton Street a short
fat man was putting two handsome ladies on a car in charge of another
fat man. The car drove off and the short fat man caught sight of the
party.

"Andre."

"It's Farley!"

A torrent of talk followed. Farley was an American. No one knew very
well what the talk was about. Villona and Riviere were the noisiest,
but all the men were excited. They got up on a car, squeezing themselves
together amid much laughter. They drove by the crowd, blended now into
soft colours, to a music of merry bells. They took the train at Westland
Row and in a few seconds, as it seemed to Jimmy, they were walking out
of Kingstown Station. The ticket-collector saluted Jimmy; he was an old
man:

"Fine night, sir!"

It was a serene summer night; the harbour lay like a darkened mirror at
their feet. They proceeded towards it with linked arms, singing Cadet
Roussel in chorus, stamping their feet at every:

"Ho! Ho! Hohe, vraiment!"

They got into a rowboat at the slip and made out for the American's
yacht. There was to be supper, music, cards. Villona said with
conviction:

"It is delightful!"

There was a yacht piano in the cabin. Villona played a waltz for Farley
and Riviere, Farley acting as cavalier and Riviere as lady. Then
an impromptu square dance, the men devising original figures. What
merriment! Jimmy took his part with a will; this was seeing life, at
least. Then Farley got out of breath and cried "Stop!" A man brought in
a light supper, and the young men sat down to it for form's sake. They
drank, however: it was Bohemian. They drank Ireland, England, France,
Hungary, the United States of America. Jimmy made a speech, a long
speech, Villona saying: "Hear! hear!" whenever there was a pause. There
was a great clapping of hands when he sat down. It must have been a good
speech. Farley clapped him on the back and laughed loudly. What jovial
fellows! What good company they were!

Cards! cards! The table was cleared. Villona returned quietly to his
piano and played voluntaries for them. The other men played game after
game, flinging themselves boldly into the adventure. They drank the
health of the Queen of Hearts and of the Queen of Diamonds. Jimmy felt
obscurely the lack of an audience: the wit was flashing. Play ran very
high and paper began to pass. Jimmy did not know exactly who was
winning but he knew that he was losing. But it was his own fault for
he frequently mistook his cards and the other men had to calculate his
I.O.U.'s for him. They were devils of fellows but he wished they would
stop: it was getting late. Someone gave the toast of the yacht The Belle
of Newport and then someone proposed one great game for a finish.

The piano had stopped; Villona must have gone up on deck. It was a
terrible game. They stopped just before the end of it to drink for
luck. Jimmy understood that the game lay between Routh and Segouin. What
excitement! Jimmy was excited too; he would lose, of course. How much
had he written away? The men rose to their feet to play the last tricks.
talking and gesticulating. Routh won. The cabin shook with the young
men's cheering and the cards were bundled together. They began then to
gather in what they had won. Farley and Jimmy were the heaviest losers.

He knew that he would regret in the morning but at present he was glad
of the rest, glad of the dark stupor that would cover up his folly. He
leaned his elbows on the table and rested his head between his hands,
counting the beats of his temples. The cabin door opened and he saw the
Hungarian standing in a shaft of grey light:

"Daybreak, gentlemen!"




TWO GALLANTS

THE grey warm evening of August had descended upon the city and a mild
warm air, a memory of summer, circulated in the streets. The streets,
shuttered for the repose of Sunday, swarmed with a gaily coloured crowd.
Like illumined pearls the lamps shone from the summits of their tall
poles upon the living texture below which, changing shape and hue
unceasingly, sent up into the warm grey evening air an unchanging
unceasing murmur.

Two young men came down the hill of Rutland Square. One of them was just
bringing a long monologue to a close. The other, who walked on the verge
of the path and was at times obliged to step on to the road, owing to
his companion's rudeness, wore an amused listening face. He was squat
and ruddy. A yachting cap was shoved far back from his forehead and the
narrative to which he listened made constant waves of expression break
forth over his face from the corners of his nose and eyes and mouth.
Little jets of wheezing laughter followed one another out of his
convulsed body. His eyes, twinkling with cunning enjoyment, glanced at
every moment towards his companion's face. Once or twice he rearranged
the light waterproof which he had slung over one shoulder in toreador
fashion. His breeches, his white rubber shoes and his jauntily slung
waterproof expressed youth. But his figure fell into rotundity at the
waist, his hair was scant and grey and his face, when the waves of
expression had passed over it, had a ravaged look.

When he was quite sure that the narrative had ended he laughed
noiselessly for fully half a minute. Then he said:

"Well!... That takes the biscuit!"

His voice seemed winnowed of vigour; and to enforce his words he added
with humour:

"That takes the solitary, unique, and, if I may so call it, recherche
biscuit!"

He became serious and silent when he had said this. His tongue was tired
for he had been talking all the afternoon in a public-house in Dorset
Street. Most people considered Lenehan a leech but, in spite of this
reputation, his adroitness and eloquence had always prevented his
friends from forming any general policy against him. He had a brave
manner of coming up to a party of them in a bar and of holding himself
nimbly at the borders of the company until he was included in a round.
He was a sporting vagrant armed with a vast stock of stories, limericks
and riddles. He was insensitive to all kinds of discourtesy. No one
knew how he achieved the stern task of living, but his name was vaguely
associated with racing tissues.

"And where did you pick her up, Corley?" he asked.

Corley ran his tongue swiftly along his upper lip.

"One night, man," he said, "I was going along Dame Street and I spotted
a fine tart under Waterhouse's clock and said good-night, you know. So
we went for a walk round by the canal and she told me she was a slavey
in a house in Baggot Street. I put my arm round her and squeezed her a
bit that night. Then next Sunday, man, I met her by appointment. We went
out to Donnybrook and I brought her into a field there. She told me she
used to go with a dairyman.... It was fine, man. Cigarettes every night
she'd bring me and paying the tram out and back. And one night she
brought me two bloody fine cigars--O, the real cheese, you know, that
the old fellow used to smoke.... I was afraid, man, she'd get in the
family way. But she's up to the dodge."

"Maybe she thinks you'll marry her," said Lenehan.

"I told her I was out of a job," said Corley. "I told her I was in
Pim's. She doesn't know my name. I was too hairy to tell her that. But
she thinks I'm a bit of class, you know."

Lenehan laughed again, noiselessly.

"Of all the good ones ever I heard," he said, "that emphatically takes
the biscuit."

Corley's stride acknowledged the compliment. The swing of his burly body
made his friend execute a few light skips from the path to the roadway
and back again. Corley was the son of an inspector of police and he had
inherited his father's frame and gait. He walked with his hands by his
sides, holding himself erect and swaying his head from side to side. His
head was large, globular and oily; it sweated in all weathers; and his
large round hat, set upon it sideways, looked like a bulb which had
grown out of another. He always stared straight before him as if he were
on parade and, when he wished to gaze after someone in the street, it
was necessary for him to move his body from the hips. At present he was
about town. Whenever any job was vacant a friend was always ready to
give him the hard word. He was often to be seen walking with policemen
in plain clothes, talking earnestly. He knew the inner side of all
affairs and was fond of delivering final judgments. He spoke without
listening to the speech of his companions. His conversation was mainly
about himself: what he had said to such a person and what such a person
had said to him and what he had said to settle the matter. When he
reported these dialogues he aspirated the first letter of his name after
the manner of Florentines.

Lenehan offered his friend a cigarette. As the two young men walked on
through the crowd Corley occasionally turned to smile at some of the
passing girls but Lenehan's gaze was fixed on the large faint moon
circled with a double halo. He watched earnestly the passing of the grey
web of twilight across its face. At length he said:

"Well... tell me, Corley, I suppose you'll be able to pull it off all
right, eh?"

Corley closed one eye expressively as an answer.

"Is she game for that?" asked Lenehan dubiously. "You can never know
women."

"She's all right," said Corley. "I know the way to get around her, man.
She's a bit gone on me."

"You're what I call a gay Lothario," said Lenehan. "And the proper kind
of a Lothario, too!"

A shade of mockery relieved the servility of his manner. To save himself
he had the habit of leaving his flattery open to the interpretation of
raillery. But Corley had not a subtle mind.

"There's nothing to touch a good slavey," he affirmed. "Take my tip for
it."

"By one who has tried them all," said Lenehan.

"First I used to go with girls, you know," said Corley, unbosoming;
"girls off the South Circular. I used to take them out, man, on the
tram somewhere and pay the tram or take them to a band or a play at the
theatre or buy them chocolate and sweets or something that way. I used
to spend money on them right enough," he added, in a convincing tone, as
if he was conscious of being disbelieved.

But Lenehan could well believe it; he nodded gravely.

"I know that game," he said, "and it's a mug's game."

"And damn the thing I ever got out of it," said Corley.

"Ditto here," said Lenehan.

"Only off of one of them," said Corley.

He moistened his upper lip by running his tongue along it. The
recollection brightened his eyes. He too gazed at the pale disc of the
moon, now nearly veiled, and seemed to meditate.

"She was... a bit of all right," he said regretfully.

He was silent again. Then he added:

"She's on the turf now. I saw her driving down Earl Street one night
with two fellows with her on a car."

"I suppose that's your doing," said Lenehan.

"There was others at her before me," said Corley philosophically.

This time Lenehan was inclined to disbelieve. He shook his head to and
fro and smiled.

"You know you can't kid me, Corley," he said.

"Honest to God!" said Corley. "Didn't she tell me herself?"

Lenehan made a tragic gesture.

"Base betrayer!" he said.

As they passed along the railings of Trinity College, Lenehan skipped
out into the road and peered up at the clock.

"Twenty after," he said.

"Time enough," said Corley. "She'll be there all right. I always let her
wait a bit."

Lenehan laughed quietly.

"Ecod! Corley, you know how to take them," he said.

"I'm up to all their little tricks," Corley confessed.

"But tell me," said Lenehan again, "are you sure you can bring it off
all right? You know it's a ticklish job. They're damn close on that
point. Eh?... What?"

His bright, small eyes searched his companion's face for reassurance.
Corley swung his head to and fro as if to toss aside an insistent
insect, and his brows gathered.

"I'll pull it off," he said. "Leave it to me, can't you?"

Lenehan said no more. He did not wish to ruffle his friend's temper, to
be sent to the devil and told that his advice was not wanted. A little
tact was necessary. But Corley's brow was soon smooth again. His
thoughts were running another way.

"She's a fine decent tart," he said, with appreciation; "that's what she
is."

They walked along Nassau Street and then turned into Kildare Street. Not
far from the porch of the club a harpist stood in the roadway, playing
to a little ring of listeners. He plucked at the wires heedlessly,
glancing quickly from time to time at the face of each new-comer and
from time to time, wearily also, at the sky. His harp, too, heedless
that her coverings had fallen about her knees, seemed weary alike of the
eyes of strangers and of her master's hands. One hand played in the
bass the melody of Silent, O Moyle, while the other hand careered in the
treble after each group of notes. The notes of the air sounded deep and
full.

The two young men walked up the street without speaking, the mournful
music following them. When they reached Stephen's Green they crossed the
road. Here the noise of trams, the lights and the crowd released them
from their silence.

"There she is!" said Corley.

At the corner of Hume Street a young woman was standing. She wore a blue
dress and a white sailor hat. She stood on the curbstone, swinging a
sunshade in one hand. Lenehan grew lively.

"Let's have a look at her, Corley," he said.

Corley glanced sideways at his friend and an unpleasant grin appeared on
his face.

"Are you trying to get inside me?" he asked.

"Damn it!" said Lenehan boldly, "I don't want an introduction. All I
want is to have a look at her. I'm not going to eat her."

"O... A look at her?" said Corley, more amiably. "Well... I'll tell you
what. I'll go over and talk to her and you can pass by."

"Right!" said Lenehan.

Corley had already thrown one leg over the chains when Lenehan called
out:

"And after? Where will we meet?"

"Half ten," answered Corley, bringing over his other leg.

"Where?"

"Corner of Merrion Street. We'll be coming back."

"Work it all right now," said Lenehan in farewell.

Corley did not answer. He sauntered across the road swaying his head
from side to side. His bulk, his easy pace, and the solid sound of his
boots had something of the conqueror in them. He approached the young
woman and, without saluting, began at once to converse with her. She
swung her umbrella more quickly and executed half turns on her heels.
Once or twice when he spoke to her at close quarters she laughed and
bent her head.

Lenehan observed them for a few minutes. Then he walked rapidly along
beside the chains at some distance and crossed the road obliquely. As he
approached Hume Street corner he found the air heavily scented and his
eyes made a swift anxious scrutiny of the young woman's appearance. She
had her Sunday finery on. Her blue serge skirt was held at the waist by
a belt of black leather. The great silver buckle of her belt seemed to
depress the centre of her body, catching the light stuff of her white
blouse like a clip. She wore a short black jacket with mother-of-pearl
buttons and a ragged black boa. The ends of her tulle collarette had
been carefully disordered and a big bunch of red flowers was pinned
in her bosomm stems upwards. Lenehan's eyes noted approvingly her stout
short muscular body. Frank rude health glowed in her face, on her fat red
cheeks and in her unabashed blue eyes. Her features were blunt. She had
broad nostrils, a straggling mouth which lay open in a contented leer,
and two projecting front teeth. As he passed Lenehan took off his cap
and, after about ten seconds, Corley returned a salute to the air. This
he did by raising his hand vaguely and pensively changing the angle of
position of his hat.

Lenehan walked as far as the Shelbourne Hotel where he halted and
waited. After waiting for a little time he saw them coming towards him
and, when they turned to the right, he followed them, stepping lightly
in his white shoes, down one side of Merrion Square. As he walked on
slowly, timing his pace to theirs, he watched Corley's head which turned
at every moment towards the young woman's face like a big ball revolving
on a pivot. He kept the pair in view until he had seen them climbing the
stairs of the Donnybrook tram; then he turned about and went back the
way he had come.

Now that he was alone his face looked older. His gaiety seemed to
forsake him and, as he came by the railings of the Duke's Lawn, he
allowed his hand to run along them. The air which the harpist had played
began to control his movements. His softly padded feet played the melody
while his fingers swept a scale of variations idly along the railings
after each group of notes.

He walked listlessly round Stephen's Green and then down Grafton Street.
Though his eyes took note of many elements of the crowd through which
he passed they did so morosely. He found trivial all that was meant to
charm him and did not answer the glances which invited him to be bold.
He knew that he would have to speak a great deal, to invent and to amuse,
and his brain and throat were too dry for such a task. The problem of
how he could pass the hours till he met Corley again troubled him a
little. He could think of no way of passing them but to keep on walking.
He turned to the left when he came to the corner of Rutland Square and
felt more at ease in the dark quiet street, the sombre look of which
suited his mood. He paused at last before the window of a poor-looking
shop over which the words Refreshment Bar were printed in white letters.
On the glass of the window were two flying inscriptions: Ginger Beer and
Ginger Ale. A cut ham was exposed on a great blue dish while near it
on a plate lay a segment of very light plum-pudding. He eyed this food
earnestly for some time and then, after glancing warily up and down the
street, went into the shop quickly.

He was hungry for, except some biscuits which he had asked two grudging
curates to bring him, he had eaten nothing since breakfast-time. He
sat down at an uncovered wooden table opposite two work-girls and a
mechanic. A slatternly girl waited on him.

"How much is a plate of peas?" he asked.

"Three halfpence, sir," said the girl.

"Bring me a plate of peas," he said, "and a bottle of ginger beer."

He spoke roughly in order to belie his air of gentility for his entry
had been followed by a pause of talk. His face was heated. To appear
natural he pushed his cap back on his head and planted his elbows on the
table. The mechanic and the two work-girls examined him point by point
before resuming their conversation in a subdued voice. The girl brought
him a plate of grocer's hot peas, seasoned with pepper and vinegar, a
fork and his ginger beer. He ate his food greedily and found it so good
that he made a note of the shop mentally. When he had eaten all the peas
he sipped his ginger beer and sat for some time thinking of Corley's
adventure. In his imagination he beheld the pair of lovers walking along
some dark road; he heard Corley's voice in deep energetic gallantries
and saw again the leer of the young woman's mouth. This vision made
him feel keenly his own poverty of purse and spirit. He was tired
of knocking about, of pulling the devil by the tail, of shifts and
intrigues. He would be thirty-one in November. Would he never get a good
job? Would he never have a home of his own? He thought how pleasant it
would be to have a warm fire to sit by and a good dinner to sit down to.
He had walked the streets long enough with friends and with girls. He
knew what those friends were worth: he knew the girls too. Experience
had embittered his heart against the world. But all hope had not left
him. He felt better after having eaten than he had felt before, less
weary of his life, less vanquished in spirit. He might yet be able to
settle down in some snug corner and live happily if he could only come
across some good simple-minded girl with a little of the ready.

He paid twopence halfpenny to the slatternly girl and went out of the
shop to begin his wandering again. He went into Capel Street and walked
along towards the City Hall. Then he turned into Dame Street. At the
corner of George's Street he met two friends of his and stopped to
converse with them. He was glad that he could rest from all his walking.
His friends asked him had he seen Corley and what was the latest. He
replied that he had spent the day with Corley. His friends talked
very little. They looked vacantly after some figures in the crowd and
sometimes made a critical remark. One said that he had seen Mac an hour
before in Westmoreland Street. At this Lenehan said that he had been
with Mac the night before in Egan's. The young man who had seen Mac
in Westmoreland Street asked was it true that Mac had won a bit over
a billiard match. Lenehan did not know: he said that Holohan had stood
them drinks in Egan's.

He left his friends at a quarter to ten and went up George's Street.
He turned to the left at the City Markets and walked on into Grafton
Street. The crowd of girls and young men had thinned and on his way
up the street he heard many groups and couples bidding one another
good-night. He went as far as the clock of the College of Surgeons: it
was on the stroke of ten. He set off briskly along the northern side
of the Green hurrying for fear Corley should return too soon. When he
reached the corner of Merrion Street he took his stand in the shadow of
a lamp and brought out one of the cigarettes which he had reserved and
lit it. He leaned against the lamp-post and kept his gaze fixed on the
part from which he expected to see Corley and the young woman return.

His mind became active again. He wondered had Corley managed it
successfully. He wondered if he had asked her yet or if he would leave
it to the last. He suffered all the pangs and thrills of his friend's
situation as well as those of his own. But the memory of Corley's slowly
revolving head calmed him somewhat: he was sure Corley would pull it off
all right. All at once the idea struck him that perhaps Corley had seen
her home by another way and given him the slip. His eyes searched the
street: there was no sign of them. Yet it was surely half-an-hour since
he had seen the clock of the College of Surgeons. Would Corley do
a thing like that? He lit his last cigarette and began to smoke it
nervously. He strained his eyes as each tram stopped at the far corner
of the square. They must have gone home by another way. The paper of his
cigarette broke and he flung it into the road with a curse.

Suddenly he saw them coming towards him. He started with delight and,
keeping close to his lamp-post, tried to read the result in their walk.
They were walking quickly, the young woman taking quick short steps,
while Corley kept beside her with his long stride. They did not seem to
be speaking. An intimation of the result pricked him like the point of a
sharp instrument. He knew Corley would fail; he knew it was no go.

They turned down Baggot Street and he followed them at once, taking the
other footpath. When they stopped he stopped too. They talked for a few
moments and then the young woman went down the steps into the area of
a house. Corley remained standing at the edge of the path, a little
distance from the front steps. Some minutes passed. Then the hall-door
was opened slowly and cautiously. A woman came running down the front
steps and coughed. Corley turned and went towards her. His broad figure
hid hers from view for a few seconds and then she reappeared running
up the steps. The door closed on her and Corley began to walk swiftly
towards Stephen's Green.

Lenehan hurried on in the same direction. Some drops of light rain fell.
He took them as a warning and, glancing back towards the house which the
young woman had entered to see that he was not observed, he ran eagerly
across the road. Anxiety and his swift run made him pant. He called out:

"Hallo, Corley!"

Corley turned his head to see who had called him, and then continued
walking as before. Lenehan ran after him, settling the waterproof on his
shoulders with one hand.

"Hallo, Corley!" he cried again.

He came level with his friend and looked keenly in his face. He could
see nothing there.

"Well?" he said. "Did it come off?"

They had reached the corner of Ely Place. Still without answering,
Corley swerved to the left and went up the side street. His features
were composed in stern calm. Lenehan kept up with his friend, breathing
uneasily. He was baffled and a note of menace pierced through his voice.

"Can't you tell us?" he said. "Did you try her?"

Corley halted at the first lamp and stared grimly before him. Then
with a grave gesture he extended a hand towards the light and, smiling,
opened it slowly to the gaze of his disciple. A small gold coin shone in
the palm.




THE BOARDING HOUSE

MRS. MOONEY was a butcher's daughter. She was a woman who was quite
able to keep things to herself: a determined woman. She had married her
father's foreman and opened a butcher's shop near Spring Gardens. But as
soon as his father-in-law was dead Mr. Mooney began to go to the devil.
He drank, plundered the till, ran headlong into debt. It was no use
making him take the pledge: he was sure to break out again a few days
after. By fighting his wife in the presence of customers and by buying
bad meat he ruined his business. One night he went for his wife with the
cleaver and she had to sleep in a neighbour's house.

After that they lived apart. She went to the priest and got a separation
from him with care of the children. She would give him neither money
nor food nor house-room; and so he was obliged to enlist himself as a
sheriff's man. He was a shabby stooped little drunkard with a white face
and a white moustache and white eyebrows, pencilled above his little eyes,
which were pink-veined and raw; and all day long he sat in the bailiff's
room, waiting to be put on a job. Mrs. Mooney, who had taken what
remained of her money out of the butcher business and set up a boarding
house in Hardwicke Street, was a big imposing woman. Her house had a
floating population made up of tourists from Liverpool and the Isle
of Man and, occasionally, artistes from the music halls. Its resident
population was made up of clerks from the city. She governed her house
cunningly and firmly, knew when to give credit, when to be stern and
when to let things pass. All the resident young men spoke of her as The
Madam.


Mrs. Mooney's young men paid fifteen shillings a week for board and
lodgings (beer or stout at dinner excluded). They shared in common
tastes and occupations and for this reason they were very chummy with
one another. They discussed with one another the chances of favourites
and outsiders. Jack Mooney, the Madam's son, who was clerk to a
commission agent in Fleet Street, had the reputation of being a hard
case. He was fond of using soldiers' obscenities: usually he came home
in the small hours. When he met his friends he had always a good one
to tell them and he was always sure to be on to a good thing--that is to
say, a likely horse or a likely artiste. He was also handy with the mits
and sang comic songs. On Sunday nights there would often be a reunion in
Mrs. Mooney's front drawing-room. The music-hall artistes would oblige;
and Sheridan played waltzes and polkas and vamped accompaniments. Polly
Mooney, the Madam's daughter, would also sing. She sang:

           I'm a... naughty girl.
             You needn't sham:
             You know I am.

Polly was a slim girl of nineteen; she had light soft hair and a small
full mouth. Her eyes, which were grey with a shade of green through
them, had a habit of glancing upwards when she spoke with anyone, which
made her look like a little perverse madonna. Mrs. Mooney had first
sent her daughter to be a typist in a corn-factor's office but, as a
disreputable sheriff's man used to come every other day to the office,
asking to be allowed to say a word to his daughter, she had taken her
daughter home again and set her to do housework. As Polly was very
lively the intention was to give her the run of the young men. Besides,
young men like to feel that there is a young woman not very far away.
Polly, of course, flirted with the young men but Mrs. Mooney, who was a
shrewd judge, knew that the young men were only passing the time away:
none of them meant business. Things went on so for a long time and Mrs.
Mooney began to think of sending Polly back to typewriting when she
noticed that something was going on between Polly and one of the young
men. She watched the pair and kept her own counsel.

Polly knew that she was being watched, but still her mother's persistent
silence could not be misunderstood. There had been no open complicity
between mother and daughter, no open understanding but, though people
in the house began to talk of the affair, still Mrs. Mooney did not
intervene. Polly began to grow a little strange in her manner and the
young man was evidently perturbed. At last, when she judged it to be the
right moment, Mrs. Mooney intervened. She dealt with moral problems as a
cleaver deals with meat: and in this case she had made up her mind.

It was a bright Sunday morning of early summer, promising heat, but with
a fresh breeze blowing. All the windows of the boarding house were open
and the lace curtains ballooned gently towards the street beneath the
raised sashes. The belfry of George's Church sent out constant peals and
worshippers, singly or in groups, traversed the little circus before
the church, revealing their purpose by their self-contained demeanour
no less than by the little volumes in their gloved hands. Breakfast
was over in the boarding house and the table of the breakfast-room was
covered with plates on which lay yellow streaks of eggs with morsels
of bacon-fat and bacon-rind. Mrs. Mooney sat in the straw arm-chair
and watched the servant Mary remove the breakfast things. She made Mary
collect the crusts and pieces of broken bread to help to make Tuesday's
bread-pudding. When the table was cleared, the broken bread collected,
the sugar and butter safe under lock and key, she began to reconstruct
the interview which she had had the night before with Polly. Things were
as she had suspected: she had been frank in her questions and Polly had
been frank in her answers. Both had been somewhat awkward, of course.
She had been made awkward by her not wishing to receive the news in too
cavalier a fashion or to seem to have connived and Polly had been
made awkward not merely because allusions of that kind always made her
awkward but also because she did not wish it to be thought that in
her wise innocence she had divined the intention behind her mother's
tolerance.

Mrs. Mooney glanced instinctively at the little gilt clock on the
mantelpiece as soon as she had become aware through her revery that the
bells of George's Church had stopped ringing. It was seventeen minutes
past eleven: she would have lots of time to have the matter out with Mr.
Doran and then catch short twelve at Marlborough Street. She was sure
she would win. To begin with she had all the weight of social opinion
on her side: she was an outraged mother. She had allowed him to live
beneath her roof, assuming that he was a man of honour, and he had simply
abused her hospitality. He was thirty-four or thirty-five years of age,
so that youth could not be pleaded as his excuse; nor could ignorance
be his excuse since he was a man who had seen something of the world. He
had simply taken advantage of Polly's youth and inexperience: that was
evident. The question was: What reparation would he make?

There must be reparation made in such cases. It is all very well for
the man: he can go his ways as if nothing had happened, having had his
moment of pleasure, but the girl has to bear the brunt. Some mothers
would be content to patch up such an affair for a sum of money; she had
known cases of it. But she would not do so. For her only one reparation
could make up for the loss of her daughter's honour: marriage.

She counted all her cards again before sending Mary up to Mr. Doran's room
to say that she wished to speak with him. She felt sure she would win.
He was a serious young man, not rakish or loud-voiced like the others.
If it had been Mr. Sheridan or Mr. Meade or Bantam Lyons her task would
have been much harder. She did not think he would face publicity. All
the lodgers in the house knew something of the affair; details had been
invented by some. Besides, he had been employed for thirteen years in a
great Catholic wine-merchant's office and publicity would mean for him,
perhaps, the loss of his job. Whereas if he agreed all might be well.
She knew he had a good screw for one thing and she suspected he had a
bit of stuff put by.

Nearly the half-hour! She stood up and surveyed herself in the
pier-glass. The decisive expression of her great florid face satisfied
her and she thought of some mothers she knew who could not get their
daughters off their hands.

Mr. Doran was very anxious indeed this Sunday morning. He had made two
attempts to shave but his hand had been so unsteady that he had been
obliged to desist. Three days' reddish beard fringed his jaws and every
two or three minutes a mist gathered on his glasses so that he had
to take them off and polish them with his pocket-handkerchief. The
recollection of his confession of the night before was a cause of acute
pain to him; the priest had drawn out every ridiculous detail of the
affair and in the end had so magnified his sin that he was almost
thankful at being afforded a loophole of reparation. The harm was done.
What could he do now but marry her or run away? He could not brazen it
out. The affair would be sure to be talked of and his employer would
be certain to hear of it. Dublin is such a small city: everyone knows
everyone else's business. He felt his heart leap warmly in his throat as
he heard in his excited imagination old Mr. Leonard calling out in his
rasping voice: "Send Mr. Doran here, please."

All his long years of service gone for nothing! All his industry and
diligence thrown away! As a young man he had sown his wild oats, of
course; he had boasted of his free-thinking and denied the existence of
God to his companions in public-houses. But that was all passed and done
with... nearly. He still bought a copy of Reynolds's Newspaper every
week but he attended to his religious duties and for nine-tenths of the
year lived a regular life. He had money enough to settle down on; it was
not that. But the family would look down on her. First of all there
was her disreputable father and then her mother's boarding house was
beginning to get a certain fame. He had a notion that he was being had.
He could imagine his friends talking of the affair and laughing. She was
a little vulgar; some times she said "I seen" and "If I had've known."
But what would grammar matter if he really loved her? He could not make
up his mind whether to like her or despise her for what she had done. Of
course he had done it too. His instinct urged him to remain free, not to
marry. Once you are married you are done for, it said.

While he was sitting helplessly on the side of the bed in shirt and
trousers she tapped lightly at his door and entered. She told him all,
that she had made a clean breast of it to her mother and that her mother
would speak with him that morning. She cried and threw her arms round
his neck, saying:

"O Bob! Bob! What am I to do? What am I to do at all?"

She would put an end to herself, she said.

He comforted her feebly, telling her not to cry, that it would be all
right, never fear. He felt against his shirt the agitation of her bosom.

It was not altogether his fault that it had happened. He remembered
well, with the curious patient memory of the celibate, the first casual
caresses her dress, her breath, her fingers had given him. Then late one
night as he was undressing for bed she had tapped at his door, timidly. She
wanted to relight her candle at his for hers had been blown out by a
gust. It was her bath night. She wore a loose open combing-jacket of
printed flannel. Her white instep shone in the opening of her furry
slippers and the blood glowed warmly behind her perfumed skin. From her
hands and wrists too as she lit and steadied her candle a faint perfume
arose.

On nights when he came in very late it was she who warmed up his dinner.
He scarcely knew what he was eating, feeling her beside him alone, at
night, in the sleeping house. And her thoughtfulness! If the night was
anyway cold or wet or windy there was sure to be a little tumbler of
punch ready for him. Perhaps they could be happy together....

They used to go upstairs together on tiptoe, each with a candle, and on
the third landing exchange reluctant good-nights. They used to kiss. He
remembered well her eyes, the touch of her hand and his delirium....

But delirium passes. He echoed her phrase, applying it to himself: "What
am I to do?" The instinct of the celibate warned him to hold back. But
the sin was there; even his sense of honour told him that reparation
must be made for such a sin.

While he was sitting with her on the side of the bed Mary came to the
door and said that the missus wanted to see him in the parlour. He stood
up to put on his coat and waistcoat, more helpless than ever. When he
was dressed he went over to her to comfort her. It would be all right,
never fear. He left her crying on the bed and moaning softly: "O my
God!"

Going down the stairs his glasses became so dimmed with moisture that
he had to take them off and polish them. He longed to ascend through the
roof and fly away to another country where he would never hear again
of his trouble, and yet a force pushed him downstairs step by step.
The implacable faces of his employer and of the Madam stared upon his
discomfiture. On the last flight of stairs he passed Jack Mooney who
was coming up from the pantry nursing two bottles of Bass. They saluted
coldly; and the lover's eyes rested for a second or two on a thick
bulldog face and a pair of thick short arms. When he reached the foot of
the staircase he glanced up and saw Jack regarding him from the door of
the return-room.

Suddenly he remembered the night when one of the music-hall artistes,
a little blond Londoner, had made a rather free allusion to Polly.
The reunion had been almost broken up on account of Jack's violence.
Everyone tried to quiet him. The music-hall artiste, a little paler than
usual, kept smiling and saying that there was no harm meant: but Jack
kept shouting at him that if any fellow tried that sort of a game on
with his sister he'd bloody well put his teeth down his throat, so he
would.

Polly sat for a little time on the side of the bed, crying. Then she
dried her eyes and went over to the looking-glass. She dipped the end of
the towel in the water-jug and refreshed her eyes with the cool water.
She looked at herself in profile and readjusted a hairpin above her ear.
Then she went back to the bed again and sat at the foot. She regarded
the pillows for a long time and the sight of them awakened in her mind
secret, amiable memories. She rested the nape of her neck against the
cool iron bed-rail and fell into a reverie. There was no longer any
perturbation visible on her face.

She waited on patiently, almost cheerfully, without alarm, her memories
gradually giving place to hopes and visions of the future. Her hopes and
visions were so intricate that she no longer saw the white pillows
on which her gaze was fixed or remembered that she was waiting for
anything.

At last she heard her mother calling. She started to her feet and ran to
the banisters.

"Polly! Polly!"

"Yes, mamma?"

"Come down, dear. Mr. Doran wants to speak to you."

Then she remembered what she had been waiting for.




A LITTLE CLOUD

EIGHT years before he had seen his friend off at the North Wall and
wished him godspeed. Gallaher had got on. You could tell that at once
by his travelled air, his well-cut tweed suit, and fearless accent. Few
fellows had talents like his and fewer still could remain unspoiled
by such success. Gallaher's heart was in the right place and he had
deserved to win. It was something to have a friend like that.

Little Chandler's thoughts ever since lunch-time had been of his meeting
with Gallaher, of Gallaher's invitation and of the great city London
where Gallaher lived. He was called Little Chandler because, though
he was but slightly under the average stature, he gave one the idea
of being a little man. His hands were white and small, his frame was
fragile, his voice was quiet and his manners were refined. He took the
greatest care of his fair silken hair and moustache and used perfume
discreetly on his handkerchief. The half-moons of his nails were perfect
and when he smiled you caught a glimpse of a row of childish white
teeth.

As he sat at his desk in the King's Inns he thought what changes those
eight years had brought. The friend whom he had known under a shabby and
necessitous guise had become a brilliant figure on the London Press. He
turned often from his tiresome writing to gaze out of the office window.
The glow of a late autumn sunset covered the grass plots and walks. It
cast a shower of kindly golden dust on the untidy nurses and decrepit
old men who drowsed on the benches; it flickered upon all the moving
figures--on the children who ran screaming along the gravel paths and
on everyone who passed through the gardens. He watched the scene and
thought of life; and (as always happened when he thought of life) he
became sad. A gentle melancholy took possession of him. He felt how
useless it was to struggle against fortune, this being the burden of
wisdom which the ages had bequeathed to him.

He remembered the books of poetry upon his shelves at home. He had
bought them in his bachelor days and many an evening, as he sat in the
little room off the hall, he had been tempted to take one down from the
bookshelf and read out something to his wife. But shyness had always
held him back; and so the books had remained on their shelves. At times
he repeated lines to himself and this consoled him.

When his hour had struck he stood up and took leave of his desk and of
his fellow-clerks punctiliously. He emerged from under the feudal
arch of the King's Inns, a neat modest figure, and walked swiftly down
Henrietta Street. The golden sunset was waning and the air had grown
sharp. A horde of grimy children populated the street. They stood or
ran in the roadway or crawled up the steps before the gaping doors or
squatted like mice upon the thresholds. Little Chandler gave them no
thought. He picked his way deftly through all that minute vermin-like
life and under the shadow of the gaunt spectral mansions in which the
old nobility of Dublin had roystered. No memory of the past touched him,
for his mind was full of a present joy.

He had never been in Corless's but he knew the value of the name. He
knew that people went there after the theatre to eat oysters and drink
liqueurs; and he had heard that the waiters there spoke French and
German. Walking swiftly by at night he had seen cabs drawn up before the
door and richly dressed ladies, escorted by cavaliers, alight and
enter quickly. They wore noisy dresses and many wraps. Their faces were
powdered and they caught up their dresses, when they touched earth,
like alarmed Atalantas. He had always passed without turning his head
to look. It was his habit to walk swiftly in the street even by day and
whenever he found himself in the city late at night he hurried on his
way apprehensively and excitedly. Sometimes, however, he courted the
causes of his fear. He chose the darkest and narrowest streets and,
as he walked boldly forward, the silence that was spread about his
footsteps troubled him, the wandering, silent figures troubled him; and
at times a sound of low fugitive laughter made him tremble like a leaf.

He turned to the right towards Capel Street. Ignatius Gallaher on the
London Press! Who would have thought it possible eight years before?
Still, now that he reviewed the past, Little Chandler could remember
many signs of future greatness in his friend. People used to say that
Ignatius Gallaher was wild. Of course, he did mix with a rakish set of
fellows at that time, drank freely and borrowed money on all sides.
In the end he had got mixed up in some shady affair, some money
transaction: at least, that was one version of his flight. But nobody
denied him talent. There was always a certain... something in Ignatius
Gallaher that impressed you in spite of yourself. Even when he was out
at elbows and at his wits' end for money he kept up a bold face. Little
Chandler remembered (and the remembrance brought a slight flush of pride
to his cheek) one of Ignatius Gallaher's sayings when he was in a tight
corner:

"Half time now, boys," he used to say light-heartedly. "Where's my
considering cap?"

That was Ignatius Gallaher all out; and, damn it, you couldn't but
admire him for it.

Little Chandler quickened his pace. For the first time in his life he
felt himself superior to the people he passed. For the first time his
soul revolted against the dull inelegance of Capel Street. There was no
doubt about it: if you wanted to succeed you had to go away. You could
do nothing in Dublin. As he crossed Grattan Bridge he looked down the
river towards the lower quays and pitied the poor stunted houses. They
seemed to him a band of tramps, huddled together along the riverbanks,
their old coats covered with dust and soot, stupefied by the panorama
of sunset and waiting for the first chill of night bid them arise, shake
themselves and begone. He wondered whether he could write a poem to
express his idea. Perhaps Gallaher might be able to get it into some
London paper for him. Could he write something original? He was not sure
what idea he wished to express but the thought that a poetic moment had
touched him took life within him like an infant hope. He stepped onward
bravely.

Every step brought him nearer to London, farther from his own sober
inartistic life. A light began to tremble on the horizon of his mind. He
was not so old--thirty-two. His temperament might be said to be just
at the point of maturity. There were so many different moods and
impressions that he wished to express in verse. He felt them within him.
He tried weigh to his soul to see if it was a poet's soul. Melancholy
was the dominant note of his temperament, he thought, but it was a
melancholy tempered by recurrences of faith and resignation and simple
joy. If he could give expression to it in a book of poems perhaps men
would listen. He would never be popular: he saw that. He could not sway
the crowd but he might appeal to a little circle of kindred minds.
The English critics, perhaps, would recognise him as one of the Celtic
school by reason of the melancholy tone of his poems; besides that, he
would put in allusions. He began to invent sentences and phrases from
the notice which his book would get. "Mr. Chandler has the gift of easy
and graceful verse."... "wistful sadness pervades these poems."... "The
Celtic note." It was a pity his name was not more Irish-looking. Perhaps
it would be better to insert his mother's name before the surname:
Thomas Malone Chandler, or better still: T. Malone Chandler. He would
speak to Gallaher about it.

He pursued his revery so ardently that he passed his street and had
to turn back. As he came near Corless's his former agitation began to
overmaster him and he halted before the door in indecision. Finally he
opened the door and entered.

The light and noise of the bar held him at the doorways for a few
moments. He looked about him, but his sight was confused by the shining
of many red and green wine-glasses The bar seemed to him to be full
of people and he felt that the people were observing him curiously. He
glanced quickly to right and left (frowning slightly to make his errand
appear serious), but when his sight cleared a little he saw that nobody
had turned to look at him: and there, sure enough, was Ignatius Gallaher
leaning with his back against the counter and his feet planted far
apart.

"Hallo, Tommy, old hero, here you are! What is it to be? What will you
have? I'm taking whisky: better stuff than we get across the water.
Soda? Lithia? No mineral? I'm the same. Spoils the flavour.... Here,
garcon, bring us two halves of malt whisky, like a good fellow.... Well,
and how have you been pulling along since I saw you last? Dear God,
how old we're getting! Do you see any signs of aging in me--eh, what? A
little grey and thin on the top--what?"

Ignatius Gallaher took off his hat and displayed a large closely cropped
head. His face was heavy, pale and cleanshaven. His eyes, which were of
bluish slate-colour, relieved his unhealthy pallor and shone out plainly
above the vivid orange tie he wore. Between these rival features the
lips appeared very long and shapeless and colourless. He bent his head
and felt with two sympathetic fingers the thin hair at the crown. Little
Chandler shook his head as a denial. Ignatius Galaher put on his hat
again.

"It pulls you down," he said. "Press life. Always hurry and scurry,
looking for copy and sometimes not finding it: and then, always to have
something new in your stuff. Damn proofs and printers, I say, for a few
days. I'm deuced glad, I can tell you, to get back to the old country.
Does a fellow good, a bit of a holiday. I feel a ton better since I
landed again in dear dirty Dublin.... Here you are, Tommy. Water? Say
when."

Little Chandler allowed his whisky to be very much diluted.

"You don't know what's good for you, my boy," said Ignatius Gallaher. "I
drink mine neat."

"I drink very little as a rule," said Little Chandler modestly. "An odd
half-one or so when I meet any of the old crowd: that's all."

"Ah well," said Ignatius Gallaher, cheerfully, "here's to us and to old
times and old acquaintance."

They clinked glasses and drank the toast.

"I met some of the old gang today," said Ignatius Gallaher. "O'Hara
seems to be in a bad way. What's he doing?"

"Nothing," said Little Chandler. "He's gone to the dogs."

"But Hogan has a good sit, hasn't he?"

"Yes; he's in the Land Commission."

"I met him one night in London and he seemed to be very flush.... Poor
O'Hara! Boose, I suppose?"

"Other things, too," said Little Chandler shortly.

Ignatius Gallaher laughed.

"Tommy," he said, "I see you haven't changed an atom. You're the very
same serious person that used to lecture me on Sunday mornings when I
had a sore head and a fur on my tongue. You'd want to knock about a bit
in the world. Have you never been anywhere even for a trip?"

"I've been to the Isle of Man," said Little Chandler.

Ignatius Gallaher laughed.

"The Isle of Man!" he said. "Go to London or Paris: Paris, for choice.
That'd do you good."

"Have you seen Paris?"

"I should think I have! I've knocked about there a little."

"And is it really so beautiful as they say?" asked Little Chandler.

He sipped a little of his drink while Ignatius Gallaher finished his
boldly.

"Beautiful?" said Ignatius Gallaher, pausing on the word and on the
flavour of his drink. "It's not so beautiful, you know. Of course, it is
beautiful.... But it's the life of Paris; that's the thing. Ah, there's
no city like Paris for gaiety, movement, excitement...."

Little Chandler finished his whisky and, after some trouble, succeeded
in catching the barman's eye. He ordered the same again.

"I've been to the Moulin Rouge," Ignatius Gallaher continued when the
barman had removed their glasses, "and I've been to all the Bohemian
cafes. Hot stuff! Not for a pious chap like you, Tommy."

Little Chandler said nothing until the barman returned with two glasses:
then he touched his friend's glass lightly and reciprocated the former
toast. He was beginning to feel somewhat disillusioned. Gallaher's
accent and way of expressing himself did not please him. There was
something vulgar in his friend which he had not observed before. But
perhaps it was only the result of living in London amid the bustle and
competition of the Press. The old personal charm was still there under
this new gaudy manner. And, after all, Gallaher had lived, he had seen
the world. Little Chandler looked at his friend enviously.

"Everything in Paris is gay," said Ignatius Gallaher. "They believe in
enjoying life--and don't you think they're right? If you want to enjoy
yourself properly you must go to Paris. And, mind you, they've a great
feeling for the Irish there. When they heard I was from Ireland they
were ready to eat me, man."

Little Chandler took four or five sips from his glass.

"Tell me," he said, "is it true that Paris is so... immoral as they
say?"

Ignatius Gallaher made a catholic gesture with his right arm.

"Every place is immoral," he said. "Of course you do find spicy bits in
Paris. Go to one of the students' balls, for instance. That's lively, if
you like, when the cocottes begin to let themselves loose. You know what
they are, I suppose?"

"I've heard of them," said Little Chandler.

Ignatius Gallaher drank off his whisky and shook his head.

"Ah," he said, "you may say what you like. There's no woman like the
Parisienne--for style, for go."

"Then it is an immoral city," said Little Chandler, with timid
insistence--"I mean, compared with London or Dublin?"

"London!" said Ignatius Gallaher. "It's six of one and half-a-dozen of
the other. You ask Hogan, my boy. I showed him a bit about London when
he was over there. He'd open your eye.... I say, Tommy, don't make punch
of that whisky: liquor up."

"No, really...."

"O, come on, another one won't do you any harm. What is it? The same
again, I suppose?"

"Well... all right."

"Francois, the same again.... Will you smoke, Tommy?"

Ignatius Gallaher produced his cigar-case. The two friends lit their
cigars and puffed at them in silence until their drinks were served.

"I'll tell you my opinion," said Ignatius Gallaher, emerging after some
time from the clouds of smoke in which he had taken refuge, "it's a rum
world. Talk of immorality! I've heard of cases--what am I saying?--I've
known them: cases of... immorality...."

Ignatius Gallaher puffed thoughtfully at his cigar and then, in a calm
historian's tone, he proceeded to sketch for his friend some pictures
of the corruption which was rife abroad. He summarised the vices of many
capitals and seemed inclined to award the palm to Berlin. Some things he
could not vouch for (his friends had told him), but of others he had had
personal experience. He spared neither rank nor caste. He revealed many
of the secrets of religious houses on the Continent and described some
of the practices which were fashionable in high society and ended by
telling, with details, a story about an English duchess--a story which
he knew to be true. Little Chandler was astonished.

"Ah, well," said Ignatius Gallaher, "here we are in old jog-along Dublin
where nothing is known of such things."

"How dull you must find it," said Little Chandler, "after all the other
places you've seen!"

"Well," said Ignatius Gallaher, "it's a relaxation to come over here,
you know. And, after all, it's the old country, as they say, isn't it?
You can't help having a certain feeling for it. That's human nature....
But tell me something about yourself. Hogan told me you had... tasted
the joys of connubial bliss. Two years ago, wasn't it?"

Little Chandler blushed and smiled.

"Yes," he said. "I was married last May twelve months."

"I hope it's not too late in the day to offer my best wishes," said
Ignatius Gallaher. "I didn't know your address or I'd have done so at
the time."

He extended his hand, which Little Chandler took.

"Well, Tommy," he said, "I wish you and yours every joy in life, old
chap, and tons of money, and may you never die till I shoot you. And
that's the wish of a sincere friend, an old friend. You know that?"

"I know that," said Little Chandler.

"Any youngsters?" said Ignatius Gallaher.

Little Chandler blushed again.

"We have one child," he said.

"Son or daughter?"

"A little boy."

Ignatius Gallaher slapped his friend sonorously on the back.

"Bravo," he said, "I wouldn't doubt you, Tommy."

Little Chandler smiled, looked confusedly at his glass and bit his lower
lip with three childishly white front teeth.

"I hope you'll spend an evening with us," he said, "before you go
back. My wife will be delighted to meet you. We can have a little music
and----"

"Thanks awfully, old chap," said Ignatius Gallaher, "I'm sorry we didn't
meet earlier. But I must leave tomorrow night."

"Tonight, perhaps...?"

"I'm awfully sorry, old man. You see I'm over here with another
fellow, clever young chap he is too, and we arranged to go to a little
card-party. Only for that..."

"O, in that case..."

"But who knows?" said Ignatius Gallaher considerately. "Next year I may
take a little skip over here now that I've broken the ice. It's only a
pleasure deferred."

"Very well," said Little Chandler, "the next time you come we must have
an evening together. That's agreed now, isn't it?"

"Yes, that's agreed," said Ignatius Gallaher. "Next year if I come,
parole d'honneur."

"And to clinch the bargain," said Little Chandler, "we'll just have one
more now."

Ignatius Gallaher took out a large gold watch and looked at it.

"Is it to be the last?" he said. "Because you know, I have an a.p."

"O, yes, positively," said Little Chandler.

"Very well, then," said Ignatius Gallaher, "let us have another one as a
deoc an doruis--that's good vernacular for a small whisky, I believe."

Little Chandler ordered the drinks. The blush which had risen to his
face a few moments before was establishing itself. A trifle made
him blush at any time: and now he felt warm and excited. Three small
whiskies had gone to his head and Gallaher's strong cigar had confused
his mind, for he was a delicate and abstinent person. The adventure of
meeting Gallaher after eight years, of finding himself with Gallaher
in Corless's surrounded by lights and noise, of listening to Gallaher's
stories and of sharing for a brief space Gallaher's vagrant and
triumphant life, upset the equipoise of his sensitive nature. He felt
acutely the contrast between his own life and his friend's and it seemed
to him unjust. Gallaher was his inferior in birth and education. He was
sure that he could do something better than his friend had ever done, or
could ever do, something higher than mere tawdry journalism if he only
got the chance. What was it that stood in his way? His unfortunate
timidity! He wished to vindicate himself in some way, to assert his
manhood. He saw behind Gallaher's refusal of his invitation. Gallaher
was only patronising him by his friendliness just as he was patronising
Ireland by his visit.

The barman brought their drinks. Little Chandler pushed one glass
towards his friend and took up the other boldly.

"Who knows?" he said, as they lifted their glasses. "When you come next
year I may have the pleasure of wishing long life and happiness to Mr.
and Mrs. Ignatius Gallaher."

Ignatius Gallaher in the act of drinking closed one eye expressively
over the rim of his glass. When he had drunk he smacked his lips
decisively, set down his glass and said:

"No blooming fear of that, my boy. I'm going to have my fling first and
see a bit of life and the world before I put my head in the sack--if I
ever do."

"Some day you will," said Little Chandler calmly.

Ignatius Gallaher turned his orange tie and slate-blue eyes full upon
his friend.

"You think so?" he said.

"You'll put your head in the sack," repeated Little Chandler stoutly,
"like everyone else if you can find the girl."

He had slightly emphasised his tone and he was aware that he had
betrayed himself; but, though the colour had heightened in his cheek, he
did not flinch from his friend's gaze. Ignatius Gallaher watched him for
a few moments and then said:

"If ever it occurs, you may bet your bottom dollar there'll be no
mooning and spooning about it. I mean to marry money. She'll have a good
fat account at the bank or she won't do for me."

Little Chandler shook his head.

"Why, man alive," said Ignatius Gallaher, vehemently, "do you know what
it is? I've only to say the word and tomorrow I can have the woman
and the cash. You don't believe it? Well, I know it. There are
hundreds--what am I saying?--thousands of rich Germans and Jews, rotten
with money, that'd only be too glad.... You wait a while my boy. See if
I don't play my cards properly. When I go about a thing I mean business,
I tell you. You just wait."

He tossed his glass to his mouth, finished his drink and laughed loudly.
Then he looked thoughtfully before him and said in a calmer tone:

"But I'm in no hurry. They can wait. I don't fancy tying myself up to
one woman, you know."

He imitated with his mouth the act of tasting and made a wry face.

"Must get a bit stale, I should think," he said.

 * * * * *

Little Chandler sat in the room off the hall, holding a child in his
arms. To save money they kept no servant but Annie's young sister Monica
came for an hour or so in the morning and an hour or so in the evening
to help. But Monica had gone home long ago. It was a quarter to nine.
Little Chandler had come home late for tea and, moreover, he had
forgotten to bring Annie home the parcel of coffee from Bewley's. Of
course she was in a bad humour and gave him short answers. She said she
would do without any tea but when it came near the time at which the
shop at the corner closed she decided to go out herself for a quarter
of a pound of tea and two pounds of sugar. She put the sleeping child
deftly in his arms and said:

"Here. Don't waken him."

A little lamp with a white china shade stood upon the table and its
light fell over a photograph which was enclosed in a frame of crumpled
horn. It was Annie's photograph. Little Chandler looked at it, pausing
at the thin tight lips. She wore the pale blue summer blouse which he
had brought her home as a present one Saturday. It had cost him ten and
elevenpence; but what an agony of nervousness it had cost him! How
he had suffered that day, waiting at the shop door until the shop was
empty, standing at the counter and trying to appear at his ease while
the girl piled ladies' blouses before him, paying at the desk and
forgetting to take up the odd penny of his change, being called back by
the cashier, and finally, striving to hide his blushes as he left the
shop by examining the parcel to see if it was securely tied. When he
brought the blouse home Annie kissed him and said it was very pretty and
stylish; but when she heard the price she threw the blouse on the table
and said it was a regular swindle to charge ten and elevenpence for it.
At first she wanted to take it back but when she tried it on she was
delighted with it, especially with the make of the sleeves, and kissed
him and said he was very good to think of her.

Hm!...

He looked coldly into the eyes of the photograph and they answered
coldly. Certainly they were pretty and the face itself was pretty. But
he found something mean in it. Why was it so unconscious and ladylike?
The composure of the eyes irritated him. They repelled him and defied
him: there was no passion in them, no rapture. He thought of what
Gallaher had said about rich Jewesses. Those dark Oriental eyes, he
thought, how full they are of passion, of voluptuous longing!... Why had
he married the eyes in the photograph?

He caught himself up at the question and glanced nervously round the
room. He found something mean in the pretty furniture which he had
bought for his house on the hire system. Annie had chosen it herself
and it reminded him of her. It too was prim and pretty. A dull resentment
against his life awoke within him. Could he not escape from his little
house? Was it too late for him to try to live bravely like Gallaher?
Could he go to London? There was the furniture still to be paid for. If
he could only write a book and get it published, that might open the way
for him.

A volume of Byron's poems lay before him on the table. He opened it
cautiously with his left hand lest he should waken the child and began
to read the first poem in the book:

     Hushed are the winds and still the evening gloom,
     Not e'en a Zephyr wanders through the grove,
     Whilst I return to view my Margaret's tomb
     And scatter flowers on the dust I love.

He paused. He felt the rhythm of the verse about him in the room.
How melancholy it was! Could he, too, write like that, express the
melancholy of his soul in verse? There were so many things he wanted
to describe: his sensation of a few hours before on Grattan Bridge, for
example. If he could get back again into that mood....

The child awoke and began to cry. He turned from the page and tried to
hush it: but it would not be hushed. He began to rock it to and fro in
his arms but its wailing cry grew keener. He rocked it faster while his
eyes began to read the second stanza:

    Within this narrow cell reclines her clay,
    That clay where once...

It was useless. He couldn't read. He couldn't do anything. The wailing
of the child pierced the drum of his ear. It was useless, useless!
He was a prisoner for life. His arms trembled with anger and suddenly
bending to the child's face he shouted:

"Stop!"

The child stopped for an instant, had a spasm of fright and began to
scream. He jumped up from his chair and walked hastily up and down the
room with the child in his arms. It began to sob piteously, losing its
breath for four or five seconds, and then bursting out anew. The thin
walls of the room echoed the sound. He tried to soothe it but it sobbed
more convulsively. He looked at the contracted and quivering face of
the child and began to be alarmed. He counted seven sobs without a
break between them and caught the child to his breast in fright. If it
died!...

The door was burst open and a young woman ran in, panting.

"What is it? What is it?" she cried.

The child, hearing its mother's voice, broke out into a paroxysm of
sobbing.

"It's nothing, Annie... it's nothing.... He began to cry..."

She flung her parcels on the floor and snatched the child from him.

"What have you done to him?" she cried, glaring into his face.

Little Chandler sustained for one moment the gaze of her eyes and his
heart closed together as he met the hatred in them. He began to stammer:

"It's nothing.... He... he began to cry.... I couldn't... I didn't do
anything.... What?"

Giving no heed to him she began to walk up and down the room, clasping
the child tightly in her arms and murmuring:

"My little man! My little mannie! Was 'ou frightened, love?... There
now, love! There now!... Lambabaun! Mamma's little lamb of the world!...
There now!"

Little Chandler felt his cheeks suffused with shame and he stood back
out of the lamplight. He listened while the paroxysm of the child's
sobbing grew less and less; and tears of remorse started to his eyes.




COUNTERPARTS

THE bell rang furiously and, when Miss Parker went to the tube, a
furious voice called out in a piercing North of Ireland accent:

"Send Farrington here!"

Miss Parker returned to her machine, saying to a man who was writing at
a desk:

"Mr. Alleyne wants you upstairs."

The man muttered "Blast him!" under his breath and pushed back his chair
to stand up. When he stood up he was tall and of great bulk. He had a
hanging face, dark wine-coloured, with fair eyebrows and moustache:
his eyes bulged forward slightly and the whites of them were dirty.
He lifted up the counter and, passing by the clients, went out of the
office with a heavy step.

He went heavily upstairs until he came to the second landing, where
a door bore a brass plate with the inscription Mr. Alleyne. Here he
halted, puffing with labour and vexation, and knocked. The shrill voice
cried:

"Come in!"

The man entered Mr. Alleyne's room. Simultaneously Mr. Alleyne, a little
man wearing gold-rimmed glasses on a cleanshaven face, shot his head up
over a pile of documents. The head itself was so pink and hairless it
seemed like a large egg reposing on the papers. Mr. Alleyne did not lose
a moment:

"Farrington? What is the meaning of this? Why have I always to complain
of you? May I ask you why you haven't made a copy of that contract
between Bodley and Kirwan? I told you it must be ready by four o'clock."

"But Mr. Shelley said, sir----"

"Mr. Shelley said, sir.... Kindly attend to what I say and not to
what Mr. Shelley says, sir. You have always some excuse or another for
shirking work. Let me tell you that if the contract is not copied before
this evening I'll lay the matter before Mr. Crosbie.... Do you hear me
now?"

"Yes, sir."

"Do you hear me now?... Ay and another little matter! I might as well be
talking to the wall as talking to you. Understand once for all that you
get a half an hour for your lunch and not an hour and a half. How many
courses do you want, I'd like to know.... Do you mind me now?"

"Yes, sir."

Mr. Alleyne bent his head again upon his pile of papers. The man stared
fixedly at the polished skull which directed the affairs of Crosbie &
Alleyne, gauging its fragility. A spasm of rage gripped his throat for
a few moments and then passed, leaving after it a sharp sensation of
thirst. The man recognised the sensation and felt that he must have a
good night's drinking. The middle of the month was passed and, if he
could get the copy done in time, Mr. Alleyne might give him an order on
the cashier. He stood still, gazing fixedly at the head upon the pile
of papers. Suddenly Mr. Alleyne began to upset all the papers, searching
for something. Then, as if he had been unaware of the man's presence
till that moment, he shot up his head again, saying:

"Eh? Are you going to stand there all day? Upon my word, Farrington, you
take things easy!"

"I was waiting to see..."

"Very good, you needn't wait to see. Go downstairs and do your work."

The man walked heavily towards the door and, as he went out of the room,
he heard Mr. Alleyne cry after him that if the contract was not copied
by evening Mr. Crosbie would hear of the matter.

He returned to his desk in the lower office and counted the sheets which
remained to be copied. He took up his pen and dipped it in the ink but
he continued to stare stupidly at the last words he had written: In no
case shall the said Bernard Bodley be... The evening was falling and in
a few minutes they would be lighting the gas: then he could write. He
felt that he must slake the thirst in his throat. He stood up from his
desk and, lifting the counter as before, passed out of the office. As he
was passing out the chief clerk looked at him inquiringly.

"It's all right, Mr. Shelley," said the man, pointing with his finger to
indicate the objective of his journey.

The chief clerk glanced at the hat-rack, but, seeing the row complete,
offered no remark. As soon as he was on the landing the man pulled
a shepherd's plaid cap out of his pocket, put it on his head and ran
quickly down the rickety stairs. From the street door he walked on
furtively on the inner side of the path towards the corner and all at
once dived into a doorway. He was now safe in the dark snug of O'Neill's
shop, and filling up the little window that looked into the bar with his
inflamed face, the colour of dark wine or dark meat, he called out:

"Here, Pat, give us a g.p., like a good fellow."

The curate brought him a glass of plain porter. The man drank it at a
gulp and asked for a caraway seed. He put his penny on the counter and,
leaving the curate to grope for it in the gloom, retreated out of the
snug as furtively as he had entered it.

Darkness, accompanied by a thick fog, was gaining upon the dusk of
February and the lamps in Eustace Street had been lit. The man went up
by the houses until he reached the door of the office, wondering whether
he could finish his copy in time. On the stairs a moist pungent odour of
perfumes saluted his nose: evidently Miss Delacour had come while he
was out in O'Neill's. He crammed his cap back again into his pocket and
re-entered the office, assuming an air of absentmindedness.

"Mr. Alleyne has been calling for you," said the chief clerk severely.
"Where were you?"

The man glanced at the two clients who were standing at the counter as
if to intimate that their presence prevented him from answering. As the
clients were both male the chief clerk allowed himself a laugh.

"I know that game," he said. "Five times in one day is a little bit...
Well, you better look sharp and get a copy of our correspondence in the
Delacour case for Mr. Alleyne."

This address in the presence of the public, his run upstairs and the
porter he had gulped down so hastily confused the man and, as he sat
down at his desk to get what was required, he realised how hopeless was
the task of finishing his copy of the contract before half past five.
The dark damp night was coming and he longed to spend it in the bars,
drinking with his friends amid the glare of gas and the clatter of
glasses. He got out the Delacour correspondence and passed out of
the office. He hoped Mr. Alleyne would not discover that the last two
letters were missing.

The moist pungent perfume lay all the way up to Mr. Alleyne's room. Miss
Delacour was a middle-aged woman of Jewish appearance. Mr. Alleyne was
said to be sweet on her or on her money. She came to the office often
and stayed a long time when she came. She was sitting beside his desk
now in an aroma of perfumes, smoothing the handle of her umbrella and
nodding the great black feather in her hat. Mr. Alleyne had swivelled
his chair round to face her and thrown his right foot jauntily upon
his left knee. The man put the correspondence on the desk and bowed
respectfully but neither Mr. Alleyne nor Miss Delacour took any notice
of his bow. Mr. Alleyne tapped a finger on the correspondence and then
flicked it towards him as if to say: "That's all right: you can go."

The man returned to the lower office and sat down again at his desk.
He stared intently at the incomplete phrase: In no case shall the said
Bernard Bodley be... and thought how strange it was that the last three
words began with the same letter. The chief clerk began to hurry Miss
Parker, saying she would never have the letters typed in time for post.
The man listened to the clicking of the machine for a few minutes and
then set to work to finish his copy. But his head was not clear and his
mind wandered away to the glare and rattle of the public-house. It was a
night for hot punches. He struggled on with his copy, but when the clock
struck five he had still fourteen pages to write. Blast it! He couldn't
finish it in time. He longed to execrate aloud, to bring his fist down
on something violently. He was so enraged that he wrote Bernard Bernard
instead of Bernard Bodley and had to begin again on a clean sheet.

He felt strong enough to clear out the whole office singlehanded. His
body ached to do something, to rush out and revel in violence. All
the indignities of his life enraged him.... Could he ask the cashier
privately for an advance? No, the cashier was no good, no damn good:
he wouldn't give an advance.... He knew where he would meet the boys:
Leonard and O'Halloran and Nosey Flynn. The barometer of his emotional
nature was set for a spell of riot.

His imagination had so abstracted him that his name was called twice
before he answered. Mr. Alleyne and Miss Delacour were standing outside
the counter and all the clerks had turn round in anticipation of
something. The man got up from his desk. Mr. Alleyne began a tirade of
abuse, saying that two letters were missing. The man answered that he
knew nothing about them, that he had made a faithful copy. The tirade
continued: it was so bitter and violent that the man could hardly
restrain his fist from descending upon the head of the manikin before
him.

"I know nothing about any other two letters," he said stupidly.

"You--know--nothing. Of course you know nothing," said Mr. Alleyne.
"Tell me," he added, glancing first for approval to the lady beside him,
"do you take me for a fool? Do you think me an utter fool?"

The man glanced from the lady's face to the little egg-shaped head and
back again; and, almost before he was aware of it, his tongue had found
a felicitous moment:

"I don't think, sir," he said, "that that's a fair question to put to
me."

There was a pause in the very breathing of the clerks. Everyone was
astounded (the author of the witticism no less than his neighbours) and
Miss Delacour, who was a stout amiable person, began to smile broadly.
Mr. Alleyne flushed to the hue of a wild rose and his mouth twitched
with a dwarf's passion. He shook his fist in the man's face till it
seemed to vibrate like the knob of some electric machine:

"You impertinent ruffian! You impertinent ruffian! I'll make short work
of you! Wait till you see! You'll apologise to me for your impertinence
or you'll quit the office instanter! You'll quit this, I'm telling you,
or you'll apologise to me!"

* * * * *

He stood in a doorway opposite the office watching to see if the cashier
would come out alone. All the clerks passed out and finally the cashier
came out with the chief clerk. It was no use trying to say a word to him
when he was with the chief clerk. The man felt that his position was bad
enough. He had been obliged to offer an abject apology to Mr. Alleyne
for his impertinence but he knew what a hornet's nest the office would
be for him. He could remember the way in which Mr. Alleyne had hounded
little Peake out of the office in order to make room for his own nephew.
He felt savage and thirsty and revengeful, annoyed with himself and with
everyone else. Mr. Alleyne would never give him an hour's rest; his life
would be a hell to him. He had made a proper fool of himself this time.
Could he not keep his tongue in his cheek? But they had never pulled
together from the first, he and Mr. Alleyne, ever since the day Mr.
Alleyne had overheard him mimicking his North of Ireland accent to amuse
Higgins and Miss Parker: that had been the beginning of it. He might
have tried Higgins for the money, but sure Higgins never had anything
for himself. A man with two establishments to keep up, of course he
couldn't....

He felt his great body again aching for the comfort of the public-house.
The fog had begun to chill him and he wondered could he touch Pat in
O'Neill's. He could not touch him for more than a bob--and a bob was
no use. Yet he must get money somewhere or other: he had spent his
last penny for the g.p. and soon it would be too late for getting money
anywhere. Suddenly, as he was fingering his watch-chain, he thought of
Terry Kelly's pawn-office in Fleet Street. That was the dart! Why didn't
he think of it sooner?

He went through the narrow alley of Temple Bar quickly, muttering to
himself that they could all go to hell because he was going to have
a good night of it. The clerk in Terry Kelly's said A crown! but the
consignor held out for six shillings; and in the end the six shillings
was allowed him literally. He came out of the pawn-office joyfully,
making a little cylinder, of the coins between his thumb and fingers. In
Westmoreland Street the footpaths were crowded with young men and women
returning from business and ragged urchins ran here and there yelling
out the names of the evening editions. The man passed through the crowd,
looking on the spectacle generally with proud satisfaction and staring
masterfully at the office-girls. His head was full of the noises of
tram-gongs and swishing trolleys and his nose already sniffed the
curling fumes of punch. As he walked on he preconsidered the terms in which
he would narrate the incident to the boys:

"So, I just looked at him--coolly, you know, and looked at her. Then I
looked back at him again--taking my time, you know. 'I don't think that
that's a fair question to put to me,' says I."

Nosey Flynn was sitting up in his usual corner of Davy Byrne's and, when
he heard the story, he stood Farrington a half-one, saying it was as
smart a thing as ever he heard. Farrington stood a drink in his turn.
After a while O'Halloran and Paddy Leonard came in and the story was
repeated to them. O'Halloran stood tailors of malt, hot, all round and
told the story of the retort he had made to the chief clerk when he was
in Callan's of Fownes's Street; but, as the retort was after the manner
of the liberal shepherds in the eclogues, he had to admit that it was
not as clever as Farrington's retort. At this Farrington told the boys
to polish off that and have another.

Just as they were naming their poisons who should come in but Higgins!
Of course he had to join in with the others. The men asked him to give
his version of it, and he did so with great vivacity for the sight of
five small hot whiskies was very exhilarating. Everyone roared
laughing when he showed the way in which Mr. Alleyne shook his fist in
Farrington's face. Then he imitated Farrington, saying, "And here was my
nabs, as cool as you please," while Farrington looked at the company out
of his heavy dirty eyes, smiling and at times drawing forth stray drops
of liquor from his moustache with the aid of his lower lip.

When that round was over there was a pause. O'Halloran had money but
neither of the other two seemed to have any; so the whole party left
the shop somewhat regretfully. At the corner of Duke Street Higgins and
Nosey Flynn bevelled off to the left while the other three turned back
towards the city. Rain was drizzling down on the cold streets and, when
they reached the Ballast Office, Farrington suggested the Scotch House.
The bar was full of men and loud with the noise of tongues and glasses.
The three men pushed past the whining match-sellers at the door and
formed a little party at the corner of the counter. They began to
exchange stories. Leonard introduced them to a young fellow named
Weathers who was performing at the Tivoli as an acrobat and knockabout
artiste. Farrington stood a drink all round. Weathers said he would take
a small Irish and Apollinaris. Farrington, who had definite notions of
what was what, asked the boys would they have an Apollinaris too;
but the boys told Tim to make theirs hot. The talk became theatrical.
O'Halloran stood a round and then Farrington stood another round,
Weathers protesting that the hospitality was too Irish. He promised to
get them in behind the scenes and introduce them to some nice girls.
O'Halloran said that he and Leonard would go, but that Farrington
wouldn't go because he was a married man; and Farrington's heavy dirty
eyes leered at the company in token that he understood he was being
chaffed. Weathers made them all have just one little tincture at his
expense and promised to meet them later on at Mulligan's in Poolbeg
Street.

When the Scotch House closed they went round to Mulligan's. They went
into the parlour at the back and O'Halloran ordered small hot specials
all round. They were all beginning to feel mellow. Farrington was just
standing another round when Weathers came back. Much to Farrington's
relief he drank a glass of bitter this time. Funds were getting low but
they had enough to keep them going. Presently two young women with big
hats and a young man in a check suit came in and sat at a table close
by. Weathers saluted them and told the company that they were out of the
Tivoli. Farrington's eyes wandered at every moment in the direction of
one of the young women. There was something striking in her appearance.
An immense scarf of peacock-blue muslin was wound round her hat and
knotted in a great bow under her chin; and she wore bright yellow
gloves, reaching to the elbow. Farrington gazed admiringly at the plump
arm which she moved very often and with much grace; and when, after a
little time, she answered his gaze he admired still more her large dark
brown eyes. The oblique staring expression in them fascinated him. She
glanced at him once or twice and, when the party was leaving the room,
she brushed against his chair and said "O, pardon!" in a London accent.
He watched her leave the room in the hope that she would look back at
him, but he was disappointed. He cursed his want of money and cursed all
the rounds he had stood, particularly all the whiskies and Apolinaris
which he had stood to Weathers. If there was one thing that he hated it
was a sponge. He was so angry that he lost count of the conversation of
his friends.

When Paddy Leonard called him he found that they were talking about
feats of strength. Weathers was showing his biceps muscle to the company
and boasting so much that the other two had called on Farrington to
uphold the national honour. Farrington pulled up his sleeve accordingly
and showed his biceps muscle to the company. The two arms were examined
and compared and finally it was agreed to have a trial of strength. The
table was cleared and the two men rested their elbows on it, clasping
hands. When Paddy Leonard said "Go!" each was to try to bring down
the other's hand on to the table. Farrington looked very serious and
determined.

The trial began. After about thirty seconds Weathers brought his
opponent's hand slowly down on to the table. Farrington's dark
wine-coloured face flushed darker still with anger and humiliation at
having been defeated by such a stripling.

"You're not to put the weight of your body behind it. Play fair," he
said.

"Who's not playing fair?" said the other.

"Come on again. The two best out of three."

The trial began again. The veins stood out on Farrington's forehead,
and the pallor of Weathers' complexion changed to peony. Their hands
and arms trembled under the stress. After a long struggle Weathers again
brought his opponent's hand slowly on to the table. There was a murmur
of applause from the spectators. The curate, who was standing beside
the table, nodded his red head towards the victor and said with stupid
familiarity:

"Ah! that's the knack!"

"What the hell do you know about it?" said Farrington fiercely, turning
on the man. "What do you put in your gab for?"

"Sh, sh!" said O'Halloran, observing the violent expression of
Farrington's face. "Pony up, boys. We'll have just one little smahan
more and then we'll be off."


A very sullen-faced man stood at the corner of O'Connell Bridge
waiting for the little Sandymount tram to take him home. He was full
of smouldering anger and revengefulness. He felt humiliated and
discontented; he did not even feel drunk; and he had only twopence in
his pocket. He cursed everything. He had done for himself in the office,
pawned his watch, spent all his money; and he had not even got drunk.
He began to feel thirsty again and he longed to be back again in the hot
reeking public-house. He had lost his reputation as a strong man, having
been defeated twice by a mere boy. His heart swelled with fury and, when
he thought of the woman in the big hat who had brushed against him and
said Pardon! his fury nearly choked him.

His tram let him down at Shelbourne Road and he steered his great body
along in the shadow of the wall of the barracks. He loathed returning
to his home. When he went in by the side-door he found the kitchen empty
and the kitchen fire nearly out. He bawled upstairs:

"Ada! Ada!"

His wife was a little sharp-faced woman who bullied her husband when
he was sober and was bullied by him when he was drunk. They had five
children. A little boy came running down the stairs.

"Who is that?" said the man, peering through the darkness.

"Me, pa."

"Who are you? Charlie?"

"No, pa. Tom."

"Where's your mother?"

"She's out at the chapel."

"That's right.... Did she think of leaving any dinner for me?"

"Yes, pa. I--"

"Light the lamp. What do you mean by having the place in darkness? Are
the other children in bed?"

The man sat down heavily on one of the chairs while the little boy
lit the lamp. He began to mimic his son's flat accent, saying half to
himself: "At the chapel. At the chapel, if you please!" When the lamp
was lit he banged his fist on the table and shouted:

"What's for my dinner?"

"I'm going... to cook it, pa," said the little boy.

The man jumped up furiously and pointed to the fire.

"On that fire! You let the fire out! By God, I'll teach you to do that
again!"

He took a step to the door and seized the walking-stick which was
standing behind it.

"I'll teach you to let the fire out!" he said, rolling up his sleeve in
order to give his arm free play.

The little boy cried "O, pa!" and ran whimpering round the table, but
the man followed him and caught him by the coat. The little boy looked
about him wildly but, seeing no way of escape, fell upon his knees.

"Now, you'll let the fire out the next time!" said the man striking at
him vigorously with the stick. "Take that, you little whelp!"

The boy uttered a squeal of pain as the stick cut his thigh. He clasped
his hands together in the air and his voice shook with fright.

"O, pa!" he cried. "Don't beat me, pa! And I'll... I'll say a Hail Mary
for you.... I'll say a Hail Mary for you, pa, if you don't beat me....
I'll say a Hail Mary...."




CLAY

THE matron had given her leave to go out as soon as the women's tea was
over and Maria looked forward to her evening out. The kitchen was
spick and span: the cook said you could see yourself in the big copper
boilers. The fire was nice and bright and on one of the side-tables were
four very big barmbracks. These barmbracks seemed uncut; but if you went
closer you would see that they had been cut into long thick even slices
and were ready to be handed round at tea. Maria had cut them herself.

Maria was a very, very small person indeed but she had a very long
nose and a very long chin. She talked a little through her nose, always
soothingly: "Yes, my dear," and "No, my dear." She was always sent for
when the women quarrelled over their tubs and always succeeded in making
peace. One day the matron had said to her:

"Maria, you are a veritable peace-maker!"

And the sub-matron and two of the Board ladies had heard the compliment.
And Ginger Mooney was always saying what she wouldn't do to the dummy
who had charge of the irons if it wasn't for Maria. Everyone was so fond
of Maria.

The women would have their tea at six o'clock and she would be able to
get away before seven. From Ballsbridge to the Pillar, twenty minutes;
from the Pillar to Drumcondra, twenty minutes; and twenty minutes to buy
the things. She would be there before eight. She took out her purse with
the silver clasps and read again the words A Present from Belfast. She
was very fond of that purse because Joe had brought it to her five years
before when he and Alphy had gone to Belfast on a Whit-Monday trip. In
the purse were two half-crowns and some coppers. She would have five
shillings clear after paying tram fare. What a nice evening they would
have, all the children singing! Only she hoped that Joe wouldn't come in
drunk. He was so different when he took any drink.

Often he had wanted her to go and live with them; but she would have
felt herself in the way (though Joe's wife was ever so nice with her)
and she had become accustomed to the life of the laundry. Joe was a good
fellow. She had nursed him and Alphy too; and Joe used often say:

"Mamma is mamma but Maria is my proper mother."

After the break-up at home the boys had got her that position in the
Dublin by Lamplight laundry, and she liked it. She used to have such
a bad opinion of Protestants but now she thought they were very nice
people, a little quiet and serious, but still very nice people to live
with. Then she had her plants in the conservatory and she liked looking
after them. She had lovely ferns and wax-plants and, whenever anyone
came to visit her, she always gave the visitor one or two slips from
her conservatory. There was one thing she didn't like and that was the
tracts on the walks; but the matron was such a nice person to deal with,
so genteel.

When the cook told her everything was ready she went into the women's
room and began to pull the big bell. In a few minutes the women began
to come in by twos and threes, wiping their steaming hands in their
petticoats and pulling down the sleeves of their blouses over their red
steaming arms. They settled down before their huge mugs which the cook
and the dummy filled up with hot tea, already mixed with milk and sugar
in huge tin cans. Maria superintended the distribution of the barmbrack
and saw that every woman got her four slices. There was a great deal of
laughing and joking during the meal. Lizzie Fleming said Maria was sure
to get the ring and, though Fleming had said that for so many Hallow
Eves, Maria had to laugh and say she didn't want any ring or man either;
and when she laughed her grey-green eyes sparkled with disappointed
shyness and the tip of her nose nearly met the tip of her chin. Then
Ginger Mooney lifted her mug of tea and proposed Maria's health while
all the other women clattered with their mugs on the table, and said she
was sorry she hadn't a sup of porter to drink it in. And Maria laughed
again till the tip of her nose nearly met the tip of her chin and till
her minute body nearly shook itself asunder because she knew that Mooney
meant well though, of course, she had the notions of a common woman.

But wasn't Maria glad when the women had finished their tea and the cook
and the dummy had begun to clear away the tea-things! She went into
her little bedroom and, remembering that the next morning was a mass
morning, changed the hand of the alarm from seven to six. Then she took
off her working skirt and her house-boots and laid her best skirt out on
the bed and her tiny dress-boots beside the foot of the bed. She changed
her blouse too and, as she stood before the mirror, she thought of how
she used to dress for mass on Sunday morning when she was a young girl;
and she looked with quaint affection at the diminutive body which she
had so often adorned. In spite of its years she found it a nice tidy
little body.

When she got outside the streets were shining with rain and she was glad
of her old brown waterproof. The tram was full and she had to sit on the
little stool at the end of the car, facing all the people, with her toes
barely touching the floor. She arranged in her mind all she was going to
do and thought how much better it was to be independent and to have your
own money in your pocket. She hoped they would have a nice evening. She
was sure they would but she could not help thinking what a pity it was
Alphy and Joe were not speaking. They were always falling out now but
when they were boys together they used to be the best of friends: but
such was life.

She got out of her tram at the Pillar and ferreted her way quickly among
the crowds. She went into Downes's cake-shop but the shop was so full of
people that it was a long time before she could get herself attended
to. She bought a dozen of mixed penny cakes, and at last came out of the
shop laden with a big bag. Then she thought what else would she buy: she
wanted to buy something really nice. They would be sure to have plenty
of apples and nuts. It was hard to know what to buy and all she could
think of was cake. She decided to buy some plumcake but Downes's
plumcake had not enough almond icing on top of it so she went over to
a shop in Henry Street. Here she was a long time in suiting herself and
the stylish young lady behind the counter, who was evidently a little
annoyed by her, asked her was it wedding-cake she wanted to buy. That
made Maria blush and smile at the young lady; but the young lady took it
all very seriously and finally cut a thick slice of plumcake, parcelled
it up and said:

"Two-and-four, please."

She thought she would have to stand in the Drumcondra tram because none
of the young men seemed to notice her but an elderly gentleman made room
for her. He was a stout gentleman and he wore a brown hard hat; he had
a square red face and a greyish moustache. Maria thought he was a
colonel-looking gentleman and she reflected how much more polite he was
than the young men who simply stared straight before them. The gentleman
began to chat with her about Hallow Eve and the rainy weather. He
supposed the bag was full of good things for the little ones and said
it was only right that the youngsters should enjoy themselves while they
were young. Maria agreed with him and favoured him with demure nods and
hems. He was very nice with her, and when she was getting out at the
Canal Bridge she thanked him and bowed, and he bowed to her and raised
his hat and smiled agreeably, and while she was going up along the
terrace, bending her tiny head under the rain, she thought how easy it
was to know a gentleman even when he has a drop taken.

Everybody said: "O, here's Maria!" when she came to Joe's house. Joe was
there, having come home from business, and all the children had their
Sunday dresses on. There were two big girls in from next door and games
were going on. Maria gave the bag of cakes to the eldest boy, Alphy, to
divide and Mrs. Donnelly said it was too good of her to bring such a big
bag of cakes and made all the children say:

"Thanks, Maria."

But Maria said she had brought something special for papa and mamma,
something they would be sure to like, and she began to look for her
plumcake. She tried in Downes's bag and then in the pockets of her
waterproof and then on the hallstand but nowhere could she find it.
Then she asked all the children had any of them eaten it--by mistake, of
course--but the children all said no and looked as if they did not like
to eat cakes if they were to be accused of stealing. Everybody had a
solution for the mystery and Mrs. Donnelly said it was plain that Maria
had left it behind her in the tram. Maria, remembering how confused the
gentleman with the greyish moustache had made her, coloured with shame
and vexation and disappointment. At the thought of the failure of her
little surprise and of the two and fourpence she had thrown away for
nothing she nearly cried outright.

But Joe said it didn't matter and made her sit down by the fire. He
was very nice with her. He told her all that went on in his office,
repeating for her a smart answer which he had made to the manager. Maria
did not understand why Joe laughed so much over the answer he had made
but she said that the manager must have been a very overbearing person
to deal with. Joe said he wasn't so bad when you knew how to take him,
that he was a decent sort so long as you didn't rub him the wrong way.
Mrs. Donnelly played the piano for the children and they danced and
sang. Then the two next-door girls handed round the nuts. Nobody could
find the nutcrackers and Joe was nearly getting cross over it and asked
how did they expect Maria to crack nuts without a nutcracker. But Maria
said she didn't like nuts and that they weren't to bother about her.
Then Joe asked would she take a bottle of stout and Mrs. Donnelly said
there was port wine too in the house if she would prefer that. Maria
said she would rather they didn't ask her to take anything: but Joe
insisted.

So Maria let him have his way and they sat by the fire talking over old
times and Maria thought she would put in a good word for Alphy. But Joe
cried that God might strike him stone dead if ever he spoke a word to
his brother again and Maria said she was sorry she had mentioned the
matter. Mrs. Donnelly told her husband it was a great shame for him to
speak that way of his own flesh and blood but Joe said that Alphy was no
brother of his and there was nearly being a row on the head of it. But
Joe said he would not lose his temper on account of the night it was
and asked his wife to open some more stout. The two next-door girls
had arranged some Hallow Eve games and soon everything was merry again.
Maria was delighted to see the children so merry and Joe and his wife in
such good spirits. The next-door girls put some saucers on the table
and then led the children up to the table, blindfold. One got the
prayer-book and the other three got the water; and when one of the
next-door girls got the ring Mrs. Donnelly shook her finger at the
blushing girl as much as to say: O, I know all about it! They insisted
then on blindfolding Maria and leading her up to the table to see
what she would get; and, while they were putting on the bandage, Maria
laughed and laughed again till the tip of her nose nearly met the tip of
her chin.

They led her up to the table amid laughing and joking and she put her
hand out in the air as she was told to do. She moved her hand about here
and there in the air and descended on one of the saucers. She felt a
soft wet substance with her fingers and was surprised that nobody spoke
or took off her bandage. There was a pause for a few seconds; and then
a great deal of scuffling and whispering. Somebody said something about
the garden, and at last Mrs. Donnelly said something very cross to one
of the next-door girls and told her to throw it out at once: that was no
play. Maria understood that it was wrong that time and so she had to do
it over again: and this time she got the prayer-book.

After that Mrs. Donnelly played Miss McCloud's Reel for the children
and Joe made Maria take a glass of wine. Soon they were all quite merry
again and Mrs. Donnelly said Maria would enter a convent before the year
was out because she had got the prayer-book. Maria had never seen Joe
so nice to her as he was that night, so full of pleasant talk and
reminiscences. She said they were all very good to her.

At last the children grew tired and sleepy and Joe asked Maria would she
not sing some little song before she went, one of the old songs. Mrs.
Donnelly said "Do, please, Maria!" and so Maria had to get up and stand
beside the piano. Mrs. Donnelly bade the children be quiet and listen
to Maria's song. Then she played the prelude and said "Now, Maria!" and
Maria, blushing very much began to sing in a tiny quavering voice. She
sang I Dreamt that I Dwelt, and when she came to the second verse she
sang again:


            I dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls
              With vassals and serfs at my side,
            And of all who assembled within those walls
              That I was the hope and the pride.

            I had riches too great to count; could boast
              Of a high ancestral name,
            But I also dreamt, which pleased me most,
              That you loved me still the same.


But no one tried to show her her mistake; and when she had ended her
song Joe was very much moved. He said that there was no time like the
long ago and no music for him like poor old Balfe, whatever other people
might say; and his eyes filled up so much with tears that he could not
find what he was looking for and in the end he had to ask his wife to
tell him where the corkscrew was.




A PAINFUL CASE

MR. JAMES DUFFY lived in Chapelizod because he wished to live as far as
possible from the city of which he was a citizen and because he found
all the other suburbs of Dublin mean, modern and pretentious. He lived
in an old sombre house and from his windows he could look into the
disused distillery or upwards along the shallow river on which Dublin is
built. The lofty walls of his uncarpeted room were free from pictures.
He had himself bought every article of furniture in the room: a black
iron bedstead, an iron washstand, four cane chairs, a clothes-rack,
a coal-scuttle, a fender and irons and a square table on which lay a
double desk. A bookcase had been made in an alcove by means of shelves
of white wood. The bed was clothed with white bedclothes and a black
and scarlet rug covered the foot. A little hand-mirror hung above the
washstand and during the day a white-shaded lamp stood as the sole
ornament of the mantelpiece. The books on the white wooden shelves were
arranged from below upwards according to bulk. A complete Wordsworth
stood at one end of the lowest shelf and a copy of the Maynooth
Catechism, sewn into the cloth cover of a notebook, stood at one end of
the top shelf. Writing materials were always on the desk. In the desk
lay a manuscript translation of Hauptmann's Michael Kramer, the stage
directions of which were written in purple ink, and a little sheaf of
papers held together by a brass pin. In these sheets a sentence was
inscribed from time to time and, in an ironical moment, the headline of
an advertisement for Bile Beans had been pasted on to the first sheet.
On lifting the lid of the desk a faint fragrance escaped--the fragrance
of new cedarwood pencils or of a bottle of gum or of an overripe apple
which might have been left there and forgotten.

Mr. Duffy abhorred anything which betokened physical or mental disorder.
A mediaeval doctor would have called him saturnine. His face, which
carried the entire tale of his years, was of the brown tint of Dublin
streets. On his long and rather large head grew dry black hair and a
tawny moustache did not quite cover an unamiable mouth. His cheekbones
also gave his face a harsh character; but there was no harshness in the
eyes which, looking at the world from under their tawny eyebrows, gave
the impression of a man ever alert to greet a redeeming instinct in
others but often disappointed. He lived at a little distance from his
body, regarding his own acts with doubtful side-glances. He had an odd
autobiographical habit which led him to compose in his mind from time
to time a short sentence about himself containing a subject in the third
person and a predicate in the past tense. He never gave alms to beggars
and walked firmly, carrying a stout hazel.

He had been for many years cashier of a private bank in Baggot Street.
Every morning he came in from Chapelizod by tram. At midday he went
to Dan Burke's and took his lunch--a bottle of lager beer and a small
trayful of arrowroot biscuits. At four o'clock he was set free. He dined
in an eating-house in George's Street where he felt himself safe from
the society of Dublin's gilded youth and where there was a certain plain
honesty in the bill of fare. His evenings were spent either before his
landlady's piano or roaming about the outskirts of the city. His liking
for Mozart's music brought him sometimes to an opera or a concert: these
were the only dissipations of his life.

He had neither companions nor friends, church nor creed. He lived his
spiritual life without any communion with others, visiting his relatives
at Christmas and escorting them to the cemetery when they died. He
performed these two social duties for old dignity's sake but conceded
nothing further to the conventions which regulate the civic life. He
allowed himself to think that in certain circumstances he would rob
his hank but, as these circumstances never arose, his life rolled out
evenly--an adventureless tale.

One evening he found himself sitting beside two ladies in the Rotunda.
The house, thinly peopled and silent, gave distressing prophecy of
failure. The lady who sat next him looked round at the deserted house
once or twice and then said:

"What a pity there is such a poor house tonight! It's so hard on people
to have to sing to empty benches."

He took the remark as an invitation to talk. He was surprised that
she seemed so little awkward. While they talked he tried to fix her
permanently in his memory. When he learned that the young girl beside
her was her daughter he judged her to be a year or so younger than
himself. Her face, which must have been handsome, had remained
intelligent. It was an oval face with strongly marked features. The eyes
were very dark blue and steady. Their gaze began with a defiant note
but was confused by what seemed a deliberate swoon of the pupil into the
iris, revealing for an instant a temperament of great sensibility. The
pupil reasserted itself quickly, this half-disclosed nature fell again
under the reign of prudence, and her astrakhan jacket, moulding a bosom
of a certain fullness, struck the note of defiance more definitely.

He met her again a few weeks afterwards at a concert in Earlsfort
Terrace and seized the moments when her daughter's attention was
diverted to become intimate. She alluded once or twice to her husband
but her tone was not such as to make the allusion a warning. Her name
was Mrs. Sinico. Her husband's great-great-grandfather had come from
Leghorn. Her husband was captain of a mercantile boat plying between
Dublin and Holland; and they had one child.

Meeting her a third time by accident he found courage to make an
appointment. She came. This was the first of many meetings; they met
always in the evening and chose the most quiet quarters for their walks
together. Mr. Duffy, however, had a distaste for underhand ways and,
finding that they were compelled to meet stealthily, he forced her to
ask him to her house. Captain Sinico encouraged his visits, thinking
that his daughter's hand was in question. He had dismissed his wife so
sincerely from his gallery of pleasures that he did not suspect that
anyone else would take an interest in her. As the husband was often
away and the daughter out giving music lessons Mr. Duffy had many
opportunities of enjoying the lady's society. Neither he nor she had had
any such adventure before and neither was conscious of any incongruity.
Little by little he entangled his thoughts with hers. He lent her books,
provided her with ideas, shared his intellectual life with her. She
listened to all.

Sometimes in return for his theories she gave out some fact of her own
life. With almost maternal solicitude she urged him to let his nature
open to the full: she became his confessor. He told her that for some
time he had assisted at the meetings of an Irish Socialist Party where
he had felt himself a unique figure amidst a score of sober workmen in
a garret lit by an inefficient oil-lamp. When the party had divided into
three sections, each under its own leader and in its own garret, he had
discontinued his attendances. The workmen's discussions, he said,
were too timorous; the interest they took in the question of wages was
inordinate. He felt that they were hard-featured realists and that they
resented an exactitude which was the produce of a leisure not within
their reach. No social revolution, he told her, would be likely to
strike Dublin for some centuries.

She asked him why did he not write out his thoughts. For what, he asked
her, with careful scorn. To compete with phrasemongers, incapable of
thinking consecutively for sixty seconds? To submit himself to the
criticisms of an obtuse middle class which entrusted its morality to
policemen and its fine arts to impresarios?

He went often to her little cottage outside Dublin; often they spent
their evenings alone. Little by little, as their thoughts entangled,
they spoke of subjects less remote. Her companionship was like a warm
soil about an exotic. Many times she allowed the dark to fall upon
them, refraining from lighting the lamp. The dark discreet room, their
isolation, the music that still vibrated in their ears united them.
This union exalted him, wore away the rough edges of his character,
emotionalised his mental life. Sometimes he caught himself listening to
the sound of his own voice. He thought that in her eyes he would ascend
to an angelical stature; and, as he attached the fervent nature of his
companion more and more closely to him, he heard the strange impersonal
voice which he recognised as his own, insisting on the soul's incurable
loneliness. We cannot give ourselves, it said: we are our own. The end
of these discourses was that one night during which she had shown every
sign of unusual excitement, Mrs. Sinico caught up his hand passionately
and pressed it to her cheek.

Mr. Duffy was very much surprised. Her interpretation of his words
disillusioned him. He did not visit her for a week, then he wrote to her
asking her to meet him. As he did not wish their last interview to be
troubled by the influence of their ruined confessional they met in a
little cakeshop near the Parkgate. It was cold autumn weather but in
spite of the cold they wandered up and down the roads of the Park for
nearly three hours. They agreed to break off their intercourse: every
bond, he said, is a bond to sorrow. When they came out of the Park they
walked in silence towards the tram; but here she began to tremble
so violently that, fearing another collapse on her part, he bade her
good-bye quickly and left her. A few days later he received a parcel
containing his books and music.

Four years passed. Mr. Duffy returned to his even way of life. His room
still bore witness of the orderliness of his mind. Some new pieces of
music encumbered the music-stand in the lower room and on his shelves
stood two volumes by Nietzsche: Thus Spake Zarathustra and The Gay
Science. He wrote seldom in the sheaf of papers which lay in his desk.
One of his sentences, written two months after his last interview with
Mrs. Sinico, read: Love between man and man is impossible because there
must not be sexual intercourse and friendship between man and woman is
impossible because there must be sexual intercourse. He kept away from
concerts lest he should meet her. His father died; the junior partner of
the bank retired. And still every morning he went into the city by
tram and every evening walked home from the city after having dined
moderately in George's Street and read the evening paper for dessert.

One evening as he was about to put a morsel of corned beef and cabbage
into his mouth his hand stopped. His eyes fixed themselves on a
paragraph in the evening paper which he had propped against the
water-carafe. He replaced the morsel of food on his plate and read the
paragraph attentively. Then he drank a glass of water, pushed his plate
to one side, doubled the paper down before him between his elbows and
read the paragraph over and over again. The cabbage began to deposit a
cold white grease on his plate. The girl came over to him to ask was
his dinner not properly cooked. He said it was very good and ate a few
mouthfuls of it with difficulty. Then he paid his bill and went out.

He walked along quickly through the November twilight, his stout hazel
stick striking the ground regularly, the fringe of the buff Mail peeping
out of a side-pocket of his tight reefer overcoat. On the lonely road
which leads from the Parkgate to Chapelizod he slackened his pace.
His stick struck the ground less emphatically and his breath, issuing
irregularly, almost with a sighing sound, condensed in the wintry air.
When he reached his house he went up at once to his bedroom and, taking
the paper from his pocket, read the paragraph again by the failing light
of the window. He read it not aloud, but moving his lips as a priest
does when he reads the prayers Secreto. This was the paragraph:


               DEATH OF A LADY AT SYDNEY PARADE
                       A PAINFUL CASE


Today at the City of Dublin Hospital the Deputy Coroner (in the absence
of Mr. Leverett) held an inquest on the body of Mrs. Emily Sinico, aged
forty-three years, who was killed at Sydney Parade Station yesterday
evening. The evidence showed that the deceased lady, while attempting to
cross the line, was knocked down by the engine of the ten o'clock slow
train from Kingstown, thereby sustaining injuries of the head and right
side which led to her death.

James Lennon, driver of the engine, stated that he had been in the
employment of the railway company for fifteen years. On hearing
the guard's whistle he set the train in motion and a second or two
afterwards brought it to rest in response to loud cries. The train was
going slowly.

P. Dunne, railway porter, stated that as the train was about to start he
observed a woman attempting to cross the lines. He ran towards her and
shouted, but, before he could reach her, she was caught by the buffer of
the engine and fell to the ground.

A juror. "You saw the lady fall?"

Witness. "Yes."

Police Sergeant Croly deposed that when he arrived he found the deceased
lying on the platform apparently dead. He had the body taken to the
waiting-room pending the arrival of the ambulance.

Constable 57E corroborated.

Dr. Halpin, assistant house surgeon of the City of Dublin Hospital,
stated that the deceased had two lower ribs fractured and had sustained
severe contusions of the right shoulder. The right side of the head
had been injured in the fall. The injuries were not sufficient to
have caused death in a normal person. Death, in his opinion, had been
probably due to shock and sudden failure of the heart's action.

Mr. H. B. Patterson Finlay, on behalf of the railway company, expressed
his deep regret at the accident. The company had always taken every
precaution to prevent people crossing the lines except by the bridges,
both by placing notices in every station and by the use of patent spring
gates at level crossings. The deceased had been in the habit of crossing
the lines late at night from platform to platform and, in view of
certain other circumstances of the case, he did not think the railway
officials were to blame.

Captain Sinico, of Leoville, Sydney Parade, husband of the deceased,
also gave evidence. He stated that the deceased was his wife. He was
not in Dublin at the time of the accident as he had arrived only that
morning from Rotterdam. They had been married for twenty-two years and
had lived happily until about two years ago when his wife began to be
rather intemperate in her habits.

Miss Mary Sinico said that of late her mother had been in the habit
of going out at night to buy spirits. She, witness, had often tried to
reason with her mother and had induced her to join a league. She was not
at home until an hour after the accident. The jury returned a verdict
in accordance with the medical evidence and exonerated Lennon from all
blame.

The Deputy Coroner said it was a most painful case, and expressed great
sympathy with Captain Sinico and his daughter. He urged on the railway
company to take strong measures to prevent the possibility of similar
accidents in the future. No blame attached to anyone.


Mr. Duffy raised his eyes from the paper and gazed out of his window on
the cheerless evening landscape. The river lay quiet beside the empty
distillery and from time to time a light appeared in some house on the
Lucan road. What an end! The whole narrative of her death revolted him
and it revolted him to think that he had ever spoken to her of what he
held sacred. The threadbare phrases, the inane expressions of sympathy,
the cautious words of a reporter won over to conceal the details of
a commonplace vulgar death attacked his stomach. Not merely had she
degraded herself; she had degraded him. He saw the squalid tract of her
vice, miserable and malodorous. His soul's companion! He thought of
the hobbling wretches whom he had seen carrying cans and bottles to
be filled by the barman. Just God, what an end! Evidently she had been
unfit to live, without any strength of purpose, an easy prey to habits,
one of the wrecks on which civilisation has been reared. But that she
could have sunk so low! Was it possible he had deceived himself
so utterly about her? He remembered her outburst of that night and
interpreted it in a harsher sense than he had ever done. He had no
difficulty now in approving of the course he had taken.

As the light failed and his memory began to wander he thought her hand
touched his. The shock which had first attacked his stomach was now
attacking his nerves. He put on his overcoat and hat quickly and went
out. The cold air met him on the threshold; it crept into the sleeves of
his coat. When he came to the public-house at Chapelizod Bridge he went
in and ordered a hot punch.

The proprietor served him obsequiously but did not venture to talk.
There were five or six workingmen in the shop discussing the value of a
gentleman's estate in County Kildare They drank at intervals from their
huge pint tumblers and smoked, spitting often on the floor and sometimes
dragging the sawdust over their spits with their heavy boots. Mr. Duffy
sat on his stool and gazed at them, without seeing or hearing them.
After a while they went out and he called for another punch. He sat a
long time over it. The shop was very quiet. The proprietor sprawled on
the counter reading the Herald and yawning. Now and again a tram was
heard swishing along the lonely road outside.

As he sat there, living over his life with her and evoking alternately
the two images in which he now conceived her, he realised that she was
dead, that she had ceased to exist, that she had become a memory. He
began to feel ill at ease. He asked himself what else could he have
done. He could not have carried on a comedy of deception with her; he
could not have lived with her openly. He had done what seemed to him
best. How was he to blame? Now that she was gone he understood how
lonely her life must have been, sitting night after night alone in that
room. His life would be lonely too until he, too, died, ceased to exist,
became a memory--if anyone remembered him.

It was after nine o'clock when he left the shop. The night was cold and
gloomy. He entered the Park by the first gate and walked along under the
gaunt trees. He walked through the bleak alleys where they had walked
four years before. She seemed to be near him in the darkness. At moments
he seemed to feel her voice touch his ear, her hand touch his. He stood
still to listen. Why had he withheld life from her? Why had he sentenced
her to death? He felt his moral nature falling to pieces.

When he gained the crest of the Magazine Hill he halted and looked
along the river towards Dublin, the lights of which burned redly and
hospitably in the cold night. He looked down the slope and, at the base,
in the shadow of the wall of the Park, he saw some human figures lying.
Those venal and furtive loves filled him with despair. He gnawed the
rectitude of his life; he felt that he had been outcast from life's
feast. One human being had seemed to love him and he had denied her life
and happiness: he had sentenced her to ignominy, a death of shame. He
knew that the prostrate creatures down by the wall were watching him and
wished him gone. No one wanted him; he was outcast from life's feast.
He turned his eyes to the grey gleaming river, winding along towards
Dublin. Beyond the river he saw a goods train winding out of Kingsbridge
Station, like a worm with a fiery head winding through the darkness,
obstinately and laboriously. It passed slowly out of sight; but still
he heard in his ears the laborious drone of the engine reiterating the
syllables of her name.

He turned back the way he had come, the rhythm of the engine pounding
in his ears. He began to doubt the reality of what memory told him. He
halted under a tree and allowed the rhythm to die away. He could not
feel her near him in the darkness nor her voice touch his ear. He
waited for some minutes listening. He could hear nothing: the night was
perfectly silent. He listened again: perfectly silent. He felt that he
was alone.




IVY DAY IN THE COMMITTEE ROOM

OLD JACK raked the cinders together with a piece of cardboard and spread
them judiciously over the whitening dome of coals. When the dome was
thinly covered his face lapsed into darkness but, as he set himself to
fan the fire again, his crouching shadow ascended the opposite wall and
his face slowly re-emerged into light. It was an old man's face, very
bony and hairy. The moist blue eyes blinked at the fire and the moist
mouth fell open at times, munching once or twice mechanically when
it closed. When the cinders had caught he laid the piece of cardboard
against the wall, sighed and said:

"That's better now, Mr. O'Connor."

Mr. O'Connor, a grey-haired young man, whose face was disfigured by many
blotches and pimples, had just brought the tobacco for a cigarette
into a shapely cylinder but when spoken to he undid his handiwork
meditatively. Then he began to roll the tobacco again meditatively and
after a moment's thought decided to lick the paper.

"Did Mr. Tierney say when he'd be back?" he asked in a husky falsetto.

"He didn't say."

Mr. O'Connor put his cigarette into his mouth and began search his
pockets. He took out a pack of thin pasteboard cards.

"I'll get you a match," said the old man.

"Never mind, this'll do," said Mr. O'Connor.

He selected one of the cards and read what was printed on it:


      MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
           ----------
      ROYAL EXCHANGE WARD
           ----------

Mr. Richard J. Tierney, P.L.G., respectfully solicits the favour of your
vote and influence at the coming election in the Royal Exchange Ward.


Mr. O'Connor had been engaged by Tierney's agent to canvass one part of
the ward but, as the weather was inclement and his boots let in the wet,
he spent a great part of the day sitting by the fire in the Committee
Room in Wicklow Street with Jack, the old caretaker. They had been
sitting thus since the short day had grown dark. It was the sixth of
October, dismal and cold out of doors.

Mr. O'Connor tore a strip off the card and, lighting it, lit his
cigarette. As he did so the flame lit up a leaf of dark glossy ivy the
lapel of his coat. The old man watched him attentively and then, taking
up the piece of cardboard again, began to fan the fire slowly while his
companion smoked.

"Ah, yes," he said, continuing, "it's hard to know what way to bring
up children. Now who'd think he'd turn out like that! I sent him to
the Christian Brothers and I done what I could for him, and there he goes
boosing about. I tried to make him someway decent."

He replaced the cardboard wearily.

"Only I'm an old man now I'd change his tune for him. I'd take the stick
to his back and beat him while I could stand over him--as I done many
a time before. The mother, you know, she cocks him up with this and
that...."

"That's what ruins children," said Mr. O'Connor.

"To be sure it is," said the old man. "And little thanks you get for it,
only impudence. He takes th'upper hand of me whenever he sees I've a
sup taken. What's the world coming to when sons speaks that way to their
father?"

"What age is he?" said Mr. O'Connor.

"Nineteen," said the old man.

"Why don't you put him to something?"

"Sure, amn't I never done at the drunken bowsy ever since he left
school? 'I won't keep you,' I says. 'You must get a job for yourself.'
But, sure, it's worse whenever he gets a job; he drinks it all."

Mr. O'Connor shook his head in sympathy, and the old man fell silent,
gazing into the fire. Someone opened the door of the room and called
out:

"Hello! Is this a Freemasons' meeting?"

"Who's that?" said the old man.

"What are you doing in the dark?" asked a voice.

"Is that you, Hynes?" asked Mr. O'Connor.

"Yes. What are you doing in the dark?" said Mr. Hynes. advancing into
the light of the fire.

He was a tall, slender young man with a light brown moustache. Imminent
little drops of rain hung at the brim of his hat and the collar of his
jacket-coat was turned up.

"Well, Mat," he said to Mr. O'Connor, "how goes it?"

Mr. O'Connor shook his head. The old man left the hearth and, after
stumbling about the room returned with two candlesticks which he thrust
one after the other into the fire and carried to the table. A denuded
room came into view and the fire lost all its cheerful colour. The walls
of the room were bare except for a copy of an election address. In the
middle of the room was a small table on which papers were heaped.

Mr. Hynes leaned against the mantelpiece and asked:

"Has he paid you yet?"

"Not yet," said Mr. O'Connor. "I hope to God he'll not leave us in the
lurch tonight."

Mr. Hynes laughed.

"O, he'll pay you. Never fear," he said.

"I hope he'll look smart about it if he means business," said Mr.
O'Connor.

"What do you think, Jack?" said Mr. Hynes satirically to the old man.

The old man returned to his seat by the fire, saying:

"It isn't but he has it, anyway. Not like the other tinker."

"What other tinker?" said Mr. Hynes.

"Colgan," said the old man scornfully.

"It is because Colgan's a working-man you say that? What's the
difference between a good honest bricklayer and a publican--eh? Hasn't
the working-man as good a right to be in the Corporation as anyone
else--ay, and a better right than those shoneens that are always hat in
hand before any fellow with a handle to his name? Isn't that so, Mat?"
said Mr. Hynes, addressing Mr. O'Connor.

"I think you're right," said Mr. O'Connor.

"One man is a plain honest man with no hunker-sliding about him. He goes
in to represent the labour classes. This fellow you're working for only
wants to get some job or other."

"Of course, the working-classes should be represented," said the old
man.

"The working-man," said Mr. Hynes, "gets all kicks and no halfpence. But
it's labour produces everything. The working-man is not looking for fat
jobs for his sons and nephews and cousins. The working-man is not going
to drag the honour of Dublin in the mud to please a German monarch."

"How's that?" said the old man.

"Don't you know they want to present an address of welcome to Edward
Rex if he comes here next year? What do we want kowtowing to a foreign
king?"

"Our man won't vote for the address," said Mr. O'Connor. "He goes in on
the Nationalist ticket."

"Won't he?" said Mr. Hynes. "Wait till you see whether he will or not. I
know him. Is it Tricky Dicky Tierney?"

"By God! perhaps you're right, Joe," said Mr. O'Connor. "Anyway, I wish
he'd turn up with the spondulics."

The three men fell silent. The old man began to rake more cinders
together. Mr. Hynes took off his hat, shook it and then turned down the
collar of his coat, displaying, as he did so, an ivy leaf in the lapel.

"If this man was alive," he said, pointing to the leaf, "we'd have no
talk of an address of welcome."

"That's true," said Mr. O'Connor.

"Musha, God be with them times!" said the old man. "There was some life
in it then."

The room was silent again. Then a bustling little man with a snuffling
nose and very cold ears pushed in the door. He walked over quickly to
the fire, rubbing his hands as if he intended to produce a spark from
them.

"No money, boys," he said.

"Sit down here, Mr. Henchy," said the old man, offering him his chair.

"O, don't stir, Jack, don't stir," said Mr. Henchy

He nodded curtly to Mr. Hynes and sat down on the chair which the old
man vacated.

"Did you serve Aungier Street?" he asked Mr. O'Connor.

"Yes," said Mr. O'Connor, beginning to search his pockets for memoranda.

"Did you call on Grimes?"

"I did."

"Well? How does he stand?"

"He wouldn't promise. He said: 'I won't tell anyone what way I'm going
to vote.' But I think he'll be all right."

"Why so?"

"He asked me who the nominators were; and I told him. I mentioned Father
Burke's name. I think it'll be all right."

Mr. Henchy began to snuffle and to rub his hands over the fire at a
terrific speed. Then he said:

"For the love of God, Jack, bring us a bit of coal. There must be some
left."

The old man went out of the room.

"It's no go," said Mr. Henchy, shaking his head. "I asked the little
shoeboy, but he said: 'Oh, now, Mr. Henchy, when I see work going on
properly I won't forget you, you may be sure.' Mean little tinker!
'Usha, how could he be anything else?"

"What did I tell you, Mat?" said Mr. Hynes. "Tricky Dicky Tierney."

"O, he's as tricky as they make 'em," said Mr. Henchy. "He hasn't got
those little pigs' eyes for nothing. Blast his soul! Couldn't he pay
up like a man instead of: 'O, now, Mr. Henchy, I must speak to Mr.
Fanning.... I've spent a lot of money'? Mean little school-boy of hell! I
suppose he forgets the time his little old father kept the hand-me-down
shop in Mary's Lane."

"But is that a fact?" asked Mr. O'Connor.

"God, yes," said Mr. Henchy. "Did you never hear that? And the men
used to go in on Sunday morning before the houses were open to buy a
waistcoat or a trousers--moya! But Tricky Dicky's little old father
always had a tricky little black bottle up in a corner. Do you mind now?
That's that. That's where he first saw the light."

The old man returned with a few lumps of coal which he placed here and
there on the fire.

"Thats a nice how-do-you-do," said Mr. O'Connor. "How does he expect us
to work for him if he won't stump up?"

"I can't help it," said Mr. Henchy. "I expect to find the bailiffs in
the hall when I go home."

Mr. Hynes laughed and, shoving himself away from the mantelpiece with
the aid of his shoulders, made ready to leave.

"It'll be all right when King Eddie comes," he said. "Well boys, I'm off
for the present. See you later. 'Bye, 'bye."

He went out of the room slowly. Neither Mr. Henchy nor the old man said
anything, but, just as the door was closing, Mr. O'Connor, who had been
staring moodily into the fire, called out suddenly:

"'Bye, Joe."

Mr. Henchy waited a few moments and then nodded in the direction of the
door.

"Tell me," he said across the fire, "what brings our friend in here?
What does he want?"

"'Usha, poor Joe!" said Mr. O'Connor, throwing the end of his cigarette
into the fire, "he's hard up, like the rest of us."

Mr. Henchy snuffled vigorously and spat so copiously that he nearly put
out the fire, which uttered a hissing protest.

"To tell you my private and candid opinion," he said, "I think he's a
man from the other camp. He's a spy of Colgan's, if you ask me. Just go
round and try and find out how they're getting on. They won't suspect
you. Do you twig?"

"Ah, poor Joe is a decent skin," said Mr. O'Connor.

"His father was a decent, respectable man," Mr. Henchy admitted. "Poor
old Larry Hynes! Many a good turn he did in his day! But I'm greatly
afraid our friend is not nineteen carat. Damn it, I can understand a
fellow being hard up, but what I can't understand is a fellow sponging.
Couldn't he have some spark of manhood about him?"

"He doesn't get a warm welcome from me when he comes," said the old man.
"Let him work for his own side and not come spying around here."

"I don't know," said Mr. O'Connor dubiously, as he took out
cigarette-papers and tobacco. "I think Joe Hynes is a straight man.
He's a clever chap, too, with the pen. Do you remember that thing he
wrote...?"

"Some of these hillsiders and fenians are a bit too clever if you ask me,"
said Mr. Henchy. "Do you know what my private and candid opinion is
about some of those little jokers? I believe half of them are in the pay
of the Castle."

"There's no knowing," said the old man.

"O, but I know it for a fact," said Mr. Henchy. "They're Castle
hacks.... I don't say Hynes.... No, damn it, I think he's a stroke above
that.... But there's a certain little nobleman with a cock-eye--you know
the patriot I'm alluding to?"

Mr. O'Connor nodded.

"There's a lineal descendant of Major Sirr for you if you like! O, the
heart's blood of a patriot! That's a fellow now that'd sell his country
for fourpence--ay--and go down on his bended knees and thank the
Almighty Christ he had a country to sell."

There was a knock at the door.

"Come in!" said Mr. Henchy.

A person resembling a poor clergyman or a poor actor appeared in the
doorway. His black clothes were tightly buttoned on his short body
and it was impossible to say whether he wore a clergyman's collar or
a layman's, because the collar of his shabby frock-coat, the uncovered
buttons of which reflected the candlelight, was turned up about his
neck. He wore a round hat of hard black felt. His face, shining with
raindrops, had the appearance of damp yellow cheese save where two rosy
spots indicated the cheekbones. He opened his very long mouth suddenly
to express disappointment and at the same time opened wide his very
bright blue eyes to express pleasure and surprise.

"O Father Keon!" said Mr. Henchy, jumping up from his chair. "Is that
you? Come in!"

"O, no, no, no!" said Father Keon quickly, pursing his lips as if he
were addressing a child.

"Won't you come in and sit down?"

"No, no, no!" said Father Keon, speaking in a discreet, indulgent,
velvety voice. "Don't let me disturb you now! I'm just looking for Mr.
Fanning...."

"He's round at the Black Eagle," said Mr. Henchy. "But won't you come in
and sit down a minute?"

"No, no, thank you. It was just a little business matter," said Father
Keon. "Thank you, indeed."

He retreated from the doorway and Mr. Henchy, seizing one of the
candlesticks, went to the door to light him downstairs.

"O, don't trouble, I beg!"

"No, but the stairs is so dark."

"No, no, I can see.... Thank you, indeed."

"Are you right now?"

"All right, thanks.... Thanks."

Mr. Henchy returned with the candlestick and put it on the table. He sat
down again at the fire. There was silence for a few moments.

"Tell me, John," said Mr. O'Connor, lighting his cigarette with another
pasteboard card.

"Hm?"

"What he is exactly?"

"Ask me an easier one," said Mr. Henchy.

"Fanning and himself seem to me very thick. They're often in Kavanagh's
together. Is he a priest at all?"

"Mmmyes, I believe so.... I think he's what you call a black sheep.
We haven't many of them, thank God! but we have a few.... He's an
unfortunate man of some kind...."

"And how does he knock it out?" asked Mr. O'Connor.

"That's another mystery."

"Is he attached to any chapel or church or institution or----"

"No," said Mr. Henchy, "I think he's travelling on his own account....
God forgive me," he added, "I thought he was the dozen of stout."

"Is there any chance of a drink itself?" asked Mr. O'Connor.

"I'm dry too," said the old man.

"I asked that little shoeboy three times," said Mr. Henchy, "would he
send up a dozen of stout. I asked him again now, but he was leaning
on the counter in his shirt-sleeves having a deep goster with Alderman
Cowley."

"Why didn't you remind him?" said Mr. O'Connor.

"Well, I couldn't go over while he was talking to Alderman Cowley. I
just waited till I caught his eye, and said: 'About that little matter I
was speaking to you about....' 'That'll be all right, Mr. H.,' he said.
Yerra, sure the little hop-o'-my-thumb has forgotten all about it."

"There's some deal on in that quarter," said Mr. O'Connor thoughtfully.
"I saw the three of them hard at it yesterday at Suffolk Street corner."

"I think I know the little game they're at," said Mr. Henchy. "You must
owe the City Fathers money nowadays if you want to be made Lord Mayor.
Then they'll make you Lord Mayor. By God! I'm thinking seriously of
becoming a City Father myself. What do you think? Would I do for the
job?"

Mr. O'Connor laughed.

"So far as owing money goes...."

"Driving out of the Mansion House," said Mr. Henchy, "in all my vermin,
with Jack here standing up behind me in a powdered wig--eh?"

"And make me your private secretary, John."

"Yes. And I'll make Father Keon my private chaplain. We'll have a family
party."

"Faith, Mr. Henchy," said the old man, "you'd keep up better style than
some of them. I was talking one day to old Keegan, the porter. 'And
how do you like your new master, Pat?' says I to him. 'You haven't much
entertaining now,' says I. 'Entertaining!' says he. 'He'd live on the
smell of an oil-rag.' And do you know what he told me? Now, I declare to
God I didn't believe him."

"What?" said Mr. Henchy and Mr. O'Connor.

"He told me: 'What do you think of a Lord Mayor of Dublin sending out
for a pound of chops for his dinner? How's that for high living?' says
he. 'Wisha! wisha,' says I. 'A pound of chops,' says he, 'coming into
the Mansion House.' 'Wisha!' says I, 'what kind of people is going at
all now?'"

At this point there was a knock at the door, and a boy put in his head.

"What is it?" said the old man.

"From the Black Eagle," said the boy, walking in sideways and depositing
a basket on the floor with a noise of shaken bottles.

The old man helped the boy to transfer the bottles from the basket to
the table and counted the full tally. After the transfer the boy put his
basket on his arm and asked:

"Any bottles?"

"What bottles?" said the old man.

"Won't you let us drink them first?" said Mr. Henchy.

"I was told to ask for the bottles."

"Come back tomorrow," said the old man.

"Here, boy!" said Mr. Henchy, "will you run over to O'Farrell's and ask
him to lend us a corkscrew--for Mr. Henchy, say. Tell him we won't keep
it a minute. Leave the basket there."

The boy went out and Mr. Henchy began to rub his hands cheerfully,
saying:

"Ah, well, he's not so bad after all. He's as good as his word, anyhow."

"There's no tumblers," said the old man.

"O, don't let that trouble you, Jack," said Mr. Henchy. "Many's the good
man before now drank out of the bottle."

"Anyway, it's better than nothing," said Mr. O'Connor.

"He's not a bad sort," said Mr. Henchy, "only Fanning has such a loan of
him. He means well, you know, in his own tinpot way."

The boy came back with the corkscrew. The old man opened three bottles
and was handing back the corkscrew when Mr. Henchy said to the boy:

"Would you like a drink, boy?"

"If you please, sir," said the boy.

The old man opened another bottle grudgingly, and handed it to the boy.

"What age are you?" he asked.

"Seventeen," said the boy.

As the old man said nothing further, the boy took the bottle and said:
"Here's my best respects, sir," to Mr. Henchy, drank the contents, put
the bottle back on the table and wiped his mouth with his sleeve. Then
he took up the corkscrew and went out of the door sideways, muttering
some form of salutation.

"That's the way it begins," said the old man.

"The thin edge of the wedge," said Mr. Henchy.

The old man distributed the three bottles which he had opened and the
men drank from them simultaneously. After having drunk each placed his
bottle on the mantelpiece within hand's reach and drew in a long breath
of satisfaction.

"Well, I did a good day's work today," said Mr. Henchy, after a pause.

"That so, John?"

"Yes. I got him one or two sure things in Dawson Street, Crofton and
myself. Between ourselves, you know, Crofton (he's a decent chap, of
course), but he's not worth a damn as a canvasser. He hasn't a word
to throw to a dog. He stands and looks at the people while I do the
talking."

Here two men entered the room. One of them was a very fat man whose blue
serge clothes seemed to be in danger of falling from his sloping figure.
He had a big face which resembled a young ox's face in expression,
staring blue eyes and a grizzled moustache. The other man, who was much
younger and frailer, had a thin, clean-shaven face. He wore a very high
double collar and a wide-brimmed bowler hat.

"Hello, Crofton!" said Mr. Henchy to the fat man. "Talk of the devil..."

"Where did the boose come from?" asked the young man. "Did the cow
calve?"

"O, of course, Lyons spots the drink first thing!" said Mr. O'Connor,
laughing.

"Is that the way you chaps canvass," said Mr. Lyons, "and Crofton and I
out in the cold and rain looking for votes?"

"Why, blast your soul," said Mr. Henchy, "I'd get more votes in five
minutes than you two'd get in a week."

"Open two bottles of stout, Jack," said Mr. O'Connor.

"How can I?" said the old man, "when there's no corkscrew?"

"Wait now, wait now!" said Mr. Henchy, getting up quickly. "Did you ever
see this little trick?"

He took two bottles from the table and, carrying them to the fire, put
them on the hob. Then he sat down again by the fire and took another
drink from his bottle. Mr. Lyons sat on the edge of the table, pushed
his hat towards the nape of his neck and began to swing his legs.

"Which is my bottle?" he asked.

"This lad," said Mr. Henchy.

Mr. Crofton sat down on a box and looked fixedly at the other bottle on
the hob. He was silent for two reasons. The first reason, sufficient in
itself, was that he had nothing to say; the second reason was that
he considered his companions beneath him. He had been a canvasser for
Wilkins, the Conservative, but when the Conservatives had withdrawn
their man and, choosing the lesser of two evils, given their support to
the Nationalist candidate, he had been engaged to work for Mr. Tiemey.

In a few minutes an apologetic "Pok!" was heard as the cork flew out
of Mr. Lyons' bottle. Mr. Lyons jumped off the table, went to the fire,
took his bottle and carried it back to the table.

"I was just telling them, Crofton," said Mr. Henchy, "that we got a good
few votes today."

"Who did you get?" asked Mr. Lyons.

"Well, I got Parkes for one, and I got Atkinson for two, and got Ward
of Dawson Street. Fine old chap he is, too--regular old toff, old
Conservative! 'But isn't your candidate a Nationalist?' said he. 'He's a
respectable man,' said I. 'He's in favour of whatever will benefit this
country. He's a big ratepayer,' I said. 'He has extensive house property
in the city and three places of business and isn't it to his own
advantage to keep down the rates? He's a prominent and respected
citizen,' said I, 'and a Poor Law Guardian, and he doesn't belong to any
party, good, bad, or indifferent.' That's the way to talk to 'em."

"And what about the address to the King?" said Mr. Lyons, after drinking
and smacking his lips.

"Listen to me," said Mr. Henchy. "What we want in this country, as I
said to old Ward, is capital. The King's coming here will mean an influx
of money into this country. The citizens of Dublin will benefit by it.
Look at all the factories down by the quays there, idle! Look at all the
money there is in the country if we only worked the old industries, the
mills, the ship-building yards and factories. It's capital we want."

"But look here, John," said Mr. O'Connor. "Why should we welcome the
King of England? Didn't Parnell himself..."

"Parnell," said Mr. Henchy, "is dead. Now, here's the way I look at it.
Here's this chap come to the throne after his old mother keeping him out
of it till the man was grey. He's a man of the world, and he means
well by us. He's a jolly fine decent fellow, if you ask me, and no damn
nonsense about him. He just says to himself: 'The old one never went
to see these wild Irish. By Christ, I'll go myself and see what they're
like.' And are we going to insult the man when he comes over here on a
friendly visit? Eh? Isn't that right, Crofton?"

Mr. Crofton nodded his head.

"But after all now," said Mr. Lyons argumentatively, "King Edward's
life, you know, is not the very..."

"Let bygones be bygones," said Mr. Henchy. "I admire the man personally.
He's just an ordinary knockabout like you and me. He's fond of his glass
of grog and he's a bit of a rake, perhaps, and he's a good sportsman.
Damn it, can't we Irish play fair?"

"That's all very fine," said Mr. Lyons. "But look at the case of Parnell
now."

"In the name of God," said Mr. Henchy, "where's the analogy between the
two cases?"

"What I mean," said Mr. Lyons, "is we have our ideals. Why, now, would
we welcome a man like that? Do you think now after what he did Parnell
was a fit man to lead us? And why, then, would we do it for Edward the
Seventh?"

"This is Parnell's anniversary," said Mr. O'Connor, "and don't let
us stir up any bad blood. We all respect him now that he's dead and
gone--even the Conservatives," he added, turning to Mr. Crofton.

Pok! The tardy cork flew out of Mr. Crofton's bottle. Mr. Crofton got
up from his box and went to the fire. As he returned with his capture he
said in a deep voice:

"Our side of the house respects him, because he was a gentleman."

"Right you are, Crofton!" said Mr. Henchy fiercely. "He was the only man
that could keep that bag of cats in order. 'Down, ye dogs! Lie down, ye
curs!' That's the way he treated them. Come in, Joe! Come in!" he called
out, catching sight of Mr. Hynes in the doorway.

Mr. Hynes came in slowly.

"Open another bottle of stout, Jack," said Mr. Henchy. "O, I forgot
there's no corkscrew! Here, show me one here and I'll put it at the
fire."

The old man handed him another bottle and he placed it on the hob.

"Sit down, Joe," said Mr. O'Connor, "we're just talking about the
Chief."

"Ay, ay!" said Mr. Henchy.

Mr. Hynes sat on the side of the table near Mr. Lyons but said nothing.

"There's one of them, anyhow," said Mr. Henchy, "that didn't renege him.
By God, I'll say for you, Joe! No, by God, you stuck to him like a man!"

"O, Joe," said Mr. O'Connor suddenly. "Give us that thing you wrote--do
you remember? Have you got it on you?"

"O, ay!" said Mr. Henchy. "Give us that. Did you ever hear that,
Crofton? Listen to this now: splendid thing."

"Go on," said Mr. O'Connor. "Fire away, Joe."

Mr. Hynes did not seem to remember at once the piece to which they were
alluding, but, after reflecting a while, he said:

"O, that thing is it.... Sure, that's old now."

"Out with it, man!" said Mr. O'Connor.

"'Sh, 'sh," said Mr. Henchy. "Now, Joe!"

Mr. Hynes hesitated a little longer. Then amid the silence he took off
his hat, laid it on the table and stood up. He seemed to be rehearsing
the piece in his mind. After a rather long pause he announced:


                       THE DEATH OF PARNELL
                        6th October, 1891


He cleared his throat once or twice and then began to recite:


            He is dead.  Our Uncrowned King is dead.
              O, Erin, mourn with grief and woe
            For he lies dead whom the fell gang
              Of modern hypocrites laid low.
            He lies slain by the coward hounds
              He raised to glory from the mire;
            And Erin's hopes and Erin's dreams
              Perish upon her monarch's pyre.
            In palace, cabin or in cot
              The Irish heart where'er it be
            Is bowed with woe--for he is gone
              Who would have wrought her destiny.
            He would have had his Erin famed,
              The green flag gloriously unfurled,
            Her statesmen, bards and warriors raised
              Before the nations of the World.
            He dreamed (alas, 'twas but a dream!)
              Of Liberty: but as he strove
            To clutch that idol, treachery
              Sundered him from the thing he loved.
            Shame on the coward, caitiff hands
              That smote their Lord or with a kiss
            Betrayed him to the rabble-rout
              Of fawning priests--no friends of his.
            May everlasting shame consume
              The memory of those who tried
            To befoul and smear the exalted name
              Of one who spurned them in his pride.
            He fell as fall the mighty ones,
              Nobly undaunted to the last,
            And death has now united him
              With Erin's heroes of the past.
            No sound of strife disturb his sleep!
              Calmly he rests: no human pain
            Or high ambition spurs him now
              The peaks of glory to attain.
            They had their way: they laid him low.
              But Erin, list, his spirit may
            Rise, like the Phoenix from the flames,
              When breaks the dawning of the day,
            The day that brings us Freedom's reign.
              And on that day may Erin well
            Pledge in the cup she lifts to Joy
              One grief--the memory of Parnell.


Mr. Hynes sat down again on the table. When he had finished his
recitation there was a silence and then a burst of clapping: even Mr.
Lyons clapped. The applause continued for a little time. When it had
ceased all the auditors drank from their bottles in silence.

Pok! The cork flew out of Mr. Hynes' bottle, but Mr. Hynes remained
sitting flushed and bare-headed on the table. He did not seem to have
heard the invitation.

"Good man, Joe!" said Mr. O'Connor, taking out his cigarette papers and
pouch the better to hide his emotion.

"What do you think of that, Crofton?" cried Mr. Henchy. "Isn't that
fine? What?"

Mr. Crofton said that it was a very fine piece of writing.




A MOTHER

MR HOLOHAN, assistant secretary of the Eire Abu Society, had been
walking up and down Dublin for nearly a month, with his hands and
pockets full of dirty pieces of paper, arranging about the series of
concerts. He had a game leg and for this his friends called him Hoppy
Holohan. He walked up and down constantly, stood by the hour at street
corners arguing the point and made notes; but in the end it was Mrs.
Kearney who arranged everything.

Miss Devlin had become Mrs. Kearney out of spite. She had been educated
in a high-class convent, where she had learned French and music. As
she was naturally pale and unbending in manner she made few friends at
school. When she came to the age of marriage she was sent out to many
houses where her playing and ivory manners were much admired. She sat
amid the chilly circle of her accomplishments, waiting for some suitor
to brave it and offer her a brilliant life. But the young men whom she
met were ordinary and she gave them no encouragement, trying to console
her romantic desires by eating a great deal of Turkish Delight in
secret. However, when she drew near the limit and her friends began
to loosen their tongues about her, she silenced them by marrying Mr.
Kearney, who was a bootmaker on Ormond Quay.

He was much older than she. His conversation, which was serious, took
place at intervals in his great brown beard. After the first year of
married life, Mrs. Kearney perceived that such a man would wear better
than a romantic person, but she never put her own romantic ideas away.
He was sober, thrifty and pious; he went to the altar every first
Friday, sometimes with her, oftener by himself. But she never weakened
in her religion and was a good wife to him. At some party in a strange
house when she lifted her eyebrow ever so slightly he stood up to take
his leave and, when his cough troubled him, she put the eider-down quilt
over his feet and made a strong rum punch. For his part, he was a model
father. By paying a small sum every week into a society, he ensured for
both his daughters a dowry of one hundred pounds each when they came to
the age of twenty-four. He sent the older daughter, Kathleen, to a good
convent, where she learned French and music, and afterward paid her
fees at the Academy. Every year in the month of July Mrs. Kearney found
occasion to say to some friend:

"My good man is packing us off to Skerries for a few weeks."

If it was not Skerries it was Howth or Greystones.

When the Irish Revival began to be appreciable Mrs. Kearney determined
to take advantage of her daughter's name and brought an Irish teacher to
the house. Kathleen and her sister sent Irish picture postcards to their
friends and these friends sent back other Irish picture postcards.
On special Sundays, when Mr. Kearney went with his family to the
pro-cathedral, a little crowd of people would assemble after mass at
the corner of Cathedral Street. They were all friends of the
Kearneys--musical friends or Nationalist friends; and, when they had
played every little counter of gossip, they shook hands with one
another all together, laughing at the crossing of so many hands, and said
good-bye to one another in Irish. Soon the name of Miss Kathleen Kearney
began to be heard often on people's lips. People said that she was
very clever at music and a very nice girl and, moreover, that she was
a believer in the language movement. Mrs. Kearney was well content at
this. Therefore she was not surprised when one day Mr. Holohan came to
her and proposed that her daughter should be the accompanist at a
series of four grand concerts which his Society was going to give in the
Antient Concert Rooms. She brought him into the drawing-room, made him
sit down and brought out the decanter and the silver biscuit-barrel. She
entered heart and soul into the details of the enterprise, advised and
dissuaded: and finally a contract was drawn up by which Kathleen was to
receive eight guineas for her services as accompanist at the four grand
concerts.

As Mr. Holohan was a novice in such delicate matters as the wording of
bills and the disposing of items for a programme, Mrs. Kearney helped
him. She had tact. She knew what artistes should go into capitals and
what artistes should go into small type. She knew that the first tenor
would not like to come on after Mr. Meade's comic turn. To keep the
audience continually diverted she slipped the doubtful items in between
the old favourites. Mr. Holohan called to see her every day to have her
advice on some point. She was invariably friendly and advising--homely,
in fact. She pushed the decanter towards him, saying:

"Now, help yourself, Mr. Holohan!"

And while he was helping himself she said:

"Don't be afraid! Don't be afraid of it!"

Everything went on smoothly. Mrs. Kearney bought some lovely blush-pink
charmeuse in Brown Thomas's to let into the front of Kathleen's dress.
It cost a pretty penny; but there are occasions when a little expense
is justifiable. She took a dozen of two-shilling tickets for the final
concert and sent them to those friends who could not be trusted to come
otherwise. She forgot nothing, and, thanks to her, everything that was
to be done was done.

The concerts were to be on Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
When Mrs. Kearney arrived with her daughter at the Antient Concert Rooms
on Wednesday night she did not like the look of things. A few young men,
wearing bright blue badges in their coats, stood idle in the vestibule;
none of them wore evening dress. She passed by with her daughter and a
quick glance through the open door of the hall showed her the cause of
the stewards' idleness. At first she wondered had she mistaken the hour.
No, it was twenty minutes to eight.

In the dressing-room behind the stage she was introduced to the
secretary of the Society, Mr. Fitzpatrick. She smiled and shook his
hand. He was a little man, with a white, vacant face. She noticed that
he wore his soft brown hat carelessly on the side of his head and that
his accent was flat. He held a programme in his hand, and, while he was
talking to her, he chewed one end of it into a moist pulp. He seemed
to bear disappointments lightly. Mr. Holohan came into the dressingroom
every few minutes with reports from the box-office. The artistes talked
among themselves nervously, glanced from time to time at the mirror and
rolled and unrolled their music. When it was nearly half-past eight, the
few people in the hall began to express their desire to be entertained.
Mr. Fitzpatrick came in, smiled vacantly at the room, and said:

"Well now, ladies and gentlemen. I suppose we'd better open the ball."

Mrs. Kearney rewarded his very flat final syllable with a quick stare of
contempt, and then said to her daughter encouragingly:

"Are you ready, dear?"

When she had an opportunity, she called Mr. Holohan aside and asked him
to tell her what it meant. Mr. Holohan did not know what it meant.
He said that the Committee had made a mistake in arranging for four
concerts: four was too many.

"And the artistes!" said Mrs. Kearney. "Of course they are doing their
best, but really they are not good."

Mr. Holohan admitted that the artistes were no good but the Committee,
he said, had decided to let the first three concerts go as they pleased
and reserve all the talent for Saturday night. Mrs. Kearney said
nothing, but, as the mediocre items followed one another on the platform
and the few people in the hall grew fewer and fewer, she began to regret
that she had put herself to any expense for such a concert. There was
something she didn't like in the look of things and Mr. Fitzpatrick's
vacant smile irritated her very much. However, she said nothing and
waited to see how it would end. The concert expired shortly before ten,
and everyone went home quickly.

The concert on Thursday night was better attended, but Mrs. Kearney
saw at once that the house was filled with paper. The audience behaved
indecorously, as if the concert were an informal dress rehearsal. Mr.
Fitzpatrick seemed to enjoy himself; he was quite unconscious that Mrs.
Kearney was taking angry note of his conduct. He stood at the edge of
the screen, from time to time jutting out his head and exchanging a
laugh with two friends in the corner of the balcony. In the course of
the evening, Mrs. Kearney learned that the Friday concert was to be
abandoned and that the Committee was going to move heaven and earth to
secure a bumper house on Saturday night. When she heard this, she sought
out Mr. Holohan. She buttonholed him as he was limping out quickly with
a glass of lemonade for a young lady and asked him was it true. Yes, it
was true.

"But, of course, that doesn't alter the contract," she said. "The
contract was for four concerts."

Mr. Holohan seemed to be in a hurry; he advised her to speak to Mr.
Fitzpatrick. Mrs. Kearney was now beginning to be alarmed. She called
Mr. Fitzpatrick away from his screen and told him that her daughter had
signed for four concerts and that, of course, according to the terms
of the contract, she should receive the sum originally stipulated for,
whether the society gave the four concerts or not. Mr. Fitzpatrick, who
did not catch the point at issue very quickly, seemed unable to resolve
the difficulty and said that he would bring the matter before the
Committee. Mrs. Kearney's anger began to flutter in her cheek and she
had all she could do to keep from asking:

"And who is the Cometty pray?"

But she knew that it would not be ladylike to do that: so she was
silent.

Little boys were sent out into the principal streets of Dublin early on
Friday morning with bundles of handbills. Special puffs appeared in all
the evening papers, reminding the music-loving public of the treat which
was in store for it on the following evening. Mrs. Kearney was
somewhat reassured, but she thought well to tell her husband part of
her suspicions. He listened carefully and said that perhaps it would be
better if he went with her on Saturday night. She agreed. She respected
her husband in the same way as she respected the General Post Office, as
something large, secure and fixed; and though she knew the small number
of his talents she appreciated his abstract value as a male. She was
glad that he had suggested coming with her. She thought her plans over.

The night of the grand concert came. Mrs. Kearney, with her husband and
daughter, arrived at the Antient Concert Rooms three-quarters of an hour
before the time at which the concert was to begin. By ill luck it was a
rainy evening. Mrs. Kearney placed her daughter's clothes and music in
charge of her husband and went all over the building looking for Mr.
Holohan or Mr. Fitzpatrick. She could find neither. She asked the
stewards was any member of the Committee in the hall and, after a great
deal of trouble, a steward brought out a little woman named Miss
Beirne to whom Mrs. Kearney explained that she wanted to see one of the
secretaries. Miss Beirne expected them any minute and asked could she do
anything. Mrs. Kearney looked searchingly at the oldish face which was
screwed into an expression of trustfulness and enthusiasm and answered:

"No, thank you!"

The little woman hoped they would have a good house. She looked out
at the rain until the melancholy of the wet street effaced all the
trustfulness and enthusiasm from her twisted features. Then she gave a
little sigh and said:

"Ah, well! We did our best, the dear knows."

Mrs. Kearney had to go back to the dressing-room.

The artistes were arriving. The bass and the second tenor had already
come. The bass, Mr. Duggan, was a slender young man with a scattered
black moustache. He was the son of a hall porter in an office in the
city and, as a boy, he had sung prolonged bass notes in the resounding
hall. From this humble state he had raised himself until he had become
a first-rate artiste. He had appeared in grand opera. One night, when an
operatic artiste had fallen ill, he had undertaken the part of the king
in the opera of Maritana at the Queen's Theatre. He sang his music with
great feeling and volume and was warmly welcomed by the gallery; but,
unfortunately, he marred the good impression by wiping his nose in his
gloved hand once or twice out of thoughtlessness. He was unassuming and
spoke little. He said yous so softly that it passed unnoticed and he
never drank anything stronger than milk for his voice's sake. Mr. Bell,
the second tenor, was a fair-haired little man who competed every year
for prizes at the Feis Ceoil. On his fourth trial he had been awarded
a bronze medal. He was extremely nervous and extremely jealous of
other tenors and he covered his nervous jealousy with an ebullient
friendliness. It was his humour to have people know what an ordeal a
concert was to him. Therefore when he saw Mr. Duggan he went over to him
and asked:

"Are you in it too?"

"Yes," said Mr. Duggan.

Mr. Bell laughed at his fellow-sufferer, held out his hand and said:

"Shake!"

Mrs. Kearney passed by these two young men and went to the edge of the
screen to view the house. The seats were being filled up rapidly and a
pleasant noise circulated in the auditorium. She came back and spoke to
her husband privately. Their conversation was evidently about Kathleen
for they both glanced at her often as she stood chatting to one of her
Nationalist friends, Miss Healy, the contralto. An unknown solitary
woman with a pale face walked through the room. The women followed with
keen eyes the faded blue dress which was stretched upon a meagre body.
Someone said that she was Madam Glynn, the soprano.

"I wonder where did they dig her up," said Kathleen to Miss Healy. "I'm
sure I never heard of her."

Miss Healy had to smile. Mr. Holohan limped into the dressing-room
at that moment and the two young ladies asked him who was the unknown
woman. Mr. Holohan said that she was Madam Glynn from London. Madam
Glynn took her stand in a corner of the room, holding a roll of music
stiffly before her and from time to time changing the direction of her
startled gaze. The shadow took her faded dress into shelter but fell
revengefully into the little cup behind her collar-bone. The noise of
the hall became more audible. The first tenor and the baritone arrived
together. They were both well dressed, stout and complacent and they
brought a breath of opulence among the company.

Mrs. Kearney brought her daughter over to them, and talked to them
amiably. She wanted to be on good terms with them but, while she strove
to be polite, her eyes followed Mr. Holohan in his limping and devious
courses. As soon as she could she excused herself and went out after
him.

"Mr. Holohan, I want to speak to you for a moment," she said.

They went down to a discreet part of the corridor. Mrs Kearney asked
him when was her daughter going to be paid. Mr. Holohan said that Mr.
Fitzpatrick had charge of that. Mrs. Kearney said that she didn't know
anything about Mr. Fitzpatrick. Her daughter had signed a contract for
eight guineas and she would have to be paid. Mr. Holohan said that it
wasn't his business.

"Why isn't it your business?" asked Mrs. Kearney. "Didn't you yourself
bring her the contract? Anyway, if it's not your business it's my
business and I mean to see to it."

"You'd better speak to Mr. Fitzpatrick," said Mr. Holohan distantly.

"I don't know anything about Mr. Fitzpatrick," repeated Mrs. Kearney. "I
have my contract, and I intend to see that it is carried out."

When she came back to the dressing-room her cheeks were slightly
suffused. The room was lively. Two men in outdoor dress had taken
possession of the fireplace and were chatting familiarly with Miss Healy
and the baritone. They were the Freeman man and Mr. O'Madden Burke. The
Freeman man had come in to say that he could not wait for the concert as
he had to report the lecture which an American priest was giving in
the Mansion House. He said they were to leave the report for him at the
Freeman office and he would see that it went in. He was a grey-haired
man, with a plausible voice and careful manners. He held an extinguished
cigar in his hand and the aroma of cigar smoke floated near him. He had
not intended to stay a moment because concerts and artistes bored him
considerably but he remained leaning against the mantelpiece. Miss
Healy stood in front of him, talking and laughing. He was old enough to
suspect one reason for her politeness but young enough in spirit to
turn the moment to account. The warmth, fragrance and colour of her body
appealed to his senses. He was pleasantly conscious that the bosom which
he saw rise and fall slowly beneath him rose and fell at that moment
for him, that the laughter and fragrance and wilful glances were his
tribute. When he could stay no longer he took leave of her regretfully.

"O'Madden Burke will write the notice," he explained to Mr. Holohan,
"and I'll see it in."

"Thank you very much, Mr. Hendrick," said Mr. Holohan, "you'll see it
in, I know. Now, won't you have a little something before you go?"

"I don't mind," said Mr. Hendrick.

The two men went along some tortuous passages and up a dark staircase
and came to a secluded room where one of the stewards was uncorking
bottles for a few gentlemen. One of these gentlemen was Mr. O'Madden
Burke, who had found out the room by instinct. He was a suave, elderly
man who balanced his imposing body, when at rest, upon a large silk
umbrella. His magniloquent western name was the moral umbrella upon
which he balanced the fine problem of his finances. He was widely
respected.

While Mr. Holohan was entertaining the Freeman man Mrs. Kearney was
speaking so animatedly to her husband that he had to ask her to lower
her voice. The conversation of the others in the dressing-room had
become strained. Mr. Bell, the first item, stood ready with his music
but the accompanist made no sign. Evidently something was wrong. Mr.
Kearney looked straight before him, stroking his beard, while Mrs.
Kearney spoke into Kathleen's ear with subdued emphasis. From the hall
came sounds of encouragement, clapping and stamping of feet. The
first tenor and the baritone and Miss Healy stood together, waiting
tranquilly, but Mr. Bell's nerves were greatly agitated because he was
afraid the audience would think that he had come late.

Mr. Holohan and Mr. O'Madden Burke came into the room. In a moment Mr.
Holohan perceived the hush. He went over to Mrs. Kearney and spoke
with her earnestly. While they were speaking the noise in the hall grew
louder. Mr. Holohan became very red and excited. He spoke volubly, but
Mrs. Kearney said curtly at intervals:

"She won't go on. She must get her eight guineas."

Mr. Holohan pointed desperately towards the hall where the audience was
clapping and stamping. He appealed to Mr Kearney and to Kathleen. But
Mr. Kearney continued to stroke his beard and Kathleen looked down,
moving the point of her new shoe: it was not her fault. Mrs. Kearney
repeated:

"She won't go on without her money."

After a swift struggle of tongues Mr. Holohan hobbled out in haste.
The room was silent. When the strain of the silence had become somewhat
painful Miss Healy said to the baritone:

"Have you seen Mrs. Pat Campbell this week?"

The baritone had not seen her but he had been told that she was very
fine. The conversation went no further. The first tenor bent his head
and began to count the links of the gold chain which was extended across
his waist, smiling and humming random notes to observe the effect on the
frontal sinus. From time to time everyone glanced at Mrs. Kearney.

The noise in the auditorium had risen to a clamour when Mr. Fitzpatrick
burst into the room, followed by Mr. Holohan, who was panting. The
clapping and stamping in the hall were punctuated by whistling. Mr.
Fitzpatrick held a few banknotes in his hand. He counted out four
into Mrs. Kearney's hand and said she would get the other half at the
interval. Mrs. Kearney said:

"This is four shillings short."

But Kathleen gathered in her skirt and said: "Now, Mr. Bell," to
the first item, who was shaking like an aspen. The singer and the
accompanist went out together. The noise in hall died away. There was a
pause of a few seconds: and then the piano was heard.

The first part of the concert was very successful except for Madam
Glynn's item. The poor lady sang Killarney in a bodiless gasping voice,
with all the old-fashioned mannerisms of intonation and pronunciation
which she believed lent elegance to her singing. She looked as if she
had been resurrected from an old stage-wardrobe and the cheaper parts
of the hall made fun of her high wailing notes. The first tenor and the
contralto, however, brought down the house. Kathleen played a selection
of Irish airs which was generously applauded. The first part closed with
a stirring patriotic recitation delivered by a young lady who arranged
amateur theatricals. It was deservedly applauded; and, when it was
ended, the men went out for the interval, content.

All this time the dressing-room was a hive of excitement. In one corner
were Mr. Holohan, Mr. Fitzpatrick, Miss Beirne, two of the stewards, the
baritone, the bass, and Mr. O'Madden Burke. Mr. O'Madden Burke said it
was the most scandalous exhibition he had ever witnessed. Miss Kathleen
Kearney's musical career was ended in Dublin after that, he said. The
baritone was asked what did he think of Mrs. Kearney's conduct. He did
not like to say anything. He had been paid his money and wished to be at
peace with men. However, he said that Mrs. Kearney might have taken the
artistes into consideration. The stewards and the secretaries debated
hotly as to what should be done when the interval came.

"I agree with Miss Beirne," said Mr. O'Madden Burke. "Pay her nothing."

In another corner of the room were Mrs. Kearney and her husband, Mr.
Bell, Miss Healy and the young lady who had to recite the patriotic
piece. Mrs. Kearney said that the Committee had treated her
scandalously. She had spared neither trouble nor expense and this was
how she was repaid.

They thought they had only a girl to deal with and that, therefore, they
could ride roughshod over her. But she would show them their mistake.
They wouldn't have dared to have treated her like that if she had been a
man. But she would see that her daughter got her rights: she wouldn't
be fooled. If they didn't pay her to the last farthing she would make
Dublin ring. Of course she was sorry for the sake of the artistes. But
what else could she do? She appealed to the second tenor who said he
thought she had not been well treated. Then she appealed to Miss Healy.
Miss Healy wanted to join the other group but she did not like to do so
because she was a great friend of Kathleen's and the Kearneys had often
invited her to their house.

As soon as the first part was ended Mr. Fitzpatrick and Mr. Holohan went
over to Mrs. Kearney and told her that the other four guineas would be
paid after the Committee meeting on the following Tuesday and that, in
case her daughter did not play for the second part, the Committee would
consider the contract broken and would pay nothing.

"I haven't seen any Committee," said Mrs. Kearney angrily. "My daughter
has her contract. She will get four pounds eight into her hand or a foot
she won't put on that platform."

"I'm surprised at you, Mrs. Kearney," said Mr. Holohan. "I never thought
you would treat us this way."

"And what way did you treat me?" asked Mrs. Kearney.

Her face was inundated with an angry colour and she looked as if she
would attack someone with her hands.

"I'm asking for my rights." she said.

"You might have some sense of decency," said Mr. Holohan.

"Might I, indeed?... And when I ask when my daughter is going to be paid
I can't get a civil answer."

She tossed her head and assumed a haughty voice:

"You must speak to the secretary. It's not my business. I'm a great
fellow fol-the-diddle-I-do."

"I thought you were a lady," said Mr. Holohan, walking away from her
abruptly.

After that Mrs. Kearney's conduct was condemned on all hands: everyone
approved of what the Committee had done. She stood at the door, haggard
with rage, arguing with her husband and daughter, gesticulating with
them. She waited until it was time for the second part to begin in the
hope that the secretaries would approach her. But Miss Healy had kindly
consented to play one or two accompaniments. Mrs. Kearney had to stand
aside to allow the baritone and his accompanist to pass up to the
platform. She stood still for an instant like an angry stone image
and, when the first notes of the song struck her ear, she caught up her
daughter's cloak and said to her husband:

"Get a cab!"

He went out at once. Mrs. Kearney wrapped the cloak round her daughter
and followed him. As she passed through the doorway she stopped and
glared into Mr. Holohan's face.

"I'm not done with you yet," she said.

"But I'm done with you," said Mr. Holohan.

Kathleen followed her mother meekly. Mr. Holohan began to pace up and
down the room, in order to cool himself for he his skin on fire.

"That's a nice lady!" he said. "O, she's a nice lady!"

"You did the proper thing, Holohan," said Mr. O'Madden Burke, poised
upon his umbrella in approval.




GRACE

TWO GENTLEMEN who were in the lavatory at the time tried to lift him up:
but he was quite helpless. He lay curled up at the foot of the stairs
down which he had fallen. They succeeded in turning him over. His hat
had rolled a few yards away and his clothes were smeared with the filth
and ooze of the floor on which he had lain, face downwards. His eyes
were closed and he breathed with a grunting noise. A thin stream of
blood trickled from the corner of his mouth.

These two gentlemen and one of the curates carried him up the stairs
and laid him down again on the floor of the bar. In two minutes he was
surrounded by a ring of men. The manager of the bar asked everyone
who he was and who was with him. No one knew who he was but one of the
curates said he had served the gentleman with a small rum.

"Was he by himself?" asked the manager.

"No, sir. There was two gentlemen with him."

"And where are they?"

No one knew; a voice said:

"Give him air. He's fainted."

The ring of onlookers distended and closed again elastically. A dark
medal of blood had formed itself near the man's head on the tessellated
floor. The manager, alarmed by the grey pallor of the man's face, sent
for a policeman.

His collar was unfastened and his necktie undone. He opened eyes for an
instant, sighed and closed them again. One of gentlemen who had carried
him upstairs held a dinged silk hat in his hand. The manager asked
repeatedly did no one know who the injured man was or where had his
friends gone. The door of the bar opened and an immense constable
entered. A crowd which had followed him down the laneway collected
outside the door, struggling to look in through the glass panels.

The manager at once began to narrate what he knew. The constable, a young
man with thick immobile features, listened. He moved his head slowly to
right and left and from the manager to the person on the floor, as if
he feared to be the victim of some delusion. Then he drew off his glove,
produced a small book from his waist, licked the lead of his pencil and
made ready to indite. He asked in a suspicious provincial accent:

"Who is the man? What's his name and address?"

A young man in a cycling-suit cleared his way through the ring of
bystanders. He knelt down promptly beside the injured man and called for
water. The constable knelt down also to help. The young man washed the
blood from the injured man's mouth and then called for some brandy. The
constable repeated the order in an authoritative voice until a curate
came running with the glass. The brandy was forced down the man's
throat. In a few seconds he opened his eyes and looked about him. He
looked at the circle of faces and then, understanding, strove to rise to
his feet.

"You're all right now?" asked the young man in the cycling-suit.

"Sha,'s nothing," said the injured man, trying to stand up.

He was helped to his feet. The manager said something about a hospital
and some of the bystanders gave advice. The battered silk hat was placed
on the man's head. The constable asked:

"Where do you live?"

The man, without answering, began to twirl the ends of his moustache.
He made light of his accident. It was nothing, he said: only a little
accident. He spoke very thickly.

"Where do you live?" repeated the constable.

The man said they were to get a cab for him. While the point was being
debated a tall agile gentleman of fair complexion, wearing a long yellow
ulster, came from the far end of the bar. Seeing the spectacle, he
called out:

"Hallo, Tom, old man! What's the trouble?"

"Sha,'s nothing," said the man.

The new-comer surveyed the deplorable figure before him and then turned
to the constable, saying:

"It's all right, constable. I'll see him home."

The constable touched his helmet and answered:

"All right, Mr. Power!"

"Come now, Tom," said Mr. Power, taking his friend by the arm. "No bones
broken. What? Can you walk?"

The young man in the cycling-suit took the man by the other arm and the
crowd divided.

"How did you get yourself into this mess?" asked Mr. Power.

"The gentleman fell down the stairs," said the young man.

"I' 'ery 'uch o'liged to you, sir," said the injured man.

"Not at all."

"'ant we have a little...?"

"Not now. Not now."

The three men left the bar and the crowd sifted through the doors in to
the laneway. The manager brought the constable to the stairs to inspect
the scene of the accident. They agreed that the gentleman must have
missed his footing. The customers returned to the counter and a curate
set about removing the traces of blood from the floor.

When they came out into Grafton Street, Mr. Power whistled for an
outsider. The injured man said again as well as he could.

"I' 'ery 'uch o'liged to you, sir. I hope we'll 'eet again. 'y na'e is
Kernan."

The shock and the incipient pain had partly sobered him.

"Don't mention it," said the young man.

They shook hands. Mr. Kernan was hoisted on to the car and, while Mr.
Power was giving directions to the carman, he expressed his gratitude
to the young man and regretted that they could not have a little drink
together.

"Another time," said the young man.

The car drove off towards Westmoreland Street. As it passed Ballast
Office the clock showed half-past nine. A keen east wind hit them,
blowing from the mouth of the river. Mr. Kernan was huddled together
with cold. His friend asked him to tell how the accident had happened.

"I'an't 'an," he answered, "'y 'ongue is hurt."

"Show."

The other leaned over the well of the car and peered into Mr. Kernan's
mouth but he could not see. He struck a match and, sheltering it in the
shell of his hands, peered again into the mouth which Mr. Kernan opened
obediently. The swaying movement of the car brought the match to and
from the opened mouth. The lower teeth and gums were covered with
clotted blood and a minute piece of the tongue seemed to have been
bitten off. The match was blown out.

"That's ugly," said Mr. Power.

"Sha, 's nothing," said Mr. Kernan, closing his mouth and pulling the
collar of his filthy coat across his neck.

Mr. Kernan was a commercial traveller of the old school which believed
in the dignity of its calling. He had never been seen in the city
without a silk hat of some decency and a pair of gaiters. By grace of
these two articles of clothing, he said, a man could always pass muster.
He carried on the tradition of his Napoleon, the great Blackwhite, whose
memory he evoked at times by legend and mimicry. Modern business methods
had spared him only so far as to allow him a little office in Crowe
Street, on the window blind of which was written the name of his firm
with the address--London, E. C. On the mantelpiece of this little office
a little leaden battalion of canisters was drawn up and on the table
before the window stood four or five china bowls which were usually half
full of a black liquid. From these bowls Mr. Kernan tasted tea. He took
a mouthful, drew it up, saturated his palate with it and then spat it
forth into the grate. Then he paused to judge.

Mr. Power, a much younger man, was employed in the Royal Irish
Constabulary Office in Dublin Castle. The arc of his social rise
intersected the arc of his friend's decline, but Mr. Kernan's decline
was mitigated by the fact that certain of those friends who had known
him at his highest point of success still esteemed him as a character.
Mr. Power was one of these friends. His inexplicable debts were a byword
in his circle; he was a debonair young man.

The car halted before a small house on the Glasnevin road and Mr. Kernan
was helped into the house. His wife put him to bed while Mr. Power sat
downstairs in the kitchen asking the children where they went to school
and what book they were in. The children--two girls and a boy, conscious
of their father's helplessness and of their mother's absence, began some
horseplay with him. He was surprised at their manners and at their
accents, and his brow grew thoughtful. After a while Mrs. Kernan entered
the kitchen, exclaiming:

"Such a sight! O, he'll do for himself one day and that's the holy alls
of it. He's been drinking since Friday."

Mr. Power was careful to explain to her that he was not responsible,
that he had come on the scene by the merest accident. Mrs. Kernan,
remembering Mr. Power's good offices during domestic quarrels, as well
as many small, but opportune loans, said:

"O, you needn't tell me that, Mr. Power. I know you're a friend of his,
not like some of the others he does be with. They're all right so long
as he has money in his pocket to keep him out from his wife and family.
Nice friends! Who was he with tonight, I'd like to know?"

Mr. Power shook his head but said nothing.

"I'm so sorry," she continued, "that I've nothing in the house to offer
you. But if you wait a minute I'll send round to Fogarty's at the
corner."

Mr. Power stood up.

"We were waiting for him to come home with the money. He never seems to
think he has a home at all."

"O, now, Mrs. Kernan," said Mr. Power, "we'll make him turn over a new
leaf. I'll talk to Martin. He's the man. We'll come here one of these
nights and talk it over."

She saw him to the door. The carman was stamping up and down the
footpath, and swinging his arms to warm himself.

"It's very kind of you to bring him home," she said.

"Not at all," said Mr. Power.

He got up on the car. As it drove off he raised his hat to her gaily.

"We'll make a new man of him," he said. "Good-night, Mrs. Kernan."

* * * * *

Mrs. Kernan's puzzled eyes watched the car till it was out of sight.
Then she withdrew them, went into the house and emptied her husband's
pockets.

She was an active, practical woman of middle age. Not long before she
had celebrated her silver wedding and renewed her intimacy with her
husband by waltzing with him to Mr. Power's accompaniment. In her days
of courtship, Mr. Kernan had seemed to her a not ungallant figure: and
she still hurried to the chapel door whenever a wedding was reported
and, seeing the bridal pair, recalled with vivid pleasure how she had
passed out of the Star of the Sea Church in Sandymount, leaning on the
arm of a jovial well-fed man, who was dressed smartly in a frock-coat
and lavender trousers and carried a silk hat gracefully balanced upon
his other arm. After three weeks she had found a wife's life irksome
and, later on, when she was beginning to find it unbearable, she had
become a mother. The part of mother presented to her no insuperable
difficulties and for twenty-five years she had kept house shrewdly for
her husband. Her two eldest sons were launched. One was in a draper's
shop in Glasgow and the other was clerk to a tea-merchant in Belfast.
They were good sons, wrote regularly and sometimes sent home money. The
other children were still at school.

Mr. Kernan sent a letter to his office next day and remained in bed. She
made beef-tea for him and scolded him roundly. She accepted his frequent
intemperance as part of the climate, healed him dutifully whenever he
was sick and always tried to make him eat a breakfast. There were worse
husbands. He had never been violent since the boys had grown up, and she
knew that he would walk to the end of Thomas Street and back again to
book even a small order.

Two nights after, his friends came to see him. She brought them up to
his bedroom, the air of which was impregnated with a personal odour,
and gave them chairs at the fire. Mr. Kernan's tongue, the occasional
stinging pain of which had made him somewhat irritable during the day,
became more polite. He sat propped up in the bed by pillows and the
little colour in his puffy cheeks made them resemble warm cinders. He
apologised to his guests for the disorder of the room, but at the same
time looked at them a little proudly, with a veteran's pride.

He was quite unconscious that he was the victim of a plot which his
friends, Mr. Cunningham, Mr. M'Coy and Mr. Power had disclosed to Mrs.
Kernan in the parlour. The idea had been Mr. Power's, but its development
was entrusted to Mr. Cunningham. Mr. Kernan came of Protestant stock
and, though he had been converted to the Catholic faith at the time
of his marriage, he had not been in the pale of the Church for twenty
years. He was fond, moreover, of giving side-thrusts at Catholicism.

Mr. Cunningham was the very man for such a case. He was an elder
colleague of Mr. Power. His own domestic life was not very happy. People
had great sympathy with him, for it was known that he had married an
unpresentable woman who was an incurable drunkard. He had set up house
for her six times; and each time she had pawned the furniture on him.

Everyone had respect for poor Martin Cunningham. He was a thoroughly
sensible man, influential and intelligent. His blade of human knowledge,
natural astuteness particularised by long association with cases in the
police courts, had been tempered by brief immersions in the waters
of general philosophy. He was well informed. His friends bowed to his
opinions and considered that his face was like Shakespeare's.

When the plot had been disclosed to her, Mrs. Kernan had said:

"I leave it all in your hands, Mr. Cunningham."

After a quarter of a century of married life, she had very few illusions
left. Religion for her was a habit, and she suspected that a man of her
husband's age would not change greatly before death. She was tempted to
see a curious appropriateness in his accident and, but that she did
not wish to seem bloody-minded, would have told the gentlemen that
Mr. Kernan's tongue would not suffer by being shortened. However, Mr.
Cunningham was a capable man; and religion was religion. The scheme
might do good and, at least, it could do no harm. Her beliefs were
not extravagant. She believed steadily in the Sacred Heart as the
most generally useful of all Catholic devotions and approved of the
sacraments. Her faith was bounded by her kitchen, but, if she was put to
it, she could believe also in the banshee and in the Holy Ghost.

The gentlemen began to talk of the accident. Mr. Cunningham said that he
had once known a similar case. A man of seventy had bitten off a piece
of his tongue during an epileptic fit and the tongue had filled in
again, so that no one could see a trace of the bite.

"Well, I'm not seventy," said the invalid.

"God forbid," said Mr. Cunningham.

"It doesn't pain you now?" asked Mr. M'Coy.

Mr. M'Coy had been at one time a tenor of some reputation. His wife, who
had been a soprano, still taught young children to play the piano at low
terms. His line of life had not been the shortest distance between two
points and for short periods he had been driven to live by his wits. He
had been a clerk in the Midland Railway, a canvasser for advertisements
for The Irish Times and for The Freeman's Journal, a town traveller
for a coal firm on commission, a private inquiry agent, a clerk in the
office of the Sub-Sheriff, and he had recently become secretary to the
City Coroner. His new office made him professionally interested in Mr.
Kernan's case.

"Pain? Not much," answered Mr. Kernan. "But it's so sickening. I feel as
if I wanted to retch off."

"That's the boose," said Mr. Cunningham firmly.

"No," said Mr. Kernan. "I think I caught a cold on the car. There's
something keeps coming into my throat, phlegm or----"

"Mucus." said Mr. M'Coy.

"It keeps coming like from down in my throat; sickening."

"Yes, yes," said Mr. M'Coy, "that's the thorax."

He looked at Mr. Cunningham and Mr. Power at the same time with an air
of challenge. Mr. Cunningham nodded his head rapidly and Mr. Power said:

"Ah, well, all's well that ends well."

"I'm very much obliged to you, old man," said the invalid.

Mr. Power waved his hand.

"Those other two fellows I was with----"

"Who were you with?" asked Mr. Cunningham.

"A chap. I don't know his name. Damn it now, what's his name? Little
chap with sandy hair...."

"And who else?"

"Harford."

"Hm," said Mr. Cunningham.

When Mr. Cunningham made that remark, people were silent. It was known
that the speaker had secret sources of information. In this case the
monosyllable had a moral intention. Mr. Harford sometimes formed one
of a little detachment which left the city shortly after noon on Sunday
with the purpose of arriving as soon as possible at some public-house on
the outskirts of the city where its members duly qualified themselves as
bona fide travellers. But his fellow-travellers had never consented
to overlook his origin. He had begun life as an obscure financier by
lending small sums of money to workmen at usurious interest. Later on he
had become the partner of a very fat, short gentleman, Mr. Goldberg, in
the Liffey Loan Bank. Though he had never embraced more than the Jewish
ethical code, his fellow-Catholics, whenever they had smarted in person
or by proxy under his exactions, spoke of him bitterly as an Irish Jew
and an illiterate, and saw divine disapproval of usury made manifest
through the person of his idiot son. At other times they remembered his
good points.

"I wonder where did he go to," said Mr. Kernan.

He wished the details of the incident to remain vague. He wished his
friends to think there had been some mistake, that Mr. Harford and he
had missed each other. His friends, who knew quite well Mr. Harford's
manners in drinking were silent. Mr. Power said again:

"All's well that ends well."

Mr. Kernan changed the subject at once.

"That was a decent young chap, that medical fellow," he said. "Only for
him----"

"O, only for him," said Mr. Power, "it might have been a case of seven
days, without the option of a fine."

"Yes, yes," said Mr. Kernan, trying to remember. "I remember now there
was a policeman. Decent young fellow, he seemed. How did it happen at
all?"

"It happened that you were peloothered, Tom," said Mr. Cunningham
gravely.

"True bill," said Mr. Kernan, equally gravely.

"I suppose you squared the constable, Jack," said Mr. M'Coy.

Mr. Power did not relish the use of his Christian name. He was not
straight-laced, but he could not forget that Mr. M'Coy had recently made
a crusade in search of valises and portmanteaus to enable Mrs. M'Coy to
fulfil imaginary engagements in the country. More than he resented the
fact that he had been victimised he resented such low playing of the
game. He answered the question, therefore, as if Mr. Kernan had asked
it.

The narrative made Mr. Kernan indignant. He was keenly conscious of his
citizenship, wished to live with his city on terms mutually honourable
and resented any affront put upon him by those whom he called country
bumpkins.

"Is this what we pay rates for?" he asked. "To feed and clothe these
ignorant bostooms... and they're nothing else."

Mr. Cunningham laughed. He was a Castle official only during office
hours.

"How could they be anything else, Tom?" he said.

He assumed a thick, provincial accent and said in a tone of command:

"65, catch your cabbage!"

Everyone laughed. Mr. M'Coy, who wanted to enter the conversation by any
door, pretended that he had never heard the story. Mr. Cunningham said:

"It is supposed--they say, you know--to take place in the depot where
they get these thundering big country fellows, omadhauns, you know, to
drill. The sergeant makes them stand in a row against the wall and hold
up their plates."

He illustrated the story by grotesque gestures.

"At dinner, you know. Then he has a bloody big bowl of cabbage before
him on the table and a bloody big spoon like a shovel. He takes up a wad
of cabbage on the spoon and pegs it across the room and the poor devils
have to try and catch it on their plates: 65, catch your cabbage."

Everyone laughed again: but Mr. Kernan was somewhat indignant still. He
talked of writing a letter to the papers.

"These yahoos coming up here," he said, "think they can boss the people.
I needn't tell you, Martin, what kind of men they are."

Mr. Cunningham gave a qualified assent.

"It's like everything else in this world," he said. "You get some bad
ones and you get some good ones."

"O yes, you get some good ones, I admit," said Mr. Kernan, satisfied.

"It's better to have nothing to say to them," said Mr. M'Coy. "That's my
opinion!"

Mrs. Kernan entered the room and, placing a tray on the table, said:

"Help yourselves, gentlemen."

Mr. Power stood up to officiate, offering her his chair. She declined
it, saying she was ironing downstairs, and, after having exchanged a nod
with Mr. Cunningham behind Mr. Power's back, prepared to leave the room.
Her husband called out to her:

"And have you nothing for me, duckie?"

"O, you! The back of my hand to you!" said Mrs. Kernan tartly.

Her husband called after her:

"Nothing for poor little hubby!"

He assumed such a comical face and voice that the distribution of the
bottles of stout took place amid general merriment.

The gentlemen drank from their glasses, set the glasses again on the
table and paused. Then Mr. Cunningham turned towards Mr. Power and said
casually:

"On Thursday night, you said, Jack."

"Thursday, yes," said Mr. Power.

"Righto!" said Mr. Cunningham promptly.

"We can meet in M'Auley's," said Mr. M'Coy. "That'll be the most
convenient place."

"But we mustn't be late," said Mr. Power earnestly, "because it is sure
to be crammed to the doors."

"We can meet at half-seven," said Mr. M'Coy.

"Righto!" said Mr. Cunningham.

"Half-seven at M'Auley's be it!"

There was a short silence. Mr. Kernan waited to see whether he would be
taken into his friends' confidence. Then he asked:

"What's in the wind?"

"O, it's nothing," said Mr. Cunningham. "It's only a little matter that
we're arranging about for Thursday."

"The opera, is it?" said Mr. Kernan.

"No, no," said Mr. Cunningham in an evasive tone, "it's just a little...
spiritual matter."

"O," said Mr. Kernan.

There was silence again. Then Mr. Power said, point blank:

"To tell you the truth, Tom, we're going to make a retreat."

"Yes, that's it," said Mr. Cunningham, "Jack and I and M'Coy here--we're
all going to wash the pot."

He uttered the metaphor with a certain homely energy and, encouraged by
his own voice, proceeded:

"You see, we may as well all admit we're a nice collection of
scoundrels, one and all. I say, one and all," he added with gruff
charity and turning to Mr. Power. "Own up now!"

"I own up," said Mr. Power.

"And I own up," said Mr. M'Coy.

"So we're going to wash the pot together," said Mr. Cunningham.

A thought seemed to strike him. He turned suddenly to the invalid and
said:

"D'ye know what, Tom, has just occurred to me? You night join in and
we'd have a four-handed reel."

"Good idea," said Mr. Power. "The four of us together."

Mr. Kernan was silent. The proposal conveyed very little meaning to
his mind, but, understanding that some spiritual agencies were about to
concern themselves on his behalf, he thought he owed it to his dignity
to show a stiff neck. He took no part in the conversation for a long
while, but listened, with an air of calm enmity, while his friends
discussed the Jesuits.

"I haven't such a bad opinion of the Jesuits," he said, intervening at
length. "They're an educated order. I believe they mean well, too."

"They're the grandest order in the Church, Tom," said Mr. Cunningham,
with enthusiasm. "The General of the Jesuits stands next to the Pope."

"There's no mistake about it," said Mr. M'Coy, "if you want a thing
well done and no flies about, you go to a Jesuit. They're the boyos have
influence. I'll tell you a case in point...."

"The Jesuits are a fine body of men," said Mr. Power.

"It's a curious thing," said Mr. Cunningham, "about the Jesuit Order.
Every other order of the Church had to be reformed at some time or other
but the Jesuit Order was never once reformed. It never fell away."

"Is that so?" asked Mr. M'Coy.

"That's a fact," said Mr. Cunningham. "That's history."

"Look at their church, too," said Mr. Power. "Look at the congregation
they have."

"The Jesuits cater for the upper classes," said Mr. M'Coy.

"Of course," said Mr. Power.

"Yes," said Mr. Kernan. "That's why I have a feeling for them. It's some
of those secular priests, ignorant, bumptious----"

"They're all good men," said Mr. Cunningham, "each in his own way. The
Irish priesthood is honoured all the world over."

"O yes," said Mr. Power.

"Not like some of the other priesthoods on the continent," said Mr.
M'Coy, "unworthy of the name."

"Perhaps you're right," said Mr. Kernan, relenting.

"Of course I'm right," said Mr. Cunningham. "I haven't been in the
world all this time and seen most sides of it without being a judge of
character."

The gentlemen drank again, one following another's example. Mr. Kernan
seemed to be weighing something in his mind. He was impressed. He had a
high opinion of Mr. Cunningham as a judge of character and as a reader
of faces. He asked for particulars.

"O, it's just a retreat, you know," said Mr. Cunningham. "Father Purdon
is giving it. It's for business men, you know."

"He won't be too hard on us, Tom," said Mr. Power persuasively.

"Father Purdon? Father Purdon?" said the invalid.

"O, you must know him, Tom," said Mr. Cunningham stoutly. "Fine, jolly
fellow! He's a man of the world like ourselves."

"Ah,... yes. I think I know him. Rather red face; tall."

"That's the man."

"And tell me, Martin.... Is he a good preacher?"

"Munno.... It's not exactly a sermon, you know. It's just kind of a
friendly talk, you know, in a common-sense way."

Mr. Kernan deliberated. Mr. M'Coy said:

"Father Tom Burke, that was the boy!"

"O, Father Tom Burke," said Mr. Cunningham, "that was a born orator. Did
you ever hear him, Tom?"

"Did I ever hear him!" said the invalid, nettled. "Rather! I heard
him...."

"And yet they say he wasn't much of a theologian," said Mr Cunningham.

"Is that so?" said Mr. M'Coy.

"O, of course, nothing wrong, you know. Only sometimes, they say, he
didn't preach what was quite orthodox."

"Ah!... he was a splendid man," said Mr. M'Coy.

"I heard him once," Mr. Kernan continued. "I forget the subject of his
discourse now. Crofton and I were in the back of the... pit, you know...
the----"

"The body," said Mr. Cunningham.

"Yes, in the back near the door. I forget now what.... O yes, it was
on the Pope, the late Pope. I remember it well. Upon my word it was
magnificent, the style of the oratory. And his voice! God! hadn't he a
voice! The Prisoner of the Vatican, he called him. I remember Crofton
saying to me when we came out----"

"But he's an Orangeman, Crofton, isn't he?" said Mr. Power.

"'Course he is," said Mr. Kernan, "and a damned decent Orangeman too. We
went into Butler's in Moore Street--faith, I was genuinely moved, tell you
the God's truth--and I remember well his very words. 'Kernan,' he said, 'we
worship at different altars, he said, but our belief is the same.' Struck
me as very well put."

"There's a good deal in that," said Mr. Power. "There used always to be
crowds of Protestants in the chapel where Father Tom was preaching."

"There's not much difference between us," said Mr. M'Coy.

"We both believe in----"

He hesitated for a moment.

"... in the Redeemer. Only they don't believe in the Pope and in the
mother of God."

"But, of course," said Mr. Cunningham quietly and effectively, "our
religion is the religion, the old, original faith."

"Not a doubt of it," said Mr. Kernan warmly.

Mrs. Kernan came to the door of the bedroom and announced:

"Here's a visitor for you!"

"Who is it?"

"Mr. Fogarty."

"O, come in! come in!"

A pale, oval face came forward into the light. The arch of its fair
trailing moustache was repeated in the fair eyebrows looped above
pleasantly astonished eyes. Mr. Fogarty was a modest grocer. He had
failed in business in a licensed house in the city because his financial
condition had constrained him to tie himself to second-class distillers
and brewers. He had opened a small shop on Glasnevin Road where, he
flattered himself, his manners would ingratiate him with the housewives
of the district. He bore himself with a certain grace, complimented
little children and spoke with a neat enunciation. He was not without
culture.

Mr. Fogarty brought a gift with him, a half-pint of special whisky. He
inquired politely for Mr. Kernan, placed his gift on the table and sat
down with the company on equal terms. Mr. Kernan appreciated the gift
all the more since he was aware that there was a small account for
groceries unsettled between him and Mr. Fogarty. He said:

"I wouldn't doubt you, old man. Open that, Jack, will you?"

Mr. Power again officiated. Glasses were rinsed and five small
measures of whisky were poured out. This new influence enlivened the
conversation. Mr. Fogarty, sitting on a small area of the chair, was
specially interested.

"Pope Leo XIII," said Mr. Cunningham, "was one of the lights of the age.
His great idea, you know, was the union of the Latin and Greek Churches.
That was the aim of his life."

"I often heard he was one of the most intellectual men in Europe," said
Mr. Power. "I mean, apart from his being Pope."

"So he was," said Mr. Cunningham, "if not the most so. His motto, you
know, as Pope, was Lux upon Lux--Light upon Light."

"No, no," said Mr. Fogarty eagerly. "I think you're wrong there. It was
Lux in Tenebris, I think--Light in Darkness."

"O yes," said Mr. M'Coy, "Tenebrae."

"Allow me," said Mr. Cunningham positively, "it was Lux upon Lux. And
Pius IX his predecessor's motto was Crux upon Crux--that is, Cross upon
Cross--to show the difference between their two pontificates."

The inference was allowed. Mr. Cunningham continued.

"Pope Leo, you know, was a great scholar and a poet."

"He had a strong face," said Mr. Kernan.

"Yes," said Mr. Cunningham. "He wrote Latin poetry."

"Is that so?" said Mr. Fogarty.

Mr. M'Coy tasted his whisky contentedly and shook his head with a double
intention, saying:

"That's no joke, I can tell you."

"We didn't learn that, Tom," said Mr. Power, following Mr. M'Coy's
example, "when we went to the penny-a-week school."

"There was many a good man went to the penny-a-week school with a sod
of turf under his oxter," said Mr. Kernan sententiously. "The old system
was the best: plain honest education. None of your modern trumpery...."

"Quite right," said Mr. Power.

"No superfluities," said Mr. Fogarty.

He enunciated the word and then drank gravely.

"I remember reading," said Mr. Cunningham, "that one of Pope Leo's poems
was on the invention of the photograph--in Latin, of course."

"On the photograph!" exclaimed Mr. Kernan.

"Yes," said Mr. Cunningham.

He also drank from his glass.

"Well, you know," said Mr. M'Coy, "isn't the photograph wonderful when
you come to think of it?"

"O, of course," said Mr. Power, "great minds can see things."

"As the poet says: Great minds are very near to madness," said Mr.
Fogarty.

Mr. Kernan seemed to be troubled in mind. He made an effort to recall
the Protestant theology on some thorny points and in the end addressed
Mr. Cunningham.

"Tell me, Martin," he said. "Weren't some of the popes--of course, not
our present man, or his predecessor, but some of the old popes--not
exactly... you know... up to the knocker?"

There was a silence. Mr. Cunningham said

"O, of course, there were some bad lots... But the astonishing thing
is this. Not one of them, not the biggest drunkard, not the most...
out-and-out ruffian, not one of them ever preached ex cathedra a word of
false doctrine. Now isn't that an astonishing thing?"

"That is," said Mr. Kernan.

"Yes, because when the Pope speaks ex cathedra," Mr. Fogarty explained,
"he is infallible."

"Yes," said Mr. Cunningham.

"O, I know about the infallibility of the Pope. I remember I was younger
then.... Or was it that----?"

Mr. Fogarty interrupted. He took up the bottle and helped the others to
a little more. Mr. M'Coy, seeing that there was not enough to go round,
pleaded that he had not finished his first measure. The others accepted
under protest. The light music of whisky falling into glasses made an
agreeable interlude.

"What's that you were saying, Tom?" asked Mr. M'Coy.

"Papal infallibility," said Mr. Cunningham, "that was the greatest scene
in the whole history of the Church."

"How was that, Martin?" asked Mr. Power.

Mr. Cunningham held up two thick fingers.

"In the sacred college, you know, of cardinals and archbishops and
bishops there were two men who held out against it while the others were
all for it. The whole conclave except these two was unanimous. No! They
wouldn't have it!"

"Ha!" said Mr. M'Coy.

"And they were a German cardinal by the name of Dolling... or Dowling...
or----"

"Dowling was no German, and that's a sure five," said Mr. Power,
laughing.

"Well, this great German cardinal, whatever his name was, was one; and
the other was John MacHale."

"What?" cried Mr. Kernan. "Is it John of Tuam?"

"Are you sure of that now?" asked Mr. Fogarty dubiously. "I thought it
was some Italian or American."

"John of Tuam," repeated Mr. Cunningham, "was the man."

He drank and the other gentlemen followed his lead. Then he resumed:

"There they were at it, all the cardinals and bishops and archbishops
from all the ends of the earth and these two fighting dog and devil
until at last the Pope himself stood up and declared infallibility a
dogma of the Church ex cathedra. On the very moment John MacHale, who
had been arguing and arguing against it, stood up and shouted out with
the voice of a lion: 'Credo!'"

"I believe!" said Mr. Fogarty.

"Credo!" said Mr. Cunningham. "That showed the faith he had. He submitted
the moment the Pope spoke."

"And what about Dowling?" asked Mr. M'Coy.

"The German cardinal wouldn't submit. He left the church."

Mr. Cunningham's words had built up the vast image of the church in the
minds of his hearers. His deep, raucous voice had thrilled them as it
uttered the word of belief and submission. When Mrs. Kernan came into
the room, drying her hands she came into a solemn company. She did not
disturb the silence, but leaned over the rail at the foot of the bed.

"I once saw John MacHale," said Mr. Kernan, "and I'll never forget it as
long as I live."

He turned towards his wife to be confirmed.

"I often told you that?"

Mrs. Kernan nodded.

"It was at the unveiling of Sir John Gray's statue. Edmund Dwyer
Gray was speaking, blathering away, and here was this old fellow,
crabbed-looking old chap, looking at him from under his bushy eyebrows."

Mr. Kernan knitted his brows and, lowering his head like an angry bull,
glared at his wife.

"God!" he exclaimed, resuming his natural face, "I never saw such an eye
in a man's head. It was as much as to say: I have you properly taped, my
lad. He had an eye like a hawk."

"None of the Grays was any good," said Mr. Power.

There was a pause again. Mr. Power turned to Mrs. Kernan and said with
abrupt joviality:

"Well, Mrs. Kernan, we're going to make your man here a good holy pious
and God-fearing Roman Catholic."

He swept his arm round the company inclusively.

"We're all going to make a retreat together and confess our sins--and
God knows we want it badly."

"I don't mind," said Mr. Kernan, smiling a little nervously.

Mrs. Kernan thought it would be wiser to conceal her satisfaction. So
she said:

"I pity the poor priest that has to listen to your tale."

Mr. Kernan's expression changed.

"If he doesn't like it," he said bluntly, "he can... do the other thing.
I'll just tell him my little tale of woe. I'm not such a bad fellow----"

Mr. Cunningham intervened promptly.

"We'll all renounce the devil," he said, "together, not forgetting his
works and pomps."

"Get behind me, Satan!" said Mr. Fogarty, laughing and looking at the
others.

Mr. Power said nothing. He felt completely out-generalled. But a pleased
expression flickered across his face.

"All we have to do," said Mr. Cunningham, "is to stand up with lighted
candles in our hands and renew our baptismal vows."

"O, don't forget the candle, Tom," said Mr. M'Coy, "whatever you do."

"What?" said Mr. Kernan. "Must I have a candle?"

"O yes," said Mr. Cunningham.

"No, damn it all," said Mr. Kernan sensibly, "I draw the line there.
I'll do the job right enough. I'll do the retreat business and
confession, and... all that business. But... no candles! No, damn it
all, I bar the candles!"

He shook his head with farcical gravity.

"Listen to that!" said his wife.

"I bar the candles," said Mr. Kernan, conscious of having created an
effect on his audience and continuing to shake his head to and fro. "I
bar the magic-lantern business."

Everyone laughed heartily.

"There's a nice Catholic for you!" said his wife.

"No candles!" repeated Mr. Kernan obdurately. "That's off!"


The transept of the Jesuit Church in Gardiner Street was almost full;
and still at every moment gentlemen entered from the side door and,
directed by the lay-brother, walked on tiptoe along the aisles until
they found seating accommodation. The gentlemen were all well dressed
and orderly. The light of the lamps of the church fell upon an assembly
of black clothes and white collars, relieved here and there by tweeds,
on dark mottled pillars of green marble and on lugubrious canvases. The
gentlemen sat in the benches, having hitched their trousers slightly
above their knees and laid their hats in security. They sat well back
and gazed formally at the distant speck of red light which was suspended
before the high altar.

In one of the benches near the pulpit sat Mr. Cunningham and Mr. Kernan.
In the bench behind sat Mr. M'Coy alone: and in the bench behind him sat
Mr. Power and Mr. Fogarty. Mr. M'Coy had tried unsuccessfully to find a
place in the bench with the others, and, when the party had settled down
in the form of a quincunx, he had tried unsuccessfully to make comic
remarks. As these had not been well received, he had desisted. Even he
was sensible of the decorous atmosphere and even he began to respond to
the religious stimulus. In a whisper, Mr. Cunningham drew Mr. Kernan's
attention to Mr. Harford, the moneylender, who sat some distance off,
and to Mr. Fanning, the registration agent and mayor maker of the city,
who was sitting immediately under the pulpit beside one of the newly
elected councillors of the ward. To the right sat old Michael Grimes,
the owner of three pawnbroker's shops, and Dan Hogan's nephew, who was
up for the job in the Town Clerk's office. Farther in front sat
Mr. Hendrick, the chief reporter of The Freeman's Journal, and poor
O'Carroll, an old friend of Mr. Kernan's, who had been at one time a
considerable commercial figure. Gradually, as he recognised familiar
faces, Mr. Kernan began to feel more at home. His hat, which had been
rehabilitated by his wife, rested upon his knees. Once or twice he
pulled down his cuffs with one hand while he held the brim of his hat
lightly, but firmly, with the other hand.

A powerful-looking figure, the upper part of which was draped with
a white surplice, was observed to be struggling into the pulpit.
Simultaneously the congregation unsettled, produced handkerchiefs and
knelt upon them with care. Mr. Kernan followed the general example. The
priest's figure now stood upright in the pulpit, two-thirds of its bulk,
crowned by a massive red face, appearing above the balustrade.

Father Purdon knelt down, turned towards the red speck of light
and, covering his face with his hands, prayed. After an interval, he
uncovered his face and rose. The congregation rose also and settled
again on its benches. Mr. Kernan restored his hat to its original
position on his knee and presented an attentive face to the preacher.
The preacher turned back each wide sleeve of his surplice with an
elaborate large gesture and slowly surveyed the array of faces. Then he
said:

"For the children of this world are wiser in their generation than the
children of light. Wherefore make unto yourselves friends out of the
mammon of iniquity so that when you die they may receive you into
everlasting dwellings."

Father Purdon developed the text with resonant assurance. It was one of
the most difficult texts in all the Scriptures, he said, to interpret
properly. It was a text which might seem to the casual observer at
variance with the lofty morality elsewhere preached by Jesus Christ.
But, he told his hearers, the text had seemed to him specially adapted
for the guidance of those whose lot it was to lead the life of the world
and who yet wished to lead that life not in the manner of worldlings. It
was a text for business men and professional men. Jesus Christ, with His
divine understanding of every cranny of our human nature, understood
that all men were not called to the religious life, that by far the vast
majority were forced to live in the world, and, to a certain extent,
for the world: and in this sentence He designed to give them a word of
counsel, setting before them as exemplars in the religious life those
very worshippers of Mammon who were of all men the least solicitous in
matters religious.

He told his hearers that he was there that evening for no terrifying,
no extravagant purpose; but as a man of the world speaking to his
fellow-men. He came to speak to business men and he would speak to them
in a businesslike way. If he might use the metaphor, he said, he was
their spiritual accountant; and he wished each and every one of his
hearers to open his books, the books of his spiritual life, and see if
they tallied accurately with conscience.

Jesus Christ was not a hard taskmaster. He understood our little
failings, understood the weakness of our poor fallen nature, understood
the temptations of this life. We might have had, we all had from time to
time, our temptations: we might have, we all had, our failings. But one
thing only, he said, he would ask of his hearers. And that was: to be
straight and manly with God. If their accounts tallied in every point to
say:

"Well, I have verified my accounts. I find all well."

But if, as might happen, there were some discrepancies, to admit the
truth, to be frank and say like a man:

"Well, I have looked into my accounts. I find this wrong and this wrong.
But, with God's grace, I will rectify this and this. I will set right my
accounts."




THE DEAD

LILY, the caretaker's daughter, was literally run off her feet. Hardly
had she brought one gentleman into the little pantry behind the office
on the ground floor and helped him off with his overcoat than the wheezy
hall-door bell clanged again and she had to scamper along the bare
hallway to let in another guest. It was well for her she had not to
attend to the ladies also. But Miss Kate and Miss Julia had thought
of that and had converted the bathroom upstairs into a ladies'
dressing-room. Miss Kate and Miss Julia were there, gossiping and
laughing and fussing, walking after each other to the head of the
stairs, peering down over the banisters and calling down to Lily to ask
her who had come.

It was always a great affair, the Misses Morkan's annual dance.
Everybody who knew them came to it, members of the family, old friends
of the family, the members of Julia's choir, any of Kate's pupils that
were grown up enough, and even some of Mary Jane's pupils too. Never
once had it fallen flat. For years and years it had gone off in splendid
style, as long as anyone could remember; ever since Kate and Julia,
after the death of their brother Pat, had left the house in Stoney
Batter and taken Mary Jane, their only niece, to live with them in the
dark, gaunt house on Usher's Island, the upper part of which they had
rented from Mr. Fulham, the corn-factor on the ground floor. That was a
good thirty years ago if it was a day. Mary Jane, who was then a little
girl in short clothes, was now the main prop of the household, for she
had the organ in Haddington Road. She had been through the Academy
and gave a pupils' concert every year in the upper room of the Antient
Concert Rooms. Many of her pupils belonged to the better-class families
on the Kingstown and Dalkey line. Old as they were, her aunts also did
their share. Julia, though she was quite grey, was still the leading
soprano in Adam and Eve's, and Kate, being too feeble to go about much,
gave music lessons to beginners on the old square piano in the back
room. Lily, the caretaker's daughter, did housemaid's work for them.
Though their life was modest, they believed in eating well; the best
of everything: diamond-bone sirloins, three-shilling tea and the best
bottled stout. But Lily seldom made a mistake in the orders, so that she
got on well with her three mistresses. They were fussy, that was all.
But the only thing they would not stand was back answers.

Of course, they had good reason to be fussy on such a night. And then it
was long after ten o'clock and yet there was no sign of Gabriel and his
wife. Besides they were dreadfully afraid that Freddy Malins might
turn up screwed. They would not wish for worlds that any of Mary Jane's
pupils should see him under the influence; and when he was like that it
was sometimes very hard to manage him. Freddy Malins always came late,
but they wondered what could be keeping Gabriel: and that was what
brought them every two minutes to the banisters to ask Lily had Gabriel
or Freddy come.

"O, Mr. Conroy," said Lily to Gabriel when she opened the door for him,
"Miss Kate and Miss Julia thought you were never coming. Good-night,
Mrs. Conroy."

"I'll engage they did," said Gabriel, "but they forget that my wife here
takes three mortal hours to dress herself."

He stood on the mat, scraping the snow from his goloshes, while Lily led
his wife to the foot of the stairs and called out:

"Miss Kate, here's Mrs. Conroy."

Kate and Julia came toddling down the dark stairs at once. Both of them
kissed Gabriel's wife, said she must be perished alive, and asked was
Gabriel with her.

"Here I am as right as the mail, Aunt Kate! Go on up. I'll follow,"
called out Gabriel from the dark.

He continued scraping his feet vigorously while the three women went
upstairs, laughing, to the ladies' dressing-room. A light fringe of snow
lay like a cape on the shoulders of his overcoat and like toecaps on the
toes of his goloshes; and, as the buttons of his overcoat slipped with a
squeaking noise through the snow-stiffened frieze, a cold, fragrant air
from out-of-doors escaped from crevices and folds.

"Is it snowing again, Mr. Conroy?" asked Lily.

She had preceded him into the pantry to help him off with his overcoat.
Gabriel smiled at the three syllables she had given his surname and
glanced at her. She was a slim, growing girl, pale in complexion and
with hay-coloured hair. The gas in the pantry made her look still paler.
Gabriel had known her when she was a child and used to sit on the lowest
step nursing a rag doll.

"Yes, Lily," he answered, "and I think we're in for a night of it."

He looked up at the pantry ceiling, which was shaking with the stamping
and shuffling of feet on the floor above, listened for a moment to
the piano and then glanced at the girl, who was folding his overcoat
carefully at the end of a shelf.

"Tell me. Lily," he said in a friendly tone, "do you still go to
school?"

"O no, sir," she answered. "I'm done schooling this year and more."

"O, then," said Gabriel gaily, "I suppose we'll be going to your wedding
one of these fine days with your young man, eh?"

The girl glanced back at him over her shoulder and said with great
bitterness:

"The men that is now is only all palaver and what they can get out of
you."

Gabriel coloured, as if he felt he had made a mistake and, without
looking at her, kicked off his goloshes and flicked actively with his
muffler at his patent-leather shoes.

He was a stout, tallish young man. The high colour of his cheeks
pushed upwards even to his forehead, where it scattered itself in a
few formless patches of pale red; and on his hairless face there
scintillated restlessly the polished lenses and the bright gilt rims of
the glasses which screened his delicate and restless eyes. His glossy
black hair was parted in the middle and brushed in a long curve behind
his ears where it curled slightly beneath the groove left by his hat.

When he had flicked lustre into his shoes he stood up and pulled his
waistcoat down more tightly on his plump body. Then he took a coin
rapidly from his pocket.

"O Lily," he said, thrusting it into her hands, "it's Christmastime,
isn't it? Just... here's a little...."

He walked rapidly towards the door.

"O no, sir!" cried the girl, following him. "Really, sir, I wouldn't
take it."

"Christmas-time! Christmas-time!" said Gabriel, almost trotting to the
stairs and waving his hand to her in deprecation.

The girl, seeing that he had gained the stairs, called out after him:

"Well, thank you, sir."

He waited outside the drawing-room door until the waltz should finish,
listening to the skirts that swept against it and to the shuffling of
feet. He was still discomposed by the girl's bitter and sudden retort.
It had cast a gloom over him which he tried to dispel by arranging his
cuffs and the bows of his tie. He then took from his waistcoat pocket a
little paper and glanced at the headings he had made for his speech. He
was undecided about the lines from Robert Browning, for he feared they
would be above the heads of his hearers. Some quotation that they would
recognise from Shakespeare or from the Melodies would be better. The
indelicate clacking of the men's heels and the shuffling of their soles
reminded him that their grade of culture differed from his. He would
only make himself ridiculous by quoting poetry to them which they
could not understand. They would think that he was airing his superior
education. He would fail with them just as he had failed with the girl
in the pantry. He had taken up a wrong tone. His whole speech was a
mistake from first to last, an utter failure.

Just then his aunts and his wife came out of the ladies' dressing-room.
His aunts were two small, plainly dressed old women. Aunt Julia was an
inch or so the taller. Her hair, drawn low over the tops of her ears,
was grey; and grey also, with darker shadows, was her large flaccid
face. Though she was stout in build and stood erect, her slow eyes and
parted lips gave her the appearance of a woman who did not know where
she was or where she was going. Aunt Kate was more vivacious. Her
face, healthier than her sister's, was all puckers and creases, like a
shrivelled red apple, and her hair, braided in the same old-fashioned
way, had not lost its ripe nut colour.

They both kissed Gabriel frankly. He was their favourite nephew, the son
of their dead elder sister, Ellen, who had married T. J. Conroy of the
Port and Docks.

"Gretta tells me you're not going to take a cab back to Monkstown
tonight, Gabriel," said Aunt Kate.

"No," said Gabriel, turning to his wife, "we had quite enough of that
last year, hadn't we? Don't you remember, Aunt Kate, what a cold Gretta
got out of it? Cab windows rattling all the way, and the east wind
blowing in after we passed Merrion. Very jolly it was. Gretta caught a
dreadful cold."

Aunt Kate frowned severely and nodded her head at every word.

"Quite right, Gabriel, quite right," she said. "You can't be too
careful."

"But as for Gretta there," said Gabriel, "she'd walk home in the snow if
she were let."

Mrs. Conroy laughed.

"Don't mind him, Aunt Kate," she said. "He's really an awful bother,
what with green shades for Tom's eyes at night and making him do the
dumb-bells, and forcing Eva to eat the stirabout. The poor child! And
she simply hates the sight of it!... O, but you'll never guess what he
makes me wear now!"

She broke out into a peal of laughter and glanced at her husband, whose
admiring and happy eyes had been wandering from her dress to her face
and hair. The two aunts laughed heartily, too, for Gabriel's solicitude
was a standing joke with them.

"Goloshes!" said Mrs. Conroy. "That's the latest. Whenever it's wet
underfoot I must put on my galoshes. Tonight even, he wanted me to put
them on, but I wouldn't. The next thing he'll buy me will be a diving
suit."

Gabriel laughed nervously and patted his tie reassuringly, while Aunt
Kate nearly doubled herself, so heartily did she enjoy the joke. The
smile soon faded from Aunt Julia's face and her mirthless eyes were
directed towards her nephew's face. After a pause she asked:

"And what are goloshes, Gabriel?"

"Goloshes, Julia!" exclaimed her sister "Goodness me, don't you know
what goloshes are? You wear them over your... over your boots, Gretta,
isn't it?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Conroy. "Guttapercha things. We both have a pair now.
Gabriel says everyone wears them on the Continent."

"O, on the Continent," murmured Aunt Julia, nodding her head slowly.

Gabriel knitted his brows and said, as if he were slightly angered:

"It's nothing very wonderful, but Gretta thinks it very funny because
she says the word reminds her of Christy Minstrels."

"But tell me, Gabriel," said Aunt Kate, with brisk tact. "Of course,
you've seen about the room. Gretta was saying..."

"O, the room is all right," replied Gabriel. "I've taken one in the
Gresham."

"To be sure," said Aunt Kate, "by far the best thing to do. And the
children, Gretta, you're not anxious about them?"

"O, for one night," said Mrs. Conroy. "Besides, Bessie will look after
them."

"To be sure," said Aunt Kate again. "What a comfort it is to have a girl
like that, one you can depend on! There's that Lily, I'm sure I don't
know what has come over her lately. She's not the girl she was at all."

Gabriel was about to ask his aunt some questions on this point, but she
broke off suddenly to gaze after her sister, who had wandered down the
stairs and was craning her neck over the banisters.

"Now, I ask you," she said almost testily, "where is Julia going? Julia!
Julia! Where are you going?"

Julia, who had gone half way down one flight, came back and announced
blandly:

"Here's Freddy."

At the same moment a clapping of hands and a final flourish of the
pianist told that the waltz had ended. The drawing-room door was opened
from within and some couples came out. Aunt Kate drew Gabriel aside
hurriedly and whispered into his ear:

"Slip down, Gabriel, like a good fellow and see if he's all right, and
don't let him up if he's screwed. I'm sure he's screwed. I'm sure he
is."

Gabriel went to the stairs and listened over the banisters. He could
hear two persons talking in the pantry. Then he recognised Freddy
Malins' laugh. He went down the stairs noisily.

"It's such a relief," said Aunt Kate to Mrs. Conroy, "that Gabriel is
here. I always feel easier in my mind when he's here.... Julia, there's
Miss Daly and Miss Power will take some refreshment. Thanks for your
beautiful waltz, Miss Daly. It made lovely time."

A tall wizen-faced man, with a stiff grizzled moustache and swarthy
skin, who was passing out with his partner, said:

"And may we have some refreshment, too, Miss Morkan?"

"Julia," said Aunt Kate summarily, "and here's Mr. Browne and Miss
Furlong. Take them in, Julia, with Miss Daly and Miss Power."

"I'm the man for the ladies," said Mr. Browne, pursing his lips until
his moustache bristled and smiling in all his wrinkles. "You know, Miss
Morkan, the reason they are so fond of me is----"

He did not finish his sentence, but, seeing that Aunt Kate was out of
earshot, at once led the three young ladies into the back room. The
middle of the room was occupied by two square tables placed end to
end, and on these Aunt Julia and the caretaker were straightening
and smoothing a large cloth. On the sideboard were arrayed dishes and
plates, and glasses and bundles of knives and forks and spoons. The top
of the closed square piano served also as a sideboard for viands
and sweets. At a smaller sideboard in one corner two young men were
standing, drinking hop-bitters.

Mr. Browne led his charges thither and invited them all, in jest, to
some ladies' punch, hot, strong and sweet. As they said they never took
anything strong, he opened three bottles of lemonade for them. Then
he asked one of the young men to move aside, and, taking hold of the
decanter, filled out for himself a goodly measure of whisky. The young
men eyed him respectfully while he took a trial sip.

"God help me," he said, smiling, "it's the doctor's orders."

His wizened face broke into a broader smile, and the three young ladies
laughed in musical echo to his pleasantry, swaying their bodies to and
fro, with nervous jerks of their shoulders. The boldest said:

"O, now, Mr. Browne, I'm sure the doctor never ordered anything of the
kind."

Mr. Browne took another sip of his whisky and said, with sidling
mimicry:

"Well, you see, I'm like the famous Mrs. Cassidy, who is reported to
have said: 'Now, Mary Grimes, if I don't take it, make me take it, for I
feel I want it.'"

His hot face had leaned forward a little too confidentially and he had
assumed a very low Dublin accent so that the young ladies, with one
instinct, received his speech in silence. Miss Furlong, who was one
of Mary Jane's pupils, asked Miss Daly what was the name of the pretty
waltz she had played; and Mr. Browne, seeing that he was ignored, turned
promptly to the two young men who were more appreciative.

A red-faced young woman, dressed in pansy, came into the room, excitedly
clapping her hands and crying:

"Quadrilles! Quadrilles!"

Close on her heels came Aunt Kate, crying:

"Two gentlemen and three ladies, Mary Jane!"

"O, here's Mr. Bergin and Mr. Kerrigan," said Mary Jane. "Mr. Kerrigan,
will you take Miss Power? Miss Furlong, may I get you a partner, Mr.
Bergin. O, that'll just do now."

"Three ladies, Mary Jane," said Aunt Kate.

The two young gentlemen asked the ladies if they might have the
pleasure, and Mary Jane turned to Miss Daly.

"O, Miss Daly, you're really awfully good, after playing for the last
two dances, but really we're so short of ladies tonight."

"I don't mind in the least, Miss Morkan."

"But I've a nice partner for you, Mr. Bartell D'Arcy, the tenor. I'll
get him to sing later on. All Dublin is raving about him."

"Lovely voice, lovely voice!" said Aunt Kate.

As the piano had twice begun the prelude to the first figure Mary Jane
led her recruits quickly from the room. They had hardly gone when Aunt
Julia wandered slowly into the room, looking behind her at something.

"What is the matter, Julia?" asked Aunt Kate anxiously. "Who is it?"

Julia, who was carrying in a column of table-napkins, turned to her
sister and said, simply, as if the question had surprised her:

"It's only Freddy, Kate, and Gabriel with him."

In fact right behind her Gabriel could be seen piloting Freddy Malins
across the landing. The latter, a young man of about forty, was of
Gabriel's size and build, with very round shoulders. His face was fleshy
and pallid, touched with colour only at the thick hanging lobes of his
ears and at the wide wings of his nose. He had coarse features, a
blunt nose, a convex and receding brow, tumid and protruded lips. His
heavy-lidded eyes and the disorder of his scanty hair made him look
sleepy. He was laughing heartily in a high key at a story which he had
been telling Gabriel on the stairs and at the same time rubbing the
knuckles of his left fist backwards and forwards into his left eye.

"Good-evening, Freddy," said Aunt Julia.

Freddy Malins bade the Misses Morkan good-evening in what seemed an
offhand fashion by reason of the habitual catch in his voice and then,
seeing that Mr. Browne was grinning at him from the sideboard, crossed
the room on rather shaky legs and began to repeat in an undertone the
story he had just told to Gabriel.

"He's not so bad, is he?" said Aunt Kate to Gabriel.

Gabriel's brows were dark but he raised them quickly and answered:

"O, no, hardly noticeable."

"Now, isn't he a terrible fellow!" she said. "And his poor mother made
him take the pledge on New Year's Eve. But come on, Gabriel, into the
drawing-room."

Before leaving the room with Gabriel she signalled to Mr. Browne by
frowning and shaking her forefinger in warning to and fro. Mr. Browne
nodded in answer and, when she had gone, said to Freddy Malins:

"Now, then, Teddy, I'm going to fill you out a good glass of lemonade
just to buck you up."

Freddy Malins, who was nearing the climax of his story, waved the offer
aside impatiently but Mr. Browne, having first called Freddy Malins'
attention to a disarray in his dress, filled out and handed him a
full glass of lemonade. Freddy Malins' left hand accepted the
glass mechanically, his right hand being engaged in the mechanical
readjustment of his dress. Mr. Browne, whose face was once more
wrinkling with mirth, poured out for himself a glass of whisky while
Freddy Malins exploded, before he had well reached the climax of his
story, in a kink of high-pitched bronchitic laughter and, setting down
his untasted and overflowing glass, began to rub the knuckles of his
left fist backwards and forwards into his left eye, repeating words of
his last phrase as well as his fit of laughter would allow him.

Gabriel could not listen while Mary Jane was playing her Academy piece,
full of runs and difficult passages, to the hushed drawing-room. He
liked music but the piece she was playing had no melody for him and he
doubted whether it had any melody for the other listeners, though they
had begged Mary Jane to play something. Four young men, who had come
from the refreshment-room to stand in the doorway at the sound of the
piano, had gone away quietly in couples after a few minutes. The only
persons who seemed to follow the music were Mary Jane herself, her hands
racing along the key-board or lifted from it at the pauses like those
of a priestess in momentary imprecation, and Aunt Kate standing at her
elbow to turn the page.

Gabriel's eyes, irritated by the floor, which glittered with beeswax
under the heavy chandelier, wandered to the wall above the piano. A
picture of the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet hung there and beside
it was a picture of the two murdered princes in the Tower which Aunt
Julia had worked in red, blue and brown wools when she was a girl.
Probably in the school they had gone to as girls that kind of work had
been taught for one year. His mother had worked for him as a birthday
present a waistcoat of purple tabinet, with little foxes' heads upon it,
lined with brown satin and having round mulberry buttons. It was strange
that his mother had had no musical talent though Aunt Kate used to call
her the brains carrier of the Morkan family. Both she and Julia had
always seemed a little proud of their serious and matronly sister. Her
photograph stood before the pierglass. She held an open book on her
knees and was pointing out something in it to Constantine who, dressed
in a man-o-war suit, lay at her feet. It was she who had chosen the name
of her sons for she was very sensible of the dignity of family life.
Thanks to her, Constantine was now senior curate in Balbrigan and,
thanks to her, Gabriel himself had taken his degree in the Royal
University. A shadow passed over his face as he remembered her sullen
opposition to his marriage. Some slighting phrases she had used still
rankled in his memory; she had once spoken of Gretta as being country
cute and that was not true of Gretta at all. It was Gretta who had
nursed her during all her last long illness in their house at Monkstown.

He knew that Mary Jane must be near the end of her piece for she was
playing again the opening melody with runs of scales after every bar and
while he waited for the end the resentment died down in his heart.
The piece ended with a trill of octaves in the treble and a final deep
octave in the bass. Great applause greeted Mary Jane as, blushing and
rolling up her music nervously, she escaped from the room. The most
vigorous clapping came from the four young men in the doorway who had
gone away to the refreshment-room at the beginning of the piece but had
come back when the piano had stopped.

Lancers were arranged. Gabriel found himself partnered with Miss Ivors.
She was a frank-mannered talkative young lady, with a freckled face and
prominent brown eyes. She did not wear a low-cut bodice and the large
brooch which was fixed in the front of her collar bore on it an Irish
device and motto.

When they had taken their places she said abruptly:

"I have a crow to pluck with you."

"With me?" said Gabriel.

She nodded her head gravely.

"What is it?" asked Gabriel, smiling at her solemn manner.

"Who is G. C.?" answered Miss Ivors, turning her eyes upon him.

Gabriel coloured and was about to knit his brows, as if he did not
understand, when she said bluntly:

"O, innocent Amy! I have found out that you write for The Daily Express.
Now, aren't you ashamed of yourself?"

"Why should I be ashamed of myself?" asked Gabriel, blinking his eyes
and trying to smile.

"Well, I'm ashamed of you," said Miss Ivors frankly. "To say you'd write
for a paper like that. I didn't think you were a West Briton."

A look of perplexity appeared on Gabriel's face. It was true that he
wrote a literary column every Wednesday in The Daily Express, for which
he was paid fifteen shillings. But that did not make him a West Briton
surely. The books he received for review were almost more welcome than
the paltry cheque. He loved to feel the covers and turn over the pages
of newly printed books. Nearly every day when his teaching in the
college was ended he used to wander down the quays to the second-hand
booksellers, to Hickey's on Bachelor's Walk, to Web's or Massey's on
Aston's Quay, or to O'Clohissey's in the by-street. He did not know how
to meet her charge. He wanted to say that literature was above politics.
But they were friends of many years' standing and their careers had been
parallel, first at the University and then as teachers: he could not
risk a grandiose phrase with her. He continued blinking his eyes and
trying to smile and murmured lamely that he saw nothing political in
writing reviews of books.

When their turn to cross had come he was still perplexed and
inattentive. Miss Ivors promptly took his hand in a warm grasp and said
in a soft friendly tone:

"Of course, I was only joking. Come, we cross now."

When they were together again she spoke of the University question and
Gabriel felt more at ease. A friend of hers had shown her his review
of Browning's poems. That was how she had found out the secret: but she
liked the review immensely. Then she said suddenly:

"O, Mr. Conroy, will you come for an excursion to the Aran Isles this
summer? We're going to stay there a whole month. It will be splendid
out in the Atlantic. You ought to come. Mr. Clancy is coming, and Mr.
Kilkelly and Kathleen Kearney. It would be splendid for Gretta too if
she'd come. She's from Connacht, isn't she?"

"Her people are," said Gabriel shortly.

"But you will come, won't you?" said Miss Ivors, laying her warm hand
eagerly on his arm.

"The fact is," said Gabriel, "I have just arranged to go----"

"Go where?" asked Miss Ivors.

"Well, you know, every year I go for a cycling tour with some fellows
and so----"

"But where?" asked Miss Ivors.

"Well, we usually go to France or Belgium or perhaps Germany," said
Gabriel awkwardly.

"And why do you go to France and Belgium," said Miss Ivors, "instead of
visiting your own land?"

"Well," said Gabriel, "it's partly to keep in touch with the languages
and partly for a change."

"And haven't you your own language to keep in touch with--Irish?" asked
Miss Ivors.

"Well," said Gabriel, "if it comes to that, you know, Irish is not my
language."

Their neighbours had turned to listen to the cross-examination. Gabriel
glanced right and left nervously and tried to keep his good humour under
the ordeal which was making a blush invade his forehead.

"And haven't you your own land to visit," continued Miss Ivors, "that
you know nothing of, your own people, and your own country?"

"O, to tell you the truth," retorted Gabriel suddenly, "I'm sick of my
own country, sick of it!"

"Why?" asked Miss Ivors.

Gabriel did not answer for his retort had heated him.

"Why?" repeated Miss Ivors.

They had to go visiting together and, as he had not answered her, Miss
Ivors said warmly:

"Of course, you've no answer."

Gabriel tried to cover his agitation by taking part in the dance with
great energy. He avoided her eyes for he had seen a sour expression on
her face. But when they met in the long chain he was surprised to feel
his hand firmly pressed. She looked at him from under her brows for a
moment quizzically until he smiled. Then, just as the chain was about to
start again, she stood on tiptoe and whispered into his ear:

"West Briton!"

When the lancers were over Gabriel went away to a remote corner of the
room where Freddy Malins' mother was sitting. She was a stout feeble old
woman with white hair. Her voice had a catch in it like her son's and
she stuttered slightly. She had been told that Freddy had come and that
he was nearly all right. Gabriel asked her whether she had had a good
crossing. She lived with her married daughter in Glasgow and came to
Dublin on a visit once a year. She answered placidly that she had had a
beautiful crossing and that the captain had been most attentive to her.
She spoke also of the beautiful house her daughter kept in Glasgow, and
of all the friends they had there. While her tongue rambled on Gabriel
tried to banish from his mind all memory of the unpleasant incident with
Miss Ivors. Of course the girl or woman, or whatever she was, was an
enthusiast but there was a time for all things. Perhaps he ought not
to have answered her like that. But she had no right to call him a West
Briton before people, even in joke. She had tried to make him ridiculous
before people, heckling him and staring at him with her rabbit's eyes.

He saw his wife making her way towards him through the waltzing couples.
When she reached him she said into his ear:

"Gabriel, Aunt Kate wants to know won't you carve the goose as usual.
Miss Daly will carve the ham and I'll do the pudding."

"All right," said Gabriel.

"She's sending in the younger ones first as soon as this waltz is over
so that we'll have the table to ourselves."

"Were you dancing?" asked Gabriel.

"Of course I was. Didn't you see me? What row had you with Molly Ivors?"

"No row. Why? Did she say so?"

"Something like that. I'm trying to get that Mr. D'Arcy to sing. He's
full of conceit, I think."

"There was no row," said Gabriel moodily, "only she wanted me to go for
a trip to the west of Ireland and I said I wouldn't."

His wife clasped her hands excitedly and gave a little jump.

"O, do go, Gabriel," she cried. "I'd love to see Galway again."

"You can go if you like," said Gabriel coldly.

She looked at him for a moment, then turned to Mrs. Malins and said:

"There's a nice husband for you, Mrs. Malins."

While she was threading her way back across the room Mrs. Malins,
without adverting to the interruption, went on to tell Gabriel what
beautiful places there were in Scotland and beautiful scenery. Her
son-in-law brought them every year to the lakes and they used to go
fishing. Her son-in-law was a splendid fisher. One day he caught a
beautiful big fish and the man in the hotel cooked it for their dinner.

Gabriel hardly heard what she said. Now that supper was coming near he
began to think again about his speech and about the quotation. When he
saw Freddy Malins coming across the room to visit his mother Gabriel
left the chair free for him and retired into the embrasure of the
window. The room had already cleared and from the back room came the
clatter of plates and knives. Those who still remained in the
drawing-room seemed tired of dancing and were conversing quietly in little
groups. Gabriel's warm trembling fingers tapped the cold pane of the
window. How cool it must be outside! How pleasant it would be to walk
out alone, first along by the river and then through the park! The snow
would be lying on the branches of the trees and forming a bright cap on
the top of the Wellington Monument. How much more pleasant it would be
there than at the supper-table!

He ran over the headings of his speech: Irish hospitality, sad memories,
the Three Graces, Paris, the quotation from Browning. He repeated to
himself a phrase he had written in his review: "One feels that one is
listening to a thought-tormented music." Miss Ivors had praised the
review. Was she sincere? Had she really any life of her own behind all
her propagandism? There had never been any ill-feeling between them
until that night. It unnerved him to think that she would be at the
supper-table, looking up at him while he spoke with her critical
quizzing eyes. Perhaps she would not be sorry to see him fail in his
speech. An idea came into his mind and gave him courage. He would
say, alluding to Aunt Kate and Aunt Julia: "Ladies and Gentlemen, the
generation which is now on the wane among us may have had its faults but
for my part I think it had certain qualities of hospitality, of humour,
of humanity, which the new and very serious and hypereducated generation
that is growing up around us seems to me to lack." Very good: that
was one for Miss Ivors. What did he care that his aunts were only two
ignorant old women?

A murmur in the room attracted his attention. Mr. Browne was advancing
from the door, gallantly escorting Aunt Julia, who leaned upon his arm,
smiling and hanging her head. An irregular musketry of applause escorted
her also as far as the piano and then, as Mary Jane seated herself on
the stool, and Aunt Julia, no longer smiling, half turned so as to pitch
her voice fairly into the room, gradually ceased. Gabriel recognised
the prelude. It was that of an old song of Aunt Julia's--Arrayed for the
Bridal. Her voice, strong and clear in tone, attacked with great spirit
the runs which embellish the air and though she sang very rapidly she
did not miss even the smallest of the grace notes. To follow the
voice, without looking at the singer's face, was to feel and share the
excitement of swift and secure flight. Gabriel applauded loudly with all
the others at the close of the song and loud applause was borne in from
the invisible supper-table. It sounded so genuine that a little
colour struggled into Aunt Julia's face as she bent to replace in the
music-stand the old leather-bound songbook that had her initials on the
cover. Freddy Malins, who had listened with his head perched sideways to
hear her better, was still applauding when everyone else had ceased and
talking animatedly to his mother who nodded her head gravely and slowly
in acquiescence. At last, when he could clap no more, he stood up
suddenly and hurried across the room to Aunt Julia whose hand he seized
and held in both his hands, shaking it when words failed him or the
catch in his voice proved too much for him.

"I was just telling my mother," he said, "I never heard you sing so
well, never. No, I never heard your voice so good as it is tonight. Now!
Would you believe that now? That's the truth. Upon my word and honour
that's the truth. I never heard your voice sound so fresh and so... so
clear and fresh, never."

Aunt Julia smiled broadly and murmured something about compliments as
she released her hand from his grasp. Mr. Browne extended his open
hand towards her and said to those who were near him in the manner of a
showman introducing a prodigy to an audience:

"Miss Julia Morkan, my latest discovery!"

He was laughing very heartily at this himself when Freddy Malins turned
to him and said:

"Well, Browne, if you're serious you might make a worse discovery. All
I can say is I never heard her sing half so well as long as I am coming
here. And that's the honest truth."

"Neither did I," said Mr. Browne. "I think her voice has greatly
improved."

Aunt Julia shrugged her shoulders and said with meek pride:

"Thirty years ago I hadn't a bad voice as voices go."

"I often told Julia," said Aunt Kate emphatically, "that she was simply
thrown away in that choir. But she never would be said by me."

She turned as if to appeal to the good sense of the others against a
refractory child while Aunt Julia gazed in front of her, a vague smile
of reminiscence playing on her face.

"No," continued Aunt Kate, "she wouldn't be said or led by anyone,
slaving there in that choir night and day, night and day. Six o'clock on
Christmas morning! And all for what?"

"Well, isn't it for the honour of God, Aunt Kate?" asked Mary Jane,
twisting round on the piano-stool and smiling.

Aunt Kate turned fiercely on her niece and said:

"I know all about the honour of God, Mary Jane, but I think it's not at
all honourable for the pope to turn out the women out of the choirs that
have slaved there all their lives and put little whipper-snappers of
boys over their heads. I suppose it is for the good of the Church if the
pope does it. But it's not just, Mary Jane, and it's not right."

She had worked herself into a passion and would have continued in
defence of her sister for it was a sore subject with her but Mary Jane,
seeing that all the dancers had come back, intervened pacifically:

"Now, Aunt Kate, you're giving scandal to Mr. Browne who is of the other
persuasion."

Aunt Kate turned to Mr. Browne, who was grinning at this allusion to his
religion, and said hastily:

"O, I don't question the pope's being right. I'm only a stupid old woman
and I wouldn't presume to do such a thing. But there's such a thing as
common everyday politeness and gratitude. And if I were in Julia's place
I'd tell that Father Healey straight up to his face..."

"And besides, Aunt Kate," said Mary Jane, "we really are all hungry and
when we are hungry we are all very quarrelsome."

"And when we are thirsty we are also quarrelsome," added Mr. Browne.

"So that we had better go to supper," said Mary Jane, "and finish the
discussion afterwards."

On the landing outside the drawing-room Gabriel found his wife and Mary
Jane trying to persuade Miss Ivors to stay for supper. But Miss Ivors,
who had put on her hat and was buttoning her cloak, would not stay.
She did not feel in the least hungry and she had already overstayed her
time.

"But only for ten minutes, Molly," said Mrs. Conroy. "That won't delay
you."

"To take a pick itself," said Mary Jane, "after all your dancing."

"I really couldn't," said Miss Ivors.

"I am afraid you didn't enjoy yourself at all," said Mary Jane
hopelessly.

"Ever so much, I assure you," said Miss Ivors, "but you really must let
me run off now."

"But how can you get home?" asked Mrs. Conroy.

"O, it's only two steps up the quay."

Gabriel hesitated a moment and said:

"If you will allow me, Miss Ivors, I'll see you home if you are really
obliged to go."

But Miss Ivors broke away from them.

"I won't hear of it," she cried. "For goodness' sake go in to your
suppers and don't mind me. I'm quite well able to take care of myself."

"Well, you're the comical girl, Molly," said Mrs. Conroy frankly.

"Beannacht libh," cried Miss Ivors, with a laugh, as she ran down the
staircase.

Mary Jane gazed after her, a moody puzzled expression on her face,
while Mrs. Conroy leaned over the banisters to listen for the hall-door.
Gabriel asked himself was he the cause of her abrupt departure. But she
did not seem to be in ill humour: she had gone away laughing. He stared
blankly down the staircase.

At the moment Aunt Kate came toddling out of the supper-room, almost
wringing her hands in despair.

"Where is Gabriel?" she cried. "Where on earth is Gabriel? There's
everyone waiting in there, stage to let, and nobody to carve the goose!"

"Here I am, Aunt Kate!" cried Gabriel, with sudden animation, "ready to
carve a flock of geese, if necessary."

A fat brown goose lay at one end of the table and at the other end, on
a bed of creased paper strewn with sprigs of parsley, lay a great ham,
stripped of its outer skin and peppered over with crust crumbs, a neat
paper frill round its shin and beside this was a round of spiced beef.
Between these rival ends ran parallel lines of side-dishes: two little
minsters of jelly, red and yellow; a shallow dish full of blocks
of blancmange and red jam, a large green leaf-shaped dish with a
stalk-shaped handle, on which lay bunches of purple raisins and peeled
almonds, a companion dish on which lay a solid rectangle of Smyrna
figs, a dish of custard topped with grated nutmeg, a small bowl full of
chocolates and sweets wrapped in gold and silver papers and a glass vase
in which stood some tall celery stalks. In the centre of the table there
stood, as sentries to a fruit-stand which upheld a pyramid of oranges
and American apples, two squat old-fashioned decanters of cut glass, one
containing port and the other dark sherry. On the closed square piano
a pudding in a huge yellow dish lay in waiting and behind it were three
squads of bottles of stout and ale and minerals, drawn up according to
the colours of their uniforms, the first two black, with brown and
red labels, the third and smallest squad white, with transverse green
sashes.

Gabriel took his seat boldly at the head of the table and, having looked
to the edge of the carver, plunged his fork firmly into the goose. He
felt quite at ease now for he was an expert carver and liked nothing
better than to find himself at the head of a well-laden table.

"Miss Furlong, what shall I send you?" he asked. "A wing or a slice of
the breast?"

"Just a small slice of the breast."

"Miss Higgins, what for you?"

"O, anything at all, Mr. Conroy."

While Gabriel and Miss Daly exchanged plates of goose and plates of ham
and spiced beef Lily went from guest to guest with a dish of hot floury
potatoes wrapped in a white napkin. This was Mary Jane's idea and she
had also suggested apple sauce for the goose but Aunt Kate had said that
plain roast goose without any apple sauce had always been good enough
for her and she hoped she might never eat worse. Mary Jane waited on
her pupils and saw that they got the best slices and Aunt Kate and Aunt
Julia opened and carried across from the piano bottles of stout and ale
for the gentlemen and bottles of minerals for the ladies. There was a
great deal of confusion and laughter and noise, the noise of orders
and counter-orders, of knives and forks, of corks and glass-stoppers.
Gabriel began to carve second helpings as soon as he had finished the
first round without serving himself. Everyone protested loudly so that
he compromised by taking a long draught of stout for he had found the
carving hot work. Mary Jane settled down quietly to her supper but Aunt
Kate and Aunt Julia were still toddling round the table, walking on
each other's heels, getting in each other's way and giving each other
unheeded orders. Mr. Browne begged of them to sit down and eat their
suppers and so did Gabriel but they said there was time enough, so that,
at last, Freddy Malins stood up and, capturing Aunt Kate, plumped her
down on her chair amid general laughter.

When everyone had been well served Gabriel said, smiling:

"Now, if anyone wants a little more of what vulgar people call stuffing
let him or her speak."

A chorus of voices invited him to begin his own supper and Lily came
forward with three potatoes which she had reserved for him.

"Very well," said Gabriel amiably, as he took another preparatory
draught, "kindly forget my existence, ladies and gentlemen, for a few
minutes."

He set to his supper and took no part in the conversation with which the
table covered Lily's removal of the plates. The subject of talk was the
opera company which was then at the Theatre Royal. Mr. Bartell D'Arcy,
the tenor, a dark-complexioned young man with a smart moustache, praised
very highly the leading contralto of the company but Miss Furlong
thought she had a rather vulgar style of production. Freddy Malins said
there was a Negro chieftain singing in the second part of the Gaiety
pantomime who had one of the finest tenor voices he had ever heard.

"Have you heard him?" he asked Mr. Bartell D'Arcy across the table.

"No," answered Mr. Bartell D'Arcy carelessly.

"Because," Freddy Malins explained, "now I'd be curious to hear your
opinion of him. I think he has a grand voice."

"It takes Teddy to find out the really good things," said Mr. Browne
familiarly to the table.

"And why couldn't he have a voice too?" asked Freddy Malins sharply. "Is
it because he's only a black?"

Nobody answered this question and Mary Jane led the table back to the
legitimate opera. One of her pupils had given her a pass for Mignon.
Of course it was very fine, she said, but it made her think of poor
Georgina Burns. Mr. Browne could go back farther still, to the old
Italian companies that used to come to Dublin--Tietjens, Ilma de Murzka,
Campanini, the great Trebelli, Giuglini, Ravelli, Aramburo. Those were
the days, he said, when there was something like singing to be heard in
Dublin. He told too of how the top gallery of the old Royal used to be
packed night after night, of how one night an Italian tenor had sung
five encores to Let me like a Soldier fall, introducing a high C every
time, and of how the gallery boys would sometimes in their enthusiasm
unyoke the horses from the carriage of some great prima donna and pull
her themselves through the streets to her hotel. Why did they never play
the grand old operas now, he asked, Dinorah, Lucrezia Borgia? Because
they could not get the voices to sing them: that was why.

"Oh, well," said Mr. Bartell D'Arcy, "I presume there are as good
singers today as there were then."

"Where are they?" asked Mr. Browne defiantly.

"In London, Paris, Milan," said Mr. Bartell D'Arcy warmly. "I suppose
Caruso, for example, is quite as good, if not better than any of the men
you have mentioned."

"Maybe so," said Mr. Browne. "But I may tell you I doubt it strongly."

"O, I'd give anything to hear Caruso sing," said Mary Jane.

"For me," said Aunt Kate, who had been picking a bone, "there was only
one tenor. To please me, I mean. But I suppose none of you ever heard of
him."

"Who was he, Miss Morkan?" asked Mr. Bartell D'Arcy politely.

"His name," said Aunt Kate, "was Parkinson. I heard him when he was in
his prime and I think he had then the purest tenor voice that was ever
put into a man's throat."

"Strange," said Mr. Bartell D'Arcy. "I never even heard of him."

"Yes, yes, Miss Morkan is right," said Mr. Browne. "I remember hearing
of old Parkinson but he's too far back for me."

"A beautiful, pure, sweet, mellow English tenor," said Aunt Kate with
enthusiasm.

Gabriel having finished, the huge pudding was transferred to the table.
The clatter of forks and spoons began again. Gabriel's wife served out
spoonfuls of the pudding and passed the plates down the table. Midway
down they were held up by Mary Jane, who replenished them with raspberry
or orange jelly or with blancmange and jam. The pudding was of Aunt
Julia's making and she received praises for it from all quarters. She
herself said that it was not quite brown enough.

"Well, I hope, Miss Morkan," said Mr. Browne, "that I'm brown enough for
you because, you know, I'm all brown."

All the gentlemen, except Gabriel, ate some of the pudding out of
compliment to Aunt Julia. As Gabriel never ate sweets the celery had
been left for him. Freddy Malins also took a stalk of celery and ate it
with his pudding. He had been told that celery was a capital thing for
the blood and he was just then under doctor's care. Mrs. Malins, who had
been silent all through the supper, said that her son was going down to
Mount Melleray in a week or so. The table then spoke of Mount Melleray,
how bracing the air was down there, how hospitable the monks were and
how they never asked for a penny-piece from their guests.

"And do you mean to say," asked Mr. Browne incredulously, "that a chap
can go down there and put up there as if it were a hotel and live on the
fat of the land and then come away without paying anything?"

"O, most people give some donation to the monastery when they leave."
said Mary Jane.

"I wish we had an institution like that in our Church," said Mr. Browne
candidly.

He was astonished to hear that the monks never spoke, got up at two in
the morning and slept in their coffins. He asked what they did it for.

"That's the rule of the order," said Aunt Kate firmly.

"Yes, but why?" asked Mr. Browne.

Aunt Kate repeated that it was the rule, that was all. Mr. Browne still
seemed not to understand. Freddy Malins explained to him, as best he
could, that the monks were trying to make up for the sins committed by
all the sinners in the outside world. The explanation was not very clear
for Mr. Browne grinned and said:

"I like that idea very much but wouldn't a comfortable spring bed do
them as well as a coffin?"

"The coffin," said Mary Jane, "is to remind them of their last end."

As the subject had grown lugubrious it was buried in a silence of the
table during which Mrs. Malins could be heard saying to her neighbour in
an indistinct undertone:

"They are very good men, the monks, very pious men."

The raisins and almonds and figs and apples and oranges and chocolates
and sweets were now passed about the table and Aunt Julia invited all
the guests to have either port or sherry. At first Mr. Bartell D'Arcy
refused to take either but one of his neighbours nudged him and
whispered something to him upon which he allowed his glass to be filled.
Gradually as the last glasses were being filled the conversation
ceased. A pause followed, broken only by the noise of the wine and by
unsettlings of chairs. The Misses Morkan, all three, looked down at
the tablecloth. Someone coughed once or twice and then a few gentlemen
patted the table gently as a signal for silence. The silence came and
Gabriel pushed back his chair.

The patting at once grew louder in encouragement and then ceased
altogether. Gabriel leaned his ten trembling fingers on the tablecloth
and smiled nervously at the company. Meeting a row of upturned faces he
raised his eyes to the chandelier. The piano was playing a waltz tune
and he could hear the skirts sweeping against the drawing-room door.
People, perhaps, were standing in the snow on the quay outside, gazing
up at the lighted windows and listening to the waltz music. The air was
pure there. In the distance lay the park where the trees were weighted
with snow. The Wellington Monument wore a gleaming cap of snow that
flashed westward over the white field of Fifteen Acres.

He began:

"Ladies and Gentlemen,

"It has fallen to my lot this evening, as in years past, to perform a
very pleasing task but a task for which I am afraid my poor powers as a
speaker are all too inadequate."

"No, no!" said Mr. Browne.

"But, however that may be, I can only ask you tonight to take the will
for the deed and to lend me your attention for a few moments while
I endeavour to express to you in words what my feelings are on this
occasion.

"Ladies and Gentlemen, it is not the first time that we have gathered
together under this hospitable roof, around this hospitable board. It is
not the first time that we have been the recipients--or perhaps, I had
better say, the victims--of the hospitality of certain good ladies."

He made a circle in the air with his arm and paused. Everyone laughed or
smiled at Aunt Kate and Aunt Julia and Mary Jane who all turned crimson
with pleasure. Gabriel went on more boldly:

"I feel more strongly with every recurring year that our country has
no tradition which does it so much honour and which it should guard so
jealously as that of its hospitality. It is a tradition that is unique
as far as my experience goes (and I have visited not a few places
abroad) among the modern nations. Some would say, perhaps, that with us
it is rather a failing than anything to be boasted of. But granted even
that, it is, to my mind, a princely failing, and one that I trust will
long be cultivated among us. Of one thing, at least, I am sure. As long
as this one roof shelters the good ladies aforesaid--and I wish from my
heart it may do so for many and many a long year to come--the tradition
of genuine warm-hearted courteous Irish hospitality, which our
forefathers have handed down to us and which we in turn must hand down
to our descendants, is still alive among us."

A hearty murmur of assent ran round the table. It shot through
Gabriel's mind that Miss Ivors was not there and that she had gone away
discourteously: and he said with confidence in himself:

"Ladies and Gentlemen,

"A new generation is growing up in our midst, a generation actuated by
new ideas and new principles. It is serious and enthusiastic for
these new ideas and its enthusiasm, even when it is misdirected, is, I
believe, in the main sincere. But we are living in a sceptical and, if
I may use the phrase, a thought-tormented age: and sometimes I fear that
this new generation, educated or hypereducated as it is, will lack those
qualities of humanity, of hospitality, of kindly humour which belonged
to an older day. Listening tonight to the names of all those great
singers of the past it seemed to me, I must confess, that we were living
in a less spacious age. Those days might, without exaggeration, be
called spacious days: and if they are gone beyond recall let us hope, at
least, that in gatherings such as this we shall still speak of them with
pride and affection, still cherish in our hearts the memory of those
dead and gone great ones whose fame the world will not willingly let
die."

"Hear, hear!" said Mr. Browne loudly.

"But yet," continued Gabriel, his voice falling into a softer
inflection, "there are always in gatherings such as this sadder thoughts
that will recur to our minds: thoughts of the past, of youth, of
changes, of absent faces that we miss here tonight. Our path through
life is strewn with many such sad memories: and were we to brood upon
them always we could not find the heart to go on bravely with our work
among the living. We have all of us living duties and living affections
which claim, and rightly claim, our strenuous endeavours.

"Therefore, I will not linger on the past. I will not let any gloomy
moralising intrude upon us here tonight. Here we are gathered together
for a brief moment from the bustle and rush of our everyday routine.
We are met here as friends, in the spirit of good-fellowship, as
colleagues, also to a certain extent, in the true spirit of camaraderie,
and as the guests of--what shall I call them?--the Three Graces of the
Dublin musical world."

The table burst into applause and laughter at this allusion. Aunt Julia
vainly asked each of her neighbours in turn to tell her what Gabriel had
said.

"He says we are the Three Graces, Aunt Julia," said Mary Jane.

Aunt Julia did not understand but she looked up, smiling, at Gabriel,
who continued in the same vein:

"Ladies and Gentlemen,

"I will not attempt to play tonight the part that Paris played on
another occasion. I will not attempt to choose between them. The task
would be an invidious one and one beyond my poor powers. For when I view
them in turn, whether it be our chief hostess herself, whose good heart,
whose too good heart, has become a byword with all who know her, or her
sister, who seems to be gifted with perennial youth and whose singing
must have been a surprise and a revelation to us all tonight, or, last
but not least, when I consider our youngest hostess, talented, cheerful,
hard-working and the best of nieces, I confess, Ladies and Gentlemen,
that I do not know to which of them I should award the prize."

Gabriel glanced down at his aunts and, seeing the large smile on Aunt
Julia's face and the tears which had risen to Aunt Kate's eyes, hastened
to his close. He raised his glass of port gallantly, while every member
of the company fingered a glass expectantly, and said loudly:

"Let us toast them all three together. Let us drink to their health,
wealth, long life, happiness and prosperity and may they long continue
to hold the proud and self-won position which they hold in their
profession and the position of honour and affection which they hold in
our hearts."

All the guests stood up, glass in hand, and turning towards the three
seated ladies, sang in unison, with Mr. Browne as leader:

     For they are jolly gay fellows,
     For they are jolly gay fellows,
     For they are jolly gay fellows,
     Which nobody can deny.

Aunt Kate was making frank use of her handkerchief and even Aunt Julia
seemed moved. Freddy Malins beat time with his pudding-fork and the
singers turned towards one another, as if in melodious conference, while
they sang with emphasis:

     Unless he tells a lie,
     Unless he tells a lie.

Then, turning once more towards their hostesses, they sang:

     For they are jolly gay fellows,
     For they are jolly gay fellows,
     For they are jolly gay fellows,
     Which nobody can deny.

The acclamation which followed was taken up beyond the door of the
supper-room by many of the other guests and renewed time after time,
Freddy Malins acting as officer with his fork on high.


The piercing morning air came into the hall where they were standing so
that Aunt Kate said:

"Close the door, somebody. Mrs. Malins will get her death of cold."

"Browne is out there, Aunt Kate," said Mary Jane.

"Browne is everywhere," said Aunt Kate, lowering her voice.

Mary Jane laughed at her tone.

"Really," she said archly, "he is very attentive."

"He has been laid on here like the gas," said Aunt Kate in the same
tone, "all during the Christmas."

She laughed herself this time good-humouredly and then added quickly:

"But tell him to come in, Mary Jane, and close the door. I hope to
goodness he didn't hear me."

At that moment the hall-door was opened and Mr. Browne came in from the
doorstep, laughing as if his heart would break. He was dressed in a long
green overcoat with mock astrakhan cuffs and collar and wore on his head
an oval fur cap. He pointed down the snow-covered quay from where the
sound of shrill prolonged whistling was borne in.

"Teddy will have all the cabs in Dublin out," he said.

Gabriel advanced from the little pantry behind the office, struggling
into his overcoat and, looking round the hall, said:

"Gretta not down yet?"

"She's getting on her things, Gabriel," said Aunt Kate.

"Who's playing up there?" asked Gabriel.

"Nobody. They're all gone."

"O no, Aunt Kate," said Mary Jane. "Bartell D'Arcy and Miss O'Callaghan
aren't gone yet."

"Someone is fooling at the piano anyhow," said Gabriel.

Mary Jane glanced at Gabriel and Mr. Browne and said with a shiver:

"It makes me feel cold to look at you two gentlemen muffled up like
that. I wouldn't like to face your journey home at this hour."

"I'd like nothing better this minute," said Mr. Browne stoutly, "than a
rattling fine walk in the country or a fast drive with a good spanking
goer between the shafts."

"We used to have a very good horse and trap at home," said Aunt Julia
sadly.

"The never-to-be-forgotten Johnny," said Mary Jane, laughing.

Aunt Kate and Gabriel laughed too.

"Why, what was wonderful about Johnny?" asked Mr. Browne.

"The late lamented Patrick Morkan, our grandfather, that is," explained
Gabriel, "commonly known in his later years as the old gentleman, was a
glue-boiler."

"O, now, Gabriel," said Aunt Kate, laughing, "he had a starch mill."

"Well, glue or starch," said Gabriel, "the old gentleman had a horse by
the name of Johnny. And Johnny used to work in the old gentleman's mill,
walking round and round in order to drive the mill. That was all very
well; but now comes the tragic part about Johnny. One fine day the old
gentleman thought he'd like to drive out with the quality to a military
review in the park."

"The Lord have mercy on his soul," said Aunt Kate compassionately.

"Amen," said Gabriel. "So the old gentleman, as I said, harnessed Johnny
and put on his very best tall hat and his very best stock collar and
drove out in grand style from his ancestral mansion somewhere near Back
Lane, I think."

Everyone laughed, even Mrs. Malins, at Gabriel's manner and Aunt Kate
said:

"O, now, Gabriel, he didn't live in Back Lane, really. Only the mill was
there."

"Out from the mansion of his forefathers," continued Gabriel, "he drove
with Johnny. And everything went on beautifully until Johnny came in
sight of King Billy's statue: and whether he fell in love with the horse
King Billy sits on or whether he thought he was back again in the mill,
anyhow he began to walk round the statue."

Gabriel paced in a circle round the hall in his goloshes amid the
laughter of the others.

"Round and round he went," said Gabriel, "and the old gentleman, who was
a very pompous old gentleman, was highly indignant. 'Go on, sir! What
do you mean, sir? Johnny! Johnny! Most extraordinary conduct! Can't
understand the horse!'"

The peal of laughter which followed Gabriel's imitation of the incident
was interrupted by a resounding knock at the hall door. Mary Jane ran to
open it and let in Freddy Malins. Freddy Malins, with his hat well back
on his head and his shoulders humped with cold, was puffing and steaming
after his exertions.

"I could only get one cab," he said.

"O, we'll find another along the quay," said Gabriel.

"Yes," said Aunt Kate. "Better not keep Mrs. Malins standing in the
draught."

Mrs. Malins was helped down the front steps by her son and Mr. Browne
and, after many manoeuvres, hoisted into the cab. Freddy Malins
clambered in after her and spent a long time settling her on the seat,
Mr. Browne helping him with advice. At last she was settled comfortably
and Freddy Malins invited Mr. Browne into the cab. There was a good
deal of confused talk, and then Mr. Browne got into the cab. The cabman
settled his rug over his knees, and bent down for the address. The
confusion grew greater and the cabman was directed differently by Freddy
Malins and Mr. Browne, each of whom had his head out through a window of
the cab. The difficulty was to know where to drop Mr. Browne along the
route, and Aunt Kate, Aunt Julia and Mary Jane helped the discussion
from the doorstep with cross-directions and contradictions and abundance
of laughter. As for Freddy Malins he was speechless with laughter.
He popped his head in and out of the window every moment to the
great danger of his hat, and told his mother how the discussion was
progressing, till at last Mr. Browne shouted to the bewildered cabman
above the din of everybody's laughter:

"Do you know Trinity College?"

"Yes, sir," said the cabman.

"Well, drive bang up against Trinity College gates," said Mr. Browne,
"and then we'll tell you where to go. You understand now?"

"Yes, sir," said the cabman.

"Make like a bird for Trinity College."

"Right, sir," said the cabman.

The horse was whipped up and the cab rattled off along the quay amid a
chorus of laughter and adieus.

Gabriel had not gone to the door with the others. He was in a dark part
of the hall gazing up the staircase. A woman was standing near the top
of the first flight, in the shadow also. He could not see her face but
he could see the terra-cotta and salmon-pink panels of her skirt which
the shadow made appear black and white. It was his wife. She was leaning
on the banisters, listening to something. Gabriel was surprised at her
stillness and strained his ear to listen also. But he could hear little
save the noise of laughter and dispute on the front steps, a few chords
struck on the piano and a few notes of a man's voice singing.

He stood still in the gloom of the hall, trying to catch the air that
the voice was singing and gazing up at his wife. There was grace and
mystery in her attitude as if she were a symbol of something. He asked
himself what is a woman standing on the stairs in the shadow, listening
to distant music, a symbol of. If he were a painter he would paint her
in that attitude. Her blue felt hat would show off the bronze of her
hair against the darkness and the dark panels of her skirt would show
off the light ones. Distant Music he would call the picture if he were a
painter.

The hall-door was closed; and Aunt Kate, Aunt Julia and Mary Jane came
down the hall, still laughing.

"Well, isn't Freddy terrible?" said Mary Jane. "He's really terrible."

Gabriel said nothing but pointed up the stairs towards where his wife
was standing. Now that the hall-door was closed the voice and the piano
could be heard more clearly. Gabriel held up his hand for them to be
silent. The song seemed to be in the old Irish tonality and the singer
seemed uncertain both of his words and of his voice. The voice,
made plaintive by distance and by the singer's hoarseness, faintly
illuminated the cadence of the air with words expressing grief:

    O, the rain falls on my heavy locks
    And the dew wets my skin,
    My babe lies cold...

"O," exclaimed Mary Jane. "It's Bartell D'Arcy singing and he wouldn't
sing all the night. O, I'll get him to sing a song before he goes."

"O, do, Mary Jane," said Aunt Kate.

Mary Jane brushed past the others and ran to the staircase, but before
she reached it the singing stopped and the piano was closed abruptly.

"O, what a pity!" she cried. "Is he coming down, Gretta?"

Gabriel heard his wife answer yes and saw her come down towards them. A
few steps behind her were Mr. Bartell D'Arcy and Miss O'Callaghan.

"O, Mr. D'Arcy," cried Mary Jane, "it's downright mean of you to break
off like that when we were all in raptures listening to you."

"I have been at him all the evening," said Miss O'Callaghan, "and Mrs.
Conroy, too, and he told us he had a dreadful cold and couldn't sing."

"O, Mr. D'Arcy," said Aunt Kate, "now that was a great fib to tell."

"Can't you see that I'm as hoarse as a crow?" said Mr. D'Arcy roughly.

He went into the pantry hastily and put on his overcoat. The others,
taken aback by his rude speech, could find nothing to say. Aunt Kate
wrinkled her brows and made signs to the others to drop the subject. Mr.
D'Arcy stood swathing his neck carefully and frowning.

"It's the weather," said Aunt Julia, after a pause.

"Yes, everybody has colds," said Aunt Kate readily, "everybody."

"They say," said Mary Jane, "we haven't had snow like it for thirty
years; and I read this morning in the newspapers that the snow is
general all over Ireland."

"I love the look of snow," said Aunt Julia sadly.

"So do I," said Miss O'Callaghan. "I think Christmas is never really
Christmas unless we have the snow on the ground."

"But poor Mr. D'Arcy doesn't like the snow," said Aunt Kate, smiling.

Mr. D'Arcy came from the pantry, fully swathed and buttoned, and in
a repentant tone told them the history of his cold. Everyone gave him
advice and said it was a great pity and urged him to be very careful of
his throat in the night air. Gabriel watched his wife, who did not join
in the conversation. She was standing right under the dusty fanlight and
the flame of the gas lit up the rich bronze of her hair, which he had
seen her drying at the fire a few days before. She was in the same
attitude and seemed unaware of the talk about her. At last she turned
towards them and Gabriel saw that there was colour on her cheeks and
that her eyes were shining. A sudden tide of joy went leaping out of his
heart.

"Mr. D'Arcy," she said, "what is the name of that song you were
singing?"

"It's called The Lass of Aughrim," said Mr. D'Arcy, "but I couldn't
remember it properly. Why? Do you know it?"

"The Lass of Aughrim," she repeated. "I couldn't think of the name."

"It's a very nice air," said Mary Jane. "I'm sorry you were not in voice
tonight."

"Now, Mary Jane," said Aunt Kate, "don't annoy Mr. D'Arcy. I won't have
him annoyed."

Seeing that all were ready to start she shepherded them to the door,
where good-night was said:

"Well, good-night, Aunt Kate, and thanks for the pleasant evening."

"Good-night, Gabriel. Good-night, Gretta!"

"Good-night, Aunt Kate, and thanks ever so much. Goodnight, Aunt Julia."

"O, good-night, Gretta, I didn't see you."

"Good-night, Mr. D'Arcy. Good-night, Miss O'Callaghan."

"Good-night, Miss Morkan."

"Good-night, again."

"Good-night, all. Safe home."

"Good-night. Good night."

The morning was still dark. A dull, yellow light brooded over the
houses and the river; and the sky seemed to be descending. It was slushy
underfoot; and only streaks and patches of snow lay on the roofs, on
the parapets of the quay and on the area railings. The lamps were still
burning redly in the murky air and, across the river, the palace of the
Four Courts stood out menacingly against the heavy sky.

She was walking on before him with Mr. Bartell D'Arcy, her shoes in a
brown parcel tucked under one arm and her hands holding her skirt up
from the slush. She had no longer any grace of attitude, but Gabriel's
eyes were still bright with happiness. The blood went bounding along his
veins; and the thoughts went rioting through his brain, proud, joyful,
tender, valorous.

She was walking on before him so lightly and so erect that he longed to
run after her noiselessly, catch her by the shoulders and say something
foolish and affectionate into her ear. She seemed to him so frail that
he longed to defend her against something and then to be alone with her.
Moments of their secret life together burst like stars upon his memory.
A heliotrope envelope was lying beside his breakfast-cup and he was
caressing it with his hand. Birds were twittering in the ivy and the
sunny web of the curtain was shimmering along the floor: he could not
eat for happiness. They were standing on the crowded platform and he was
placing a ticket inside the warm palm of her glove. He was standing
with her in the cold, looking in through a grated window at a man making
bottles in a roaring furnace. It was very cold. Her face, fragrant in
the cold air, was quite close to his; and suddenly he called out to the
man at the furnace:

"Is the fire hot, sir?"

But the man could not hear with the noise of the furnace. It was just as
well. He might have answered rudely.

A wave of yet more tender joy escaped from his heart and went coursing
in warm flood along his arteries. Like the tender fire of stars moments
of their life together, that no one knew of or would ever know of, broke
upon and illumined his memory. He longed to recall to her those moments,
to make her forget the years of their dull existence together and
remember only their moments of ecstasy. For the years, he felt, had not
quenched his soul or hers. Their children, his writing, her household
cares had not quenched all their souls' tender fire. In one letter that
he had written to her then he had said: "Why is it that words like
these seem to me so dull and cold? Is it because there is no word tender
enough to be your name?"

Like distant music these words that he had written years before were
borne towards him from the past. He longed to be alone with her. When
the others had gone away, when he and she were in the room in their hotel,
then they would be alone together. He would call her softly:

"Gretta!"

Perhaps she would not hear at once: she would be undressing. Then
something in his voice would strike her. She would turn and look at
him....

At the corner of Winetavern Street they met a cab. He was glad of its
rattling noise as it saved him from conversation. She was looking out of
the window and seemed tired. The others spoke only a few words, pointing
out some building or street. The horse galloped along wearily under the
murky morning sky, dragging his old rattling box after his heels,
and Gabriel was again in a cab with her, galloping to catch the boat,
galloping to their honeymoon.

As the cab drove across O'Connell Bridge Miss O'Callaghan said:

"They say you never cross O'Connell Bridge without seeing a white
horse."

"I see a white man this time," said Gabriel.

"Where?" asked Mr. Bartell D'Arcy.

Gabriel pointed to the statue, on which lay patches of snow. Then he
nodded familiarly to it and waved his hand.

"Good-night, Dan," he said gaily.

When the cab drew up before the hotel, Gabriel jumped out and, in spite
of Mr. Bartell D'Arcy's protest, paid the driver. He gave the man a
shilling over his fare. The man saluted and said:

"A prosperous New Year to you, sir."

"The same to you," said Gabriel cordially.

She leaned for a moment on his arm in getting out of the cab and while
standing at the curbstone, bidding the others good-night. She leaned
lightly on his arm, as lightly as when she had danced with him a few
hours before. He had felt proud and happy then, happy that she was his,
proud of her grace and wifely carriage. But now, after the kindling
again of so many memories, the first touch of her body, musical and
strange and perfumed, sent through him a keen pang of lust. Under cover
of her silence he pressed her arm closely to his side; and, as they
stood at the hotel door, he felt that they had escaped from their lives
and duties, escaped from home and friends and run away together with
wild and radiant hearts to a new adventure.

An old man was dozing in a great hooded chair in the hall. He lit a
candle in the office and went before them to the stairs. They followed
him in silence, their feet falling in soft thuds on the thickly carpeted
stairs. She mounted the stairs behind the porter, her head bowed in
the ascent, her frail shoulders curved as with a burden, her skirt girt
tightly about her. He could have flung his arms about her hips and held
her still, for his arms were trembling with desire to seize her and only
the stress of his nails against the palms of his hands held the wild
impulse of his body in check. The porter halted on the stairs to settle
his guttering candle. They halted, too, on the steps below him. In the
silence Gabriel could hear the falling of the molten wax into the tray
and the thumping of his own heart against his ribs.

The porter led them along a corridor and opened a door. Then he set his
unstable candle down on a toilet-table and asked at what hour they were
to be called in the morning.

"Eight," said Gabriel.

The porter pointed to the tap of the electric-light and began a muttered
apology, but Gabriel cut him short.

"We don't want any light. We have light enough from the street. And I
say," he added, pointing to the candle, "you might remove that handsome
article, like a good man."

The porter took up his candle again, but slowly, for he was surprised by
such a novel idea. Then he mumbled good-night and went out. Gabriel shot
the lock to.

A ghostly light from the street lamp lay in a long shaft from one window
to the door. Gabriel threw his overcoat and hat on a couch and crossed
the room towards the window. He looked down into the street in order
that his emotion might calm a little. Then he turned and leaned against
a chest of drawers with his back to the light. She had taken off her hat
and cloak and was standing before a large swinging mirror, unhooking her
waist. Gabriel paused for a few moments, watching her, and then said:

"Gretta!"

She turned away from the mirror slowly and walked along the shaft of
light towards him. Her face looked so serious and weary that the words
would not pass Gabriel's lips. No, it was not the moment yet.

"You looked tired," he said.

"I am a little," she answered.

"You don't feel ill or weak?"

"No, tired: that's all."

She went on to the window and stood there, looking out. Gabriel waited
again and then, fearing that diffidence was about to conquer him, he
said abruptly:

"By the way, Gretta!"

"What is it?"

"You know that poor fellow Malins?" he said quickly.

"Yes. What about him?"

"Well, poor fellow, he's a decent sort of chap, after all," continued
Gabriel in a false voice. "He gave me back that sovereign I lent him,
and I didn't expect it, really. It's a pity he wouldn't keep away from
that Browne, because he's not a bad fellow, really."

He was trembling now with annoyance. Why did she seem so abstracted? He
did not know how he could begin. Was she annoyed, too, about something?
If she would only turn to him or come to him of her own accord! To take
her as she was would be brutal. No, he must see some ardour in her eyes
first. He longed to be master of her strange mood.

"When did you lend him the pound?" she asked, after a pause.

Gabriel strove to restrain himself from breaking out into brutal
language about the sottish Malins and his pound. He longed to cry to her
from his soul, to crush her body against his, to overmaster her. But he
said:

"O, at Christmas, when he opened that little Christmas-card shop in
Henry Street."

He was in such a fever of rage and desire that he did not hear her come
from the window. She stood before him for an instant, looking at him
strangely. Then, suddenly raising herself on tiptoe and resting her
hands lightly on his shoulders, she kissed him.

"You are a very generous person, Gabriel," she said.

Gabriel, trembling with delight at her sudden kiss and at the quaintness
of her phrase, put his hands on her hair and began smoothing it back,
scarcely touching it with his fingers. The washing had made it fine and
brilliant. His heart was brimming over with happiness. Just when he
was wishing for it she had come to him of her own accord. Perhaps her
thoughts had been running with his. Perhaps she had felt the impetuous
desire that was in him, and then the yielding mood had come upon her.
Now that she had fallen to him so easily, he wondered why he had been so
diffident.

He stood, holding her head between his hands. Then, slipping one arm
swiftly about her body and drawing her towards him, he said softly:

"Gretta, dear, what are you thinking about?"

She did not answer nor yield wholly to his arm. He said again, softly:

"Tell me what it is, Gretta. I think I know what is the matter. Do I
know?"

She did not answer at once. Then she said in an outburst of tears:

"O, I am thinking about that song, The Lass of Aughrim."

She broke loose from him and ran to the bed and, throwing her arms
across the bed-rail, hid her face. Gabriel stood stock-still for a moment
in astonishment and then followed her. As he passed in the way of the
cheval-glass he caught sight of himself in full length, his broad,
well-filled shirt-front, the face whose expression always puzzled him
when he saw it in a mirror, and his glimmering gilt-rimmed eyeglasses.
He halted a few paces from her and said:

"What about the song? Why does that make you cry?"

She raised her head from her arms and dried her eyes with the back of
her hand like a child. A kinder note than he had intended went into his
voice.

"Why, Gretta?" he asked.

"I am thinking about a person long ago who used to sing that song."

"And who was the person long ago?" asked Gabriel, smiling.

"It was a person I used to know in Galway when I was living with my
grandmother," she said.

The smile passed away from Gabriel's face. A dull anger began to gather
again at the back of his mind and the dull fires of his lust began to
glow angrily in his veins.

"Someone you were in love with?" he asked ironically.

"It was a young boy I used to know," she answered, "named Michael Furey.
He used to sing that song, The Lass of Aughrim. He was very delicate."

Gabriel was silent. He did not wish her to think that he was interested
in this delicate boy.

"I can see him so plainly," she said, after a moment. "Such eyes as he
had: big, dark eyes! And such an expression in them--an expression!"

"O, then, you are in love with him?" said Gabriel.

"I used to go out walking with him," she said, "when I was in Galway."

A thought flew across Gabriel's mind.

"Perhaps that was why you wanted to go to Galway with that Ivors girl?"
he said coldly.

She looked at him and asked in surprise:

"What for?"

Her eyes made Gabriel feel awkward. He shrugged his shoulders and said:

"How do I know? To see him, perhaps."

She looked away from him along the shaft of light towards the window in
silence.

"He is dead," she said at length. "He died when he was only seventeen.
Isn't it a terrible thing to die so young as that?"

"What was he?" asked Gabriel, still ironically.

"He was in the gasworks," she said.

Gabriel felt humiliated by the failure of his irony and by the evocation
of this figure from the dead, a boy in the gasworks. While he had been
full of memories of their secret life together, full of tenderness and
joy and desire, she had been comparing him in her mind with another. A
shameful consciousness of his own person assailed him. He saw himself
as a ludicrous figure, acting as a pennyboy for his aunts, a nervous,
well-meaning sentimentalist, orating to vulgarians and idealising his
own clownish lusts, the pitiable fatuous fellow he had caught a glimpse
of in the mirror. Instinctively he turned his back more to the light
lest she might see the shame that burned upon his forehead.

He tried to keep up his tone of cold interrogation, but his voice when
he spoke was humble and indifferent.

"I suppose you were in love with this Michael Furey, Gretta," he said.

"I was great with him at that time," she said.

Her voice was veiled and sad. Gabriel, feeling now how vain it would be
to try to lead her whither he had purposed, caressed one of her hands
and said, also sadly:

"And what did he die of so young, Gretta? Consumption, was it?"

"I think he died for me," she answered.

A vague terror seized Gabriel at this answer, as if, at that hour when
he had hoped to triumph, some impalpable and vindictive being was coming
against him, gathering forces against him in its vague world. But he
shook himself free of it with an effort of reason and continued to
caress her hand. He did not question her again, for he felt that she
would tell him of herself. Her hand was warm and moist: it did not
respond to his touch, but he continued to caress it just as he had
caressed her first letter to him that spring morning.

"It was in the winter," she said, "about the beginning of the winter
when I was going to leave my grandmother's and come up here to the
convent. And he was ill at the time in his lodgings in Galway and
wouldn't be let out, and his people in Oughterard were written to.
He was in decline, they said, or something like that. I never knew
rightly."

She paused for a moment and sighed.

"Poor fellow," she said. "He was very fond of me and he was such a
gentle boy. We used to go out together, walking, you know, Gabriel, like
the way they do in the country. He was going to study singing only for
his health. He had a very good voice, poor Michael Furey."

"Well; and then?" asked Gabriel.

"And then when it came to the time for me to leave Galway and come up to
the convent he was much worse and I wouldn't be let see him so I wrote
him a letter saying I was going up to Dublin and would be back in the
summer, and hoping he would be better then."

She paused for a moment to get her voice under control, and then went
on:

"Then the night before I left, I was in my grandmother's house in Nuns'
Island, packing up, and I heard gravel thrown up against the window.
The window was so wet I couldn't see, so I ran downstairs as I was and
slipped out the back into the garden and there was the poor fellow at
the end of the garden, shivering."

"And did you not tell him to go back?" asked Gabriel.

"I implored of him to go home at once and told him he would get his
death in the rain. But he said he did not want to live. I can see his
eyes as well as well! He was standing at the end of the wall where there
was a tree."

"And did he go home?" asked Gabriel.

"Yes, he went home. And when I was only a week in the convent he died
and he was buried in Oughterard, where his people came from. O, the day
I heard that, that he was dead!"

She stopped, choking with sobs, and, overcome by emotion, flung herself
face downward on the bed, sobbing in the quilt. Gabriel held her hand
for a moment longer, irresolutely, and then, shy of intruding on her
grief, let it fall gently and walked quietly to the window.


She was fast asleep.

Gabriel, leaning on his elbow, looked for a few moments unresentfully
on her tangled hair and half-open mouth, listening to her deep-drawn
breath. So she had had that romance in her life: a man had died for her
sake. It hardly pained him now to think how poor a part he, her husband,
had played in her life. He watched her while she slept, as though he and
she had never lived together as man and wife. His curious eyes rested
long upon her face and on her hair: and, as he thought of what she must
have been then, in that time of her first girlish beauty, a strange,
friendly pity for her entered his soul. He did not like to say even to
himself that her face was no longer beautiful, but he knew that it was
no longer the face for which Michael Furey had braved death.

Perhaps she had not told him all the story. His eyes moved to the
chair over which she had thrown some of her clothes. A petticoat string
dangled to the floor. One boot stood upright, its limp upper fallen
down: the fellow of it lay upon its side. He wondered at his riot of
emotions of an hour before. From what had it proceeded? From his aunt's
supper, from his own foolish speech, from the wine and dancing, the
merry-making when saying good-night in the hall, the pleasure of the
walk along the river in the snow. Poor Aunt Julia! She, too, would soon
be a shade with the shade of Patrick Morkan and his horse. He had
caught that haggard look upon her face for a moment when she was singing
Arrayed for the Bridal. Soon, perhaps, he would be sitting in that same
drawing-room, dressed in black, his silk hat on his knees. The blinds
would be drawn down and Aunt Kate would be sitting beside him, crying
and blowing her nose and telling him how Julia had died. He would cast
about in his mind for some words that might console her, and would find
only lame and useless ones. Yes, yes: that would happen very soon.

The air of the room chilled his shoulders. He stretched himself
cautiously along under the sheets and lay down beside his wife. One by
one, they were all becoming shades. Better pass boldly into that other
world, in the full glory of some passion, than fade and wither dismally
with age. He thought of how she who lay beside him had locked in her
heart for so many years that image of her lover's eyes when he had told
her that he did not wish to live.

Generous tears filled Gabriel's eyes. He had never felt like that
himself towards any woman, but he knew that such a feeling must be love.
The tears gathered more thickly in his eyes and in the partial darkness
he imagined he saw the form of a young man standing under a dripping
tree. Other forms were near. His soul had approached that region where
dwell the vast hosts of the dead. He was conscious of, but could not
apprehend, their wayward and flickering existence. His own identity was
fading out into a grey impalpable world: the solid world itself,
which these dead had one time reared and lived in, was dissolving and
dwindling.

A few light taps upon the pane made him turn to the window. It had begun
to snow again. He watched sleepily the flakes, silver and dark, falling
obliquely against the lamplight. The time had come for him to set out on
his journey westward. Yes, the newspapers were right: snow was general
all over Ireland. It was falling on every part of the dark central
plain, on the treeless hills, falling softly upon the Bog of Allen and,
farther westward, softly falling into the dark mutinous Shannon waves.
It was falling, too, upon every part of the lonely churchyard on the
hill where Michael Furey lay buried. It lay thickly drifted on the
crooked crosses and headstones, on the spears of the little gate, on
the barren thorns. His soul swooned slowly as he heard the snow falling
faintly through the universe and faintly falling, like the descent of
their last end, upon all the living and the dead.


STANDARD TRUSTCO SEES BETTER YEAR
  Standard Trustco said it expects earnings
  in 1987 to increase at least 15 to 20 pct from the 9,140,000
  dlrs, or 2.52 dlrs per share, recorded in 1986.
      "Stable interest rates and a growing economy are expected to
  provide favorable conditions for further growth in 1987,"
  president Brian O'Malley told shareholders at the annual
  meeting.
      Standard Trustco previously reported assets of 1.28 billion
  dlrs in 1986, up from 1.10 billion dlrs in 1985. Return on
  common shareholders' equity was 18.6 pct last year, up from 15
  pct in 1985.
  

DIAGNOSTIC/RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS INC MAKES 53 MLN DLR BID FOR ROSPATCH CORP

  DIAGNOSTIC/RETRIEVAL SYSTEMS INC MAKES 53 MLN DLR BID FOR ROSPATCH CORP
  

ASTEC INDUSTRIES INC &lt;ASTE> 4TH QTR DEC 31
  Shr loss nine cts vs profit 22 cts
      Net loss 278,949 vs profit 346,368
      Revs 11.9 mln vs 10.4 mln
      Year
      Shr profit 49 cts vs profit 49 cts
      Net profit 1.2 mln vs profit 949,626
      Revs 61.7 mln vs 52.7 mln
      NOTE:1985 net includes loss of three cts or 49.1 mln dlrs
  in 4th qtr and loss of 13 cts or 258,720 dlrs in year from
  discontinued operations.
  

U.S. ECONOMIC DATA KEY TO DEBT FUTURES OUTLOOK
  U.S. economic data this week could be
  the key in determining whether U.S. interest rate futures break
  out of a 3-1/2 month trading range, financial analysts said.
      Although market expectations are for February U.S. retail
  sales Thursday and industrial production Friday to show healthy
  gains, figures within or slightly below expectations would be
  positive for the market, the analysts said.
      "You have to be impressed with the resiliency of bonds
  right now," said Smith Barney Harris Upham analyst Craig
  Sloane.
      Treasury bond futures came under pressure today which
  traders linked to a persistently firm federal funds rate and a
  rise in oil prices. However, when sufficient selling interest
  to break below chart support in the June contract failed to
  materialize, participants who had sold bond futures early
  quickly covered short positions, they said.
      "Everyone is expecting strong numbers, and if they come in
  as expected it won't be that bad for the market," Sloane said.
      Sloane said the consensus estimate for the non-auto sector
  of retail sales is for a rise of 0.6 to 0.7 pct.
      Dean Witter analyst Karen Gibbs said a retail sales figure
  below market forecasts would give a boost to debt futures, and
  she put the range for the non-auto sector of retail sales at up
  0.8 to 1.2 pct.
      Industrial production and the producer price index Friday
  both are expected to show increases of about 0.5 pct, she
  added.
      Retail sales "will tell us whether or not we will be able
  to fill the gap," Gibbs said, referring to a chart gap in June
  bonds between 100-26/32 and 101-3/32 created Friday. June bonds
  closed at 100-4/32 today.
      Also key to debt futures direction, in addition to the
  federal funds rate, is the direction of crude oil prices, said
  Carroll McEntee and McGinley Futures analyst Brian Singer.
      "A higher fed funds rate and firm oil prices precluded the
  market from breaking out of the trading range the last time the
  market approached the top of the range," Singer said.
      In order for bonds to break above the top of the range,
  which is just below 102 in the June contract, "the crude oil
  rally needs to run its course and pull back a little bit,"
  Singer said. "Fed funds are already easing back down toward the
  six pct level."
      The recent surge in oil prices has also been a concern to
  Manufacturers Hanover Futures analyst Jim Rozich, but the rally
  may be nearing a top around 18.50 dlrs per barrel, he said.
      Rozich said he is looking for the June bond contract to
  ease to 99-6/32 and find support.
      "I'm not quite ready to jump on the bullish bandwagon yet.
  The jury is still out this week," Rozich said.
  

MILLER TABAK HAS 91.8 PCT OF PENN TRAFFIC &lt;PNF>
  &lt;Miller Tabak Hirsch and Co> said it
  has received an accepted 3,424,729 common shares of Penn
  Traffic Co in response to its 31.60 dlr per share tender offer
  that expired Friday, and together with the 380,728 shares it
  already owned, it now has about 91.8 pct of Penn Traffic.
      The company said Penn Traffic is expected to hold a special
  shareholders' meeting later this month to approve a merger into
  Miller Tabak at the tender price.
      It said two Miller Tabak representatives will be named to
  the Penn Traffic board on March Four to serve as the only
  directors with Penn Traffic president and chief executive
  officer Guido Malacarne.
      The company said it received financing for the transaction
  from First National Bank of Minneapolis and Salomon Inc &lt;SB>.
  

BANK OF BRITISH COLUMBIA 1ST QTR JAN 31 NET
  Oper shr loss two cts vs profit three cts
      Oper net profit 273,000 dlrs vs profit 1,710,000
      YEAR - period ended October 31, 1986
      Oper shr loss 23 cts vs profit 14 cts
      Oper net loss 4,397,000 vs profit 7,527,000
      Assets 2.67 billion vs 3.25 billion
      Note: 1987 1st qtr net excludes extraordinary loss of 2.2
  mln dlrs or six cts shr.
      1986 yr net excludes extraordinary loss of 66 mln dlrs or
  1.94 dlrs shr involving 22.1 mln dlrs of costs from sale of
  bank assets to Hongkong Bank of Canada, eight mln dlrs for
  contingent liabilities in respect of litigation and potential
  tax reassessment by U.S. govt and 35.9 mln dlrs of deferred tax
  debits.
      Most bank assets sold to HongKong Bank of Canada, a unit of
  &lt;Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp> in Nov, 1986.
      Shr after preferred divs.
  

RESTAURANT ASSOCIATES INC &lt;RA> 4TH QTR JAN 3
  Shr 25 cts vs 36 cts
      Net 1.4 mln vs 1.4 mln
      Revs 56.9 mln vs 35.1 mln
      Year
      Shr 86 cts vs 75 cts
      Net 4.7 mln vs 3.0 mln
      REvs 201.4 mln vs 140.0 mln
      NOTE:1985 4th qtr includes 99,000 loss from carryforward.
  Shares restated to give effect to 1.4 to one stock split in the
  form a 40 pct class A dividend in August 1985.
  

MICHIGAN GENERAL CORP &lt;MGL> 4TH QTR
  Shr loss 1.02 dlrs vs 1.01 dlr
      Net loss 18.1 mln vs 11.4 mln
      Revs 96.0 mln vs 90.3 mln
      Year
      Shr loss 2.65 dlrs vs loss 3.06 dlrs
      Net loss 39.3 mln vs 34.6 mln
      Revs 386.0 mln vs 373.0 mln
      NOTE:1986 4th qtr, year loss includes 14.4 mln dlrs, 4.6
  mln dlrs respectively from discontinued. 1985 4th qtr and year
  include loss of 13.1 mln, 1.9 mln dlr respectively.
  

USX &lt;X> PROVED OIL, GAS RESERVES FALL IN 1986
  USX Corp said proved reserves of oil
  and natural gas liquids fell 28 pct to 802.8 mln barrels at the
  end of 1986 from 1.12 billion barrels at year-end 1985.
      The figures, in USX's just-released 1986 annual report,
  indicate much of the drop resulted from the exclusion of 293.7
  mln barrels of Libyan reserves, after the U.S. government last
  June directed U.S. oil companies to end Libyan operations.
      USX, which owns Marathon Oil Co and Texas Oil and Gas Corp,
  had 60 pct of its 1986 sales of 14.94 billion dlrs from its oil
  and gas operations.
      About 24 pct of total sales came from USX's USS steel unit
  and 16 pct from diversified businesses, which include oilfield
  services, raw materials, minerals, chemicals and real estate.
      According to the report, domestic liquids reserves fell
  slightly to 628.5 mln barrels from 628.9 mln and foreign
  reserves fell to 174.3 mln from 486.4 mln barrels. The large
  drop in foreign reserves was in the Middle East and Africa,
  where they fell to about 9.3 mln barrels from 316.7 mln,
  reflecting the exclusion of Libya.
      Total natural gas reserves fell to 4.82 trillion cubic feet
  at year-end 1986 from 5.18 trillion at the end of 1985.
      Again, most of the drop came from the Middle East and
  Africa, where reserves fell to zero from 71.9 billion cubic
  feet, excluding Libyan reserves.
      U.S. natural gas reserves fell to 3.44 trillion cubic feet
  from 3.65 trillion and foreign reserves fell to 1.38 trillion
  from 1.53 trillion.
      In other areas, USX said total capital spending fell to 962
  mln dlrs in 1986 from 1.78 billion dlrs in 1985. The 1986
  audited figure is eight mln dlrs higher than the unaudited
  figure the company reported on Jan 27.
      USX also said it expects to record a gain of 150 mln dlrs
  in 1988, representing 50 pct of previously existing investment
  tax credits allowable under the new tax law. The loss of the
  other half of the credits was reflected in the fourth quarter.
      In a discussion of steel results, USX said plants that were
  shut down last month and some previously idled plants may be
  permanently closed. USX took a fourth quarter charge of 1.03
  billion dlrs to restructure its steel operations. The charge
  included the "indefinite idling" last month of four plants in
  Utah, Pennsylvania and Texas.
      Other plants or parts of plants in Pennsylvania, Indiana,
  Alabama, Ohio and Chicago had been previously idled.
      "These operations are not permanently shut down. Improved
  market conditions for the products from these plants may make
  it feasible to reopen some of them," USX said in the report.
      "On the other hand, a lack of any future market improvement
  may necessitate their permanent closing," it added.
  

BANK OF B.C. REVISES SHARE PAYOUT ESTIMATE
  Bank of British
  Columbia said it revised its estimate of shareholder
  distributions from last November's sale of most of the bank's
  assets to HongKong Bank of Canada to between 65 cts and 1.15
  dlrs a share from 55 cts to 1.20 dlrs a share.
      The bank said the estimate could rise to between 1.30 dlrs
  and 1.80 dlrs a share if the full pension surplus is obtained.
  It said it did not know when distributions would be made.
      It earlier reported that operating profit for first quarter
  ended January 31 fell to 273,000 dlrs from 1.7 mln dlrs the
  previous year.
      For full-year 1986 ended October 31, the bank posted an
  operating loss of 4.4 mln dlrs against year-earlier profit of
  7.5 mln dlrs. The bank also posted a 66 mln dlr extraordinary
  loss in fiscal 1986.
      Bank of British Columbia sold most of its assets last
  November to HongKong Bank Canada, a unit of &lt;HongKong and
  Shanghai Banking Corp>, of Hong Kong, for 63.5 mln dlrs.
      It said efforts to wind up the bank's affairs were
  proceeding as quickly as possible.
      The bank said it expected to report positive earnings in
  future periods, barring unforeseen circumstances.
      Loan losses, which the bank previously said figured in its
  move to sell off most of its assets, rose to 105.7 mln dlrs in
  fiscal 1986 from year-earlier 36.1 mln dlrs. The bank said 31.1
  mln dlrs of the 1986 total represented downward adjustments to
  its portfolio of syndicated sovereign risk loans as required
  under the sale to HongKong Bank.
      Since November 27, the bank has confined activities to the
  winding up of affairs, Bank of British Columbia said.
  

COFFEE QUOTA TALKS CONTINUE BUT NO AGREEMENT YET
  Coffee quota talks at the International
  Coffee Organization council meeting here continued this
  afternoon, but producers and consumers still had not reached
  common ground on the key issue of how to estimate export
  quotas, delegates said.
      The 54 member contact group was examining a Colombian
  proposal to resume quotas April 1 under the ad hoc system used
  historically, with a pledge to meet again in September to
  discuss how quotas would be worked out in the future, they
  said.
      Delegates would not speculate on the prospects for
  agreement at this time.
      "Anything could happen," one delegate said.
  

&lt;KIENA GOLD MINES LTD> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 17 cts vs 16 cts
      Net 1,019,000 vs 985,000
      Revs 7,997,000 vs 7,492,000
      YEAR
      Shr 1.18 dlrs vs 64 cts
      Net 6,959,000 vs 3,778,000
      Revs 36.5 mln vs 29.8 mln
  

ARGENTINE MEAT EXPORTS HIGHER IN JAN/FEB 1987
  Argentine meat exports during
  Jan/Feb 1987 totalled 39,714 tonnes, against 36,594 tonnes
  shipped in the same 1986 period, National Meat board said.
      Shipments in tonnes with comparative figures for the 1986
  period, in brackets, included: beef 26,945 (20,096), horse meat
  3,257 (4,211) and beef offal 7,660 (10,502).
      Argentine's meat exports totalled 20,243 tonnes in February
  1987, against 19,217 tonnes shipped in the same 1986 month.
      Shipments in tonnes, with comparative figures for February
  1986, in brackets, included: beef 13,272 (11,464), horse meat
  1,543 (2,083) and beef offal 4,476 (4,672), the board added.
      Main destinations for refrigerated beef (bone in
  equivalent) were as follows, in tonnes, with comparative
  figures for 1986 in brackets -
      EC 5,500 (7,900), Brazil 5,200 (unavailable), Israel 3,700
  (3,000), Peru 2,500 (800), Singapore 500 (300), Switzerland 500
  (400), Canary Islands 500 (300), Malta 500 (700), Aruba/Curazao
  200 (300), Chile 100 (600).
      Main destinations for canned meat and cooked beef (bone in
  equivalent), in tonnes with comparative figures for Jan/Feb
  1986, in brackets, were -
      United States 11,200 (13,400), EC 4,700 (5,100).
  

KIENA PLANS TWO-FOR-ONE STOCK SPLIT
  &lt;Kiena Gold Mines Ltd> said it planned
  a two-for-one common stock split, pending shareholder approval
  on April 7.
      It said approval would require 66-2/3 pct of votes cast.
  Kiena said 57 pct-owner Campbell Red Lake Mines Ltd &lt;CRK> was
  expected to vote in favor of the split.
  

ROWE FURNITURE CORP &lt;ROWE> SETS QTLY DIVIDEND
  Qtly div four cts vs four cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record March 20
  

U.S. HOUSE PANEL TAKES FIRST TRADE BILL VOTES
  House trade lawmakers took their
  first votes on measures designed to toughen U.S. trade laws but
  held over until tomorrow the most difficult votes on
  controversial plans to protect American industries.
      Meeting in closed session, the House Ways and Means Trade
  Subcommittee failed to resolve one of the most sensitive issues
  in the bill--whether they will force major foreign trading
  partners to severely cut their trade surpluses with the United
  States.
      The subcommittee is considering a toned-down version of
  Democratic-sponsored trade legislation that aims to open
  foreign markets but which drops last year's effort to force
  President Reagan to retaliate with quotas or tariffs.
      Congressional aides who asked not to be identified said the
  lawmakers intend to wrap up their proposals tomorrow and will
  consider a proposal to mandate retaliation without setting
  specific trade penalties.
      The legislation faces another hurdle in the full Ways and
  Means Committee next week before the full House votes on it.
      Rep. Richard Gephardt, a Missouri Democrat who is seeking
  his party's 1988 presidential nomination, said he may offer an
  amendment to call for reductions in the trade surpluses of
  those countries with barriers to imports of U.S. goods.
      This would be a moderated version of his earlier plan to
  force a mandatory ten per cent annual cut in the trade surplus
  with the United States by Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, West
  Germany and other countries with the largest trade imbalances.
      "My criteria for a good amendment sets a standard for
  getting the trade deficit down," he told reporters.
      The trade law changes are to become part of a major
  congressional and administration effort to turn around the
  record U.S. trade deficit of 169 billion dlrs last year by
  opening up foreign markets and making U.S. products more
  competitive.
      House Speaker James Wright, a Texas Democrat, said again
  today he expects the full House will approve the trade bill by
  May and that Reagan will accept the final congressional bill.
      "I expect whatever is reported (by the Ways and Means
  Committee) will pass. We will have a good bill and an effective
  bill," he told reporters.
      The comprehensive trade bill will include work by other
  committees to ease export controls on high technology, to aid
  U.S. workers displaced by foreign competition, to stimulate
  research and development, to remove foreign trade barriers and
  to improve education and worker training.
      The lawmakers agreed that for the first time a U.S.
  industry could charge foreign producers with unfair competition
  if they deny basic worker rights such as collective bargaining,
  safety rules and payment of a minimum wage appropriate to the
  country's economic development.
      They transferred to U.S. Trade Representative Clayton
  Yeutter the powers now held by Reagan to decide whether to
  retaliate against foreign violations of fair trade rules and
  whether an injured industry deserves import relief.
      They agreed to make it easier for a company to get
  temporary relief from import competition but agreed the
  industry should provide a plan to become competitive.
      The administration has not announced its support but
  Yeutter said yesterday, "I am cautiously optimistic," that the
  Democratic-led House will come up with an acceptable bill.
  

SOVIET MINISTER SAYS TRADE BOOST UP TO FRENCH
  Soviet first deputy prime minister
  Vsevolod Murakhovsky said at the end of a brief visit here his
  country wanted to boost joint business with France, but that a
  reduction of France's trade deficit with the Soviet Union
  depended on the French.
      Murakhovsky, who is also chairman of the State
  Agro-Industrial Committee (GOSAGROPROM), told a news conference
  he had discussed a variety of possible deals with French
  companies Rhone-Poulenc, Pechiney and Imec.
      Declining to put figures on possible contracts he said he
  had discussed plant protection and the processing of highly
  sulphuric gas with Rhone-Poulenc, packaging technology for
  agricultural products with Pechiney, and fruit and vegetable
  juice processing with Imec.
      An official for Pechiney said an agreement of intent on
  packaging could be signed soon, but could not give any other
  details. The other two companies were not immediately available
  for comment.
      Asked whether he foresaw a reduction this year of France's
  trade shortfall, at 7.6 billion francs in the first 11 months
  of 1986 against 5.1 billion for the whole of 1985, Murakhovsky
  told Reuters: "It all depends on France."
      At a meeting in Paris last January French and Soviet
  foreign trade ministers said they were committed to increased
  efforts to reduce the deficit. Estimates at the time showed a
  French 190 mln franc surplus for December 1986.
      Murakhovsky said the Soviet Union was prepared to talk with
  anybody with "interesting" proposals offering latest technology
  and assuring "a mutual advantage."
      He said the Soviet Union had many tasks ahead of it and
  would deal rapidly with proposals it considered interesting.
      He encouraged companies to take advantage of new laws
  guaranteeing "the interests of foreign partners" in joint
  ventures.
      But he said no agreements had yet been finalised under the
  new joint venture laws.
      He said concrete deals had not yet been finalised as a
  result of a one billion dollar accord signed in Moscow last
  month with French businessman Jean-Baptiste Doumeng.
      He said Doumeng's Interagra company was preparing proposals
  for further examination by the Soviet Union. Doumeng last month
  said the agreement was to exchange one billion dollars worth of
  goods.
      Murakhovsky said the agreement was one of intent, and
  designed primarily to renew and increase the Soviet Union's
  food production capacity.
  

VENEZUELA TO LEND OIL TO ECUADOR FOR EXPORT
  venezuela will supply ecuador with an
  as yet undetermined amount of crude oil to help it meet export
  commitments, seriously affected by last week's earthquake,
  energy and mines minister arturo hernandez grisanti said.
      He gave few details about the deal, but said a crude oil
  loan agreement will be made between state oil companies
  petroleos de venezuela (pdvsa) and ecuador's cepe.
      Ecuador was forced to suspend oil exports for an expected
  four months after an earthquake damaged a pipeline. Oil
  accounts for 60 per cent of its export income.
       Hernandez was speaking to reporters at miraflores palace
  on the results of talks with ecuador's deputy energy minister
  fernando santos alvite, who arrived here last night.
      "the volume lent to ecuador would be discounted from its
  opec quota and would not affect venezuela's," he said. "we would
  from august on produce our own quota and sell the additional
  amounts that ecuador would be repaying us," he said.
      He did not elaborate on the quota arrangements but did say
  ecuador would notify opec by telex that venezuela would be
  lending it a certain amount over so many days.
      Venezuela's opec output quota is currently 1.495 million
  barrels a day, and ecuador's has been set at 210,000 bpd.
  

EAGLE CLOTHES INC &lt;EGL> 2nD QTR JAN 31
  Shr profit 17 cts vs profit 14 cts
      Net profit 1.3 mln vs profit 901,000
      Revs 36.9 mln vs 36.2 mln
      Six months
      Shr profit 18 cts vs loss 11 cts
      Net profit 1.4 mln vs loss 716,000
      Revs 63.6 mln vs 57.7 mln
      NOTE:1986 six months includes increase in provision for
  doubtful accounts to 1.5 mln dlrs. 1986 shares give effect to
  issuance of 1.5 mln shares in exchange for outstanding Series 1
  preferred shares.
  

BRITAIN CALLS ON JAPAN TO INCREASE IMPORTS
  Britain today called on Japan to
  increase foreign imports or risk the rise of protectionism and
  the harm it would bring to it and other trading nations.
      British Trade and Industry Secretary Paul Channon said
  Japan must heed a report issued by a Japanese government
  advisory body in December calling for faster domestic demand to
  help cut its trade surplus and restructure its economy.
      "I recognise that the strong yen has brought problems to
  Japan's domestic economy," he told a group of Japanese
  businessmen in London.
      "But these short term difficulties should not be allowed to
  deflect Japan from the fundamental reforms necessary," he said.
      "It is not just a domestic issue for Japan. If import
  propensity does not expand very soon there is a real risk from
  protectionist lobbies, particularly in the U.S. With whom Japan
  has so massive a surplus," he said.
      "They may well succeed in securing action by governments
  which would be highly injurious to trading nations like Japan
  and the U.K."
      Channon said there had been substantial growth in the
  volume of trade between Japan and Britain, amounting to 6.2
  billion sterling (9.8 billion dlrs) last year.
      But he added: "Regrettably too much of it was in one
  direction, with the Japanese selling us 3.7 billion sterling
  (5.8 billion dlrs) more than we sold them."
  

TAFT BROADCASTING REJECTS 145 DLR PER SHARE BUYOUT OFFER FROM THETA CORP

  TAFT BROADCASTING REJECTS 145 DLR PER SHARE BUYOUT OFFER FROM THETA CORP
  

TAFT &lt;TFB> REJECTS 145 DLR/SHR OFFER
  Taft Braodacasting Co said its board
  of directors unanimously decided not to accept the pending
  proposal of Theta Corp, an investor group led by Dudley Taft.
      The decision was based on, among other things, the advise
  of its financial advisors, goldman sachs and co, that the offer
  of 145 dlrs per share was inadequate.
      Taft said the board concluded that the offer failed to
  recognize fully the future propsects of the company and
  directed management to explore alternatives including possible
  financial restructuring.
  

BRITISH MINISTER CRITICISES PROPOSED EC OILS TAX
  A British minister said that a proposed
  European Community tax on vegetable oils and fats would raise
  the price of fish and chips and he pledged the government would
  fight against it.
      Lord Belstead, a junior agriculture minister, told the
  House of Lords the tax would raise the price of raw materials
  used in many processed foods by about 100 pct.
      He said revenue should not be raised by taxing the consumer
  and called the proposal "repugnant."
  

AUSTRALIAN UNEMPLOYMENT EASES IN FEBRUARY
  Australia's seasonally-adjusted
  unemployment rate eased to 8.2 pct of the estimated workforce
  in February from 8.3 pct in January, compared with 7.9 pct a
  year earlier, the Statistics Bureau said.
      The number of unemployed declined to 632,100 from 638,300
  in January, against 594,500 in February 1986, it said.
      But unadjusted, the number of jobless rose to 699,800 or
  9.1 pct of the workforce from 671,400 or 8.9 pct in January and
  658,500 or 8.7 pct a year earlier.
  

TREASURY SECRETARY BAKER DECLINES COMMENT ON G-6
  U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker
  declined comment on the February 22 Paris accord between the
  six major industrial nations under which they agreed to foster
  exchange rate stability.
      Asked by reporters after a speech before the National
  Fitness Foundation banquet what, if any, currency intervention
  levels had been set in Paris, Baker replied: "We never talk
  about intervention."
      Baker also declined to comment on his views about the
  foreign exchange markets' reaction to the accord.
  

ECUADOR TO ASK OPEC TO RAISE EXPORT QUOTA
  Ecuador will ask OPEC to raise its oil
  export quota by 100,000 barrels per day to 310,000 to
  compensate for lost output due to last week's earthquake,
  deputy Energy Minister Fernando Santos Alvite said.
      Santos Alvite, who arrived in Caracas last night to discuss
  an aid plan for Ecuador, did not say when the Organisation of
  Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) would be approached.
      The additional output would be related to plans now under
  discussion for Venezuela and Mexico to lend Ecuador crude while
  it repairs a pipeline damaged by the quake.
      Earlier, Venezuelan Energy and Mines Minister Aturo
  Hernandez Grisanti said his country would supply an unspecified
  part of Ecuador's export commitments.
      But Santos Alvite told reporters he hoped a first cargo of
  300,000 barrels could leave Maracaibo this weekend to supply
  refineries near Guayaquil. He added Ecuador also wanted to make
  up for 50,000 bpd it shipped to Caribbean destinations. Mexico
  might supply Ecuador's South Korean market.
      Ecuador may be unable to export oil for up to five months
  due to extensive damage to a 25 mile stretch of pipeline
  linking jungle oilfields to the Pacific port of Balao.
  

WASTE MANAGEMENT &lt;WMX> VOTES SPLIT, UPS PAYOUT
  Waste Management Corp said its
  board voted a two-for-one stock split payable April 21, record
  March 30.
      In other action, Waste Management directors approved an
  increase in the quarterly dividend to 18 cts from 14 cts,
  payable April three, record March 18.
  

CHINA'S RAPESEED CROP DAMAGED BY STORMS
  The yield on 46,000 hectares (ha) of
  rapeseed in central China will be cut by up to 70 pct by
  hailstorms and tornadoes that swept across nearly 100,000 ha of
  crops on March 6, the New China News Agency said today.
      The storm, which lashed the Huai and Yangtze rivers and
  eastern Anhui province, left two people dead and 800 others
  injured. Some 800 houses were flattened and 19 boats sunk, it
  said.
      The Anhui provincial government has sent emergency relief
  to the 19 counties affected, the news agency said.
  

CHINA CLOSES SECOND ROUND OF OFFSHORE OIL BIDS
  China has closed the second round of
  bidding by foreign firms for offshore oil exploration rights,
  the China Daily has reported.
      It quoted a spokesman for the China National Offshore Oil
  Corp (CNOOC) as saying China signed eight contracts with 15
  foreign firms for blocks in the Pearl River mouth and south
  Yellow Sea covering a total area of 44,913 sq km.
      Second round bidding began at the end of 1984 and only one
  well has so far produced results -- Lufeng 13-1-1, 250 km
  south-east of Shenzhen, with an output of 6,770 barrels a day.
  The well was drilled by a group of Japanese companies.
      The spokesman added CNOOC was ready to enter into contracts
  for offshore blocks before third round bidding began. He did
  not say when this would be, but added the contracts would not
  be bound by restrictions imposed during the second round.
      China has signed 36 oil contracts and agreements with 37
  companies from 10 countries since 1979, when offshore
  exploration was open to foreigners. Eleven contracts were
  terminated after no oil was discovered.
      Foreign firms have invested 2.1 billion dlrs on offshore
  China since 1979.
  

AMC IMPOSES HIRING FREEZE DUE TO TAKEOVER BID
  American Motors Corp &lt;AMO> management
  has ordered a hiring freeze in view of Chrysler Corp's &lt;C> 1.5
  billion dlr takeover bid, a spokesman for AMC said.
      Analysts said the merger is virtually certain to go ahead.
      American Motors directors met for five hours Wednesday to
  review the takeover proposal. "The board ... Expects to be
  meeting periodically over the next several weeks on the
  Chrysler proposal," AMC said in its first formal statement since
  it acknowledged the Chrysler proposal on Monday.
      Chrysler, the number three U.S. Automaker, has said the
  merger is motivated principally by its desire to acquire AMC's
  profitable Jeep business and dealers, as well as a new modern
  car assembly plant in Bramalea, Ontario.
      That means a guaranteed future for much of AMC, but it
  leaves in question the fate of many of its 19,000-plus
  employees, according to industry analysts. AMC's Toledo, Ohio
  Jeep plant has 1,850 hourly workers on indefinite layoff while
  its Kenosha, Wisconsin, car plant has another 2,250 on layoff.
  

FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA JUMPS IN LAST QTR
  The net inflow of foreign investment
  into Australia jumped to 7.3 billion dlrs in the fourth quarter
  of 1986 from 4.32 billion in the third quarter and 4.55 billion
  a year earlier, the Statistics Bureau said.
      The Bureau attributed the increase to a turnaround of 2.08
  billion dlrs in official sector transactions and a 1.09 billion
  turnaround in direct investment.
      The turnaround in official transactions to a 1.52 billion
  inflow from a 555 mln outflow in the third quarter, against a
  520 mln inflow a year earlier, was largely on account of
  government foreign currency borrowings, it said.
      Direct investment recorded a turnaround to a 1.04 billion
  dlr inflow in the fourth quarter from a 57 mln withdrawal in
  the third quarter, against a 546 mln inflow in the fourth
  quarter of 1985, the Bureau said.
      It said the major part of the turnaround reflected an
  injection of funds, estimated at around 700 mln dlrs,
  associated with the previously reported restructuring of the
  Australian operations of General Motors Corp &lt;GM>.
      GM used the funds to pay out or take over certain
  Australian liabilities of its local unit &lt;General
  Motors-Holden's Ltd>, it said.
      However, net borrowings remained the major part of total
  inflow, accounting for 6.16 billion dlrs in the fourth quarter
  against 3.88 billion in the third quarter and 4.03 billion a
  year earlier, the Bureau said.
      Net official borrowings comprised 1.52 billion dlrs against
  a net outflow of 548 mln in the third quarter and a 516 mln
  inflow a year earlier.
      Total private and semi-public authority net borrowings rose
  to 4.64 billion dlrs from 4.42 billion in the third quarter and
  3.51 billion a year earlier.
  

TAIWAN'S FIRST QUARTER MAIZE IMPORTS SEEN RISING
  Taiwan's maize import commitments are
  expected to rise to 970,000 tonnes in the first four months of
  1987 from 870,000 tonnes a year earlier, a spokesman for the
  Joint Committee of Maize Importers told Reuters.
      He said more than 75 pct of the imports come from the U.S.
  And the rest from South Africa.
      The maize import target for calendar 1987 is set at well
  over 3.4 mln tonnes compared with an actual 3.07 mln in 1985,
  he added.
  

TAIWAN FURTHER RELAXES FOREIGN GOODS IMPORT CURBS
  Taiwan said it would soon relax import
  controls on some 400 foreign items, including stationery and
  books, in a further effort to allow trading partners,
  especially the U.S., Greater access to its markets.
      Taiwan announced the easing of import curbs on some 600
  farm and industrial products last month, a Council for Economic
  Planning and Development spokesman told Reuters.
      He said the new move was intended to balance trade between
  Taiwan and its trading partners. The island's trade surplus
  reached a record 15.6 billion U.S. Dlrs last year, up from
  10.62 billion in 1985.
      In January, Taiwan cut import tariffs on some 1,700 foreign
  products and allowed imports of U.S. Wine, beer and cigarettes.
      "We hope the measures will help reduce our trade surplus
  this year, especially with that of the U.S.," the spokesman
  said.
      Washington is pressing Taiwan to open its markets wider as
  a way of cutting its trade deficit with the island, which rose
  to 2.35 billion U.S. Dlrs in the first two months of 1987 from
  1.87 billion in the year-earlier period.
  

ECONOMIC SPOTLIGHT - MITSUBISHI HEAVY FIGHTS BACK
  International efforts to redirect Japan's
  export-driven economy toward domestic consumption face heavy
  going if the country's largest defence contractor and world's
  biggest shipbuilder is anything to go by.
      Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd &lt;MITH.T> (MHI), which began
  making ships and iron goods for Japan's military rulers 130
  years ago, is responding to the strong yen by redoubling its
  efforts to maintain its share of export markets.
      "If we sell the best quality and the cheapest products,
  everyone will buy them," MHI president Yotaro Iida said.
      Although two of MHI's main businesses, shipbuilding and
  power plant construction, have been hit hard by the yen's 40
  pct rise against the dollar, the company has no plans to
  abandon them, Iida told Reuters in an interview.
      Its other big activity, aircraft component manufacture, has
  performed so well that MHI now accounts for half of the money
  Tokyo spends on defence procurement each year.
      "We have made the utmost efforts among the world's
  manufacturers to improve productivity," he said. "You may be
  surprised if you come to see our plants. The outside is old but
  the inside is ultra-modern, with robots and computers."
      Securities analysts at major securities houses agreed that
  MHI has pared costs more quickly than its competitors. The
  company has slashed its workforce to 47,000 from 86,000 in
  1976.
      Despite its cost-cutting, MHI expects profits to drop 40
  pct to 30 billion yen in the current fiscal year ending March
  31, from 1985/86's record 50.14 billion.
      And that includes gains from the sale of MHI's stake in
  Mitsubishi Motors Corp &lt;MIMT.T> for 49 billion yen.
      Iida is optimistic about the future, however. He said a
  resurgence of demand from the Middle East following the recent
  recovery in oil prices coupled with persistent demand for power
  plants in developing countries will help MHI restore its
  exports-to-sales ratio to the past decade's average of 30 pct.
      MHI's exports-to-sales ratio fell to 25.9 pct in the
  half-year ended last September, from 35 to 36 pct five years
  ago.
      China is the most promising market, although MHI also
  considers other non-oil-producing developing countries as major
  customers.
      "Our customers are all seen as being in trouble due to a
  lack of foreign currency," Iida said. But he added that he felt
  MHI could sell to those markets with Japanese government
  financial support.
      It can also finance the plants itself and recover its
  investment through product sales, a strategy Iida said could
  prove popular in the future.
      In shipping, MHI is fighting back against low-priced South
  Korean competition by building more technologically advanced
  carriers to carry liquefied natural gas and other products
  difficult to transport.
      Shipbuilders Association officials told Reuters MHI is the
  world's largest shipbuilder in terms of orders and capacity.
      Domestically, MHI is involved in 12 national projects,
  including development of nuclear fusion reactors and launch
  vehicles for man-made satellites.
      It has been the biggest contractor for the Japan Defence
  Agency's F-15 and F-14 jet fighters and missiles, although all
  of these have been built under licence from U.S. Firms.
      MHI is now heading up five Japanese companies seeking to
  develop the country's own fighter plane to replace the
  currently used F-1 support fighters in the late 1990s.
      Military experts said Washington is putting strong pressure
  on Tokyo to buy a U.S. Plane, either the McDonnell Douglas Corp
  F-18 or General Dynamics Corp F-16, to reduce Japan's huge
  trade surplus with the U.S.
      "It might be a good idea to jointly produce planes with U.S.
  Makers as Japan is supported by the U.S. Defence umbrella," Iida
  said.
      MHI also plans to cooperate with the U.S. In its Strategic
  Defence Initiative space defence program by participating in
  the project when it moves from the research stage, he said.
      The U.S. Has been seeking Japan's technological support.
      In fiscal 1985/86, aircraft accounted for 17.1 pct of MHI's
  sales, shipbuilding 17 pct and power plants 27.9 pct. Iida said
  the ideal ratio is power plants 30 pct, aircraft and special
  vehicles 25 pct and shipbuilding 15 pct.
      As for the remaining 30 pct, Iida said he wanted to shift
  the domestic focus away from heavy machinery sold to
  manufacturers and towards household goods, but he declined to
  specify which products.
      "By the end of this year, you may find our brand name on
  your daily products, although this does not mean we will run
  away from our mainstream business," he said.
  

POREX TECHNOLOGIES &lt;PORX> SETS INITIAL DIVIDEND
  Porex Technologies Corp said its
  board declared an initial annual dividend of 10 cts per share,
  its first payout, payable March 26 to holders of record March
  12.
  

BANGLADESH PORT WORKERS END STRIKE
  Cargo handling resumed at
  Bangladesh's Chittagong port today after 7,000 workers ended
  their three day walk-out triggered by a pay dispute, port
  officials said.
      Loading and unloading of 14 ships stranded by the strike
  started this morning and will be completed as quickly as
  possible, they said.
      The strikers returned to work after an agreement was
  reached last night between port authorities and the Port
  Workers Association, they said without giving details.
  

LEIGH-PEMBERTON OPPOSES TAKEOVER PROTECTION RULES
  The Bank of England does not favour the
  introduction of rules to shield companies from hostile takeover
  attempts, its governor, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, said.
      Instead, merchant banks advising bidding companies must
  show restraint and responsibility to avoid the excesses that
  have marred recent takeovers, he told the Yorkshire and
  Humberside Regional Confederation of British Industries' annual
  dinner.
      Leigh-Pemberton also called on companies to improve ties
  with institutional investors, suggesting representatives of
  those institutions be granted seats on the boards of directors
  of companies they invest in.
      "Boards cannot expect protection from unwelcome predators,
  for that is but a short step from saying that they should be
  protected from their own shareholders -- who are, after all,
  the proprietors of the company," Leigh-Pemberton said.
      He added takeovers and mergers had an important role to
  play in furthering economies of scale, integration and more
  efficient market penetration. "The degree of success or failure
  (of a takeover) has not in my experience depended on whether or
  not the takeover was contested," he said.
      Leigh-Pemberton noted there had been excesses in takeover
  activity in the recent past. "The aim is to pressurise a
  company's management into action dedicated solely to a
  favourable impact on the share price in the short-term, partly
  or even primarily at the expense of the future," he said.
      Such bids "often depend for their success on creating a
  highly-charged and artificial situation in the share market,
  and give rise to temptations, on both sides of the battle, to
  engage in aggressive, even manipulative tactics that are
  immensely damaging to the interest of the shareholders," he
  said.
      In a clear reference recent events, he said "those in the
  City who act for companies or individuals .. Must, I suggest,
  be ready to accept a full measure of responsibility -- even if
  it entails opprobrium -- for the transactions that may result."
      They "should exercise the most careful judgment at the
  outset with respect to the clients for whom they act and the
  activities contenplated. Those who sow wind cannot expect the
  whirlwind to visit elsewhere," he added.
  

TONEN SEKIYU AND EXXON UNIT STUDYING RESIN PROJECT
  &lt;Tonen Sekiyukagaku KK> and &lt;Exxon
  Chemical Co>, a petrochemical division of Exxon Corp &lt;XON>,
  said they agreed to accelerate a study to set up an
  equally-owned joint venture to make waterwhite resin in Japan.
      Details of the venture, to be based on Exxon Chemical
  technology, will be set later, the companies said.
      Waterwhite resins are widely used in adhesive applications
  for baby nappies, medical tapes, and other bonding agents.
      Tonen is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Toa Nenryo Kogyo KK
  &lt;TNEN.T> which is owned 25 pct by Exxon Corp.
  

JAPANESE PURCHASE OF U.S. HIGH-TECH FIRM OPPOSED
  Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige
  has asked the White House to consider blocking the planned
  Japanese acquisition of a major U.S. Computer and semiconductor
  maker, U.S. Officials said yesterday.
      The officials told reporters Baldrige had serious concerns
  on national security grounds about the sale of Schlumberger Ltd
  &lt;SLB> unit &lt;Fairchild Semiconductor Inc> to Fujitsu Ltd
  &lt;ITSU.T>. The officials said the sale could leave the United
  States overly dependent on a foreign company for equipment used
  in advanced missiles, aircraft electronics and intelligence
  gathering.
      The U.S. Officials added the sale would also worsen the
  strained relations between the two countries stemming from the
  huge Japanese trade surplus.
      The White House Economic Policy Council would consider the
  sale in the coming weeks, they said.
      Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger's position was not
  known, but in the past, he has opposed the transfer of high
  technology to foreign governments or companies.
      Computers made by U.S. Manufacturers are widely used in the
  world, but Tokyo told U.S. Negotiators recently it prefers
  local manufacturers and would not buy U.S. Supercomputers.
  

S.KOREA TO BUY MORE COTTON, ESPECIALLY U.S. COTTON
  South Korea plans to import about 387,000
  tonnes of cotton this year compared to 225,000 tonnes in 1986,
  trade ministry officials said.
      More than three quarters of the total, some 290,000 tonnes,
  will come from the United States. That will be a 93.7 pct
  increase on 1986 when U.S. Imports totalled 150,000 tonnes, an
  official said.
      He said the U.S. Increase is due partly to the
  competitiveness of American cotton and partly to efforts by
  Seoul to reduce its trade surplus with Washington. South Korea
  is the second largest importer of U.S. Cotton after Japan.
  

AWB SAYS AUSTRALIAN WHEAT SALES OVER 10 MLN TONNES
  The Australian Wheat Board's (AWB)
  1986/87 export program is well advanced with over 10 mln tonnes
  already sold, AWB general manager Ron Paice said.
      "We are certainly within reach of our 15 mln tonne export
  target for the year," he said in a statement.
      He did not detail the commitments already made, but an AWB
  spokesman said they include sales to Egypt, China, Iran, the
  Soviet Union and Iraq.
      In the 1985/86 wheat year ended September 30, the AWB
  exported a record 15.96 mln tonnes.
      Paice also said the 1986/87 Australian wheat harvest has
  ended after a long, cool summer with 15.14 mln tonnes delivered
  to the AWB.
      The season produced another good crop, with only 0.2 pct of
  receivals being downgraded to feed quality, he said.
      However, it is likely that some weather-damaged grain was
  still being held on farms and further milling and feed wheat
  may be delivered following the recent announcement of the final
  Guaranteed Minimum Price for 1986/87, he said.
      Paice did not give a crop estimate, but the AWB's February
  Wheat Australia publication put the crop at 16.7 mln tonnes.
      But the AWB spokesman said it is likely this estimate could
  turn out to be too high, based on the receivals level, and the
  final crop figure would probably be nearer to 16.2 mln tonnes.
  The official estimate is not yet available.
      In the 1985/86 season, the AWB received 15.08 mln tonnes of
  the 16.13 mln tonne crop.
      Another 422,000 tonnes was retained on-farm and 620,000
  sold under the permit system introduced in 1984/85 to allow
  farmers to sell feed wheat to the grain trade outside the AWB's
  receival system, according to Bureau of Agricultural Economics
  data.
  

NORTH BH SETS ONE-FOR-FIVE OFFER FOR NORGOLD FLOAT
  North Broken Hill Holdings Ltd
  &lt;NBHA.ME> (NBH) said it will offer one &lt;Norgold Ltd> share for
  every five NBH shares in the float of its newly created gold
  offshoot.
      The 20 cent par-value shares will be offered at 22 cents to
  shareholders registered April 3, NBH said in a statement.
      Norgold's issued capital will be 240.5 mln shares, of which
  63 pct will be held by NBH after 89 mln are issued to
  shareholders to raise 19.6 mln dlrs, it said.
      Norgold will take control of a portfolio of precious metal
  exploration and pre-development interests held by NBH.
      The major gold deposit to be acquired by Norgold is 100 pct
  of the Bottle Creek deposit, west of Leonora in Western
  Australia, NBH said.
      Production of gold from the project, at an annual rate of
  35,000 ounces, is scheduled to begin early in 1988.
      Norgold will also have a 10 pct stake in the Coronation
  Hill gold/platinum project in the Northern Territory and 43 pct
  of the Poona copper/gold project in South Australia.
      Other gold exploration interests to be acquired by Norgold
  are in Western Australia, Queensland, New South Wales and
  Tasmania, NBH said.
  

DAVIS WATER &lt;DWWS> DECLARES STOCK DIVIDEND
  Davis Water and Waste
  Industries Inc said its board declared a 33-1/3 pct stock
  dividend, payable March 23 to holders of record March 12.
  

STRIKING BRAZIL SEAMEN THREATEN MASS RESIGNATION
  Striking seamen said they would
  offer their collective resignation rather than end their
  13-day-old national strike on management's terms.
      The seamen said they were spurred to their decision after
  marines occupied the ship Docemarte in Santos harbour Tuesday
  night. They said seamen on the vessel were being forced to work
  under duress.
      President Jose Sarney's government despatched troops to
  Brazil's ports and oil installations on Tuesday.
      Seamen in Santos, Brazil's main port, are in defiant mood.
  One of their leaders, Orlando dos Santos, told Reuters that
  most of the 1,100 seamen in the port offered their resignations
  on Wednesday. The national strike headquarters in Rio de
  Janeiro said seamen were offering to resign in all the
  country's main ports.
      The strike by 40,000 seamen comes as Brazil faces a serious
  debt crisis brought on by a sharp deterioration in its trade
  balance. The country needs all the foreign exchange it can get,
  and shipowners have been quick to denounce seamen for the harm
  the strike is doing to exports.
      An advertisement placed in the newspapers by the Shipowners
  Association read, "The seamen's strike is illegal, irrational
  and unpatriotic."
      The seamen respond that they cannot live on their present
  salaries. According to officical pay lists available in the
  union's office, the basic pay for ordinary seamen is 1,977
  cruzados a month, while various allowances can bring their
  total pay up to 4,000 cruzados a month.
      At the other end of the scale, captains earn 7,993 cruzados
  a month basic pay, which is brought up to 15,229 cruzados with
  allowances. 
      "Brazil's seamen are the second worst paid in the world,
  after Ghana's," dos Santos said. He said the seamen had not
  received a pay increase since February 1986, and prices have
  doubled since then with the collapse of the government's
  Cruzado Plan price freeze.
      Talks in Rio de Janeiro Wednesday involving Labour Minister
  Almir Pazzionotto, seamen and employers failed to resolve the
  dispute. The seamen are demanding pay raises of about 200 pct
  but have been offered less than half that.
  

 German net currency reserves rise 400 mln marks to 87.0 billion - Bundesbank

   German net currency reserves rise 400 mln marks to 87.0 billion - Bundesbank
  

INDONESIAN COFFEE PRODUCTION MAY FALL THIS YEAR
  Indonesia's coffee production in
  1986/87 ending September 30 may fall slightly from last year's
  level of 360,000 tonnes, Dharyono Kertosastro, chairman of the
  Association of Indonesian Coffee Exporters told Reuters.
      He said shade trees had been damaged by pests and this may
  have affected the crop, though it remains to be seen how
  seriously. Indonesia's main crop is harvested next month.
      He gave no figure for expected output, except to say it
  would probably be down a little from 1985/86. He said stocks
  were about normal at 90,000 tonnes.
      Kertosastro predicted that exports were unlikely to rise
  much from last year's level of 320,000 tonnes. "I expect exports
  will be a bit more, maybe 330,000 tonnes, but not above that,"
  he said. Exports in 1985/86 were valued at 944 mln U.S. Dlrs,
  but the value could fall by 30 pct this year because of low
  prices, he added.
      Dharyono said production was behind a five year plan target
  of 420,000 tonnes for the current year, but Indonesia is trying
  to boost output through introduction of higher yielding seeds,
  better training for farmers and increased use of fertilizers.
  

RENOUF SELLS 10.83 PCT NZI STAKE TO BRIERLEY
  &lt;Renouf Corp Ltd> said it sold its
  10.83 pct stake in &lt;NZI Corp Ltd> to &lt;Brierley Investments
  Ltd>, (BIL), for 207.7 mln N.Z. Dlrs.
      Renouf managing director Mike Cashin said in a statement it
  had been Renouf's intention to build up a long-term strategic
  position in NZI. "But it became clear to us that it was in the
  best interests of both NZI and ourselves for Brierley
  Investments to acquire our holding," he said.
      He said Renouf built up its NZI holding over the past six
  months. The sale comprised 74.9 mln shares at 2.725 N.Z. Dlrs a
  share and 2,095 warrants at 1,709 dlrs each.
      The warrants are attached to a 150 mln Swiss franc note
  issue. Each bond of 5,000 francs carries a detachable warrant
  entitling the bearer to 2,486 NZI shares.
      In its 1986 annual report BIL reported that it held a 19
  pct stake in NZI.
      NZI has 673.4 mln ordinary shares on issue. Total capital
  including shares attached to warrants is 678.8 mln shares.
      Cashin said the sale will result in a significant profit
  and places Renouf in a good position to consolidate on recent
  transactions and pursue other opportunities.
      NZI shares were at 2.18 N.Z. Dlrs, BIL at 4.08 and Renouf
  at 6.15 at the close of trading.
      BIL executives were unavailable for comment.
  

BOLIDEN  AB &lt;BLDS ST> 1986 RESULTS
  Group loss after financial income and expenses 1.08
      Billion vs loss 71 mln crowns
      Sales - 12.38 billion crowns vs 6.16 billion.
      No proposed dividend vs 10 crowns.
      Note - The company this year consolidated wholesale and
  investment conglomerate Ahlsell AB.
  

BRITAIN TO MINT NEW "BRITANNIA" GOLD COIN
  Britain will from next autumn mint and
  market a new bullion coin called the "Britannia" containing one
  ounce of 24 carat gold, together with bullion coins of smaller
  denominations, a Treasury official said.
      The new investment coin, to be sold worldwide, will
  fluctuate in price according to the international price of
  gold.
      The smaller coins will be in denominations of a half ounce,
  a quarter ounce and a tenth of an ounce. REUTER
  

SAUDI BANKS FACE FURTHER LEAN PERIOD
  Saudi Arabia's 11 commercial banks are
  reporting a further decline in profits for 1986 as increasing
  provisions have to be set aside to cover the burden of non-
  performing loans.
      Bankers in the Saudi capital said the need to build
  reserves for bad and doubtful debts may start to decline a
  little this year.
      But the kingdom's still sluggish economy and legal problems
  hampering traditional lending operations mean earnings will
  remain vulnerable.
      One senior bank credit officer said "The work is largely
  done in terms of identifying bad loans and making provisions,
  but banks are still going to face difficulties earning money."
      The sudden decline of Saudi Arabia's corporate sector in
  1983 - culminating in a number of debt reschedulings - has
  taken a heavy toll of bank profits, with first results now
  appearing for 1986 showing a fourth successive year of broad
  decline.
      The cumulative net 1985 earnings of the kingdom's banks had
  sunk to 827.9 mln riyals from 2.66 billion in 1982 before world
  oil prices tumbled.
      Of the kingdom's nine joint-venture banks which operate on
  the Gregorian calendar year, four have already reported and
  revealed a further profits decline - or net loss - for 1986 at
  the expense of increased provisions.
      The newest and smallest of the joint ventures, &lt;United Saudi
  Commercial Bank> (USCB) reported a 1986 net loss of 15.9 mln
  riyals, marginally less than 1985's shortfall of 17.0 mln.
      Profits before provisions were sharply higher, in part
  reflecting an 18 pct staff cut last year. But the bank nearly
  trebled the amount set aside against bad and doubtful loans to
  60 mln riyals from 22 mln in 1985.
      Other results released so far show &lt;Saudi American Bank>
  (SAMBA) reporting a 53.8 pct fall in 1986 net profit to 80.7
  mln riyals, while &lt;Al Bank Al Saudi Al Fransi>, known as Saudi
  French, slid 14 pct to 94.9 mln riyals.
      Both Saudi American, owned 40 pct by Citicorp's &lt;CCI.N>
  Citibank NA and Saudi French, 40 pct owned by Banque Indosuez,
  increased provisions sharply.
      &lt;Arab National Bank>'s net profit fell 17.8 pct to 152.1
  mln riyals and provisions were more than doubled to 86.6 mln
  riyals.
      Bankers said there are first signs that the number of non-
  performing loans has stopped growing as the decline in the
  Saudi economy bottoms out.
      Few are willing to predict a sharp upturn in economic
  activity, but one banker said "The top 50 pct of the Saudi banks
  are now at or close to international levels on provisions."
      From 1982 to 1985, the kingdom's largest bank &lt;National
  Commercial Bank> (NCB) stashed away 1.7 billion riyals in
  provisions or 8.9 pct of its total loans and advances to the
  private sector, bankers calculated.
      Between 1982 and 1985, &lt;Riyad Bank>, NCB's rival as the
  second biggest of the two all-Saudi shareholding banks, had
  covered 12.8 pct of its loans and advances. Both banks operate
  on an Islamic year that does not coincide with the other nine.
      Although the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA) has been
  tightening supervision, there is still no standardised rule for
  declaring loans as non-performing.
      Bankers say this makes comparison of profit figures
  difficult because some banks still book non-accruing interest
  as revenue while others follow more conservative practices in
  force in major world financial centres.
      Bankers generally said NCB, Riyad Bank and the
  joint-ventures SAMBA, Saudi French and Arab National Bank rank
  as the strongest earners.
      Other banks such as &lt;Saudi British Bank>, 40 pct owned by
  the &lt;British Bank of the Middle East>, are disadvantaged by a
  relatively low deposit base.
      Saudi British slashed 1985 profit 91 pct to just 9.1 mln
  riyals and 1986 accounts due soon are expected to show another
  low figure. But the bank has traditionally been one of the most
  conservative in making provisions.
      Bankers said SAMA has proved it is not prepared to see a
  Saudi bank go under and not only supported &lt;Saudi Cairo Bank>
  after its troubled 1985 accounts came to light but also made
  available cheap deposits to &lt;Saudi Investment Bank> and USCB.
      The banks can on-lend these to generate profit, but
  generally banks are awash with liquidity since they are
  unwilling to risk incurring fresh non-performing loans.
      And while banks in more liberal financial markets can
  attempt to diversify away from traditional lending,
  conservatism in Saudi banking has made it difficult to generate
  fee income from new investment banking products.
      One banker said "Operating earnings in the Kingdom are not
  good."
      Reflecting the caution in new lending, the amount of
  advances is showing a declining trend, while the days when
  banks had ample funds in interest-free current accounts to
  invest are disappearing as Saudi customers seek a better return
  on their money.
      In 1979, the ratio of interest-bearing accounts to current
  accounts was 27 to 73 pct. Today, only about 40 pct of customer
  funds are held on current account.
  

GUINNESS CHALLENGES 5.2 MLN STG PAYMENT TO LAWYER
  Guinness Plc &lt;GUIN.L> , the
  brewing group, has challenged a 5.2 mln stg payment to a U.S.
  Lawyer who says he organised its controversial takeover of
  Scotch whisky maker &lt;The Distillers Co Plc>.
      But attorneys for lawyer Thomas Ward, a member of the
  Guinness board, told a court yesterday in the Channel Island of
  Jersey that Ward saw the payment as his reward for services in
  last year's 2.7 billion stg takeover.
      Britain's Department of Trade and Industry is investigating
  the takeover.
      Guinness says its former chairman Ernest Saunders and Ward
  "breached their fiduciary duty" in authorising the payment to
  Ward, via a Jersey-based company, Marketing and Acquisitions
  Consultants and has gone to the Jersey court to recover it.
      MAC said in defence documents that Ward was the main
  negotiator in the battle for Distillers against rival bidder
  Argyll &lt;AYLL.L> Group Plc.
      "The bid would not have been successful but for the ...
  Services of Mr Ward," MAC attorneys said in the documents
  submitted in court. "The payment was, in all the circumstances,
  reasonable, proper and fully earned."
  

MEDCO CONTAINMENT &lt;MCCS> SETS INITIAL PAYOUT
  Medco Containment Services
  Inc said its board declared an initial annual dividend of 10
  cts per share, its first payout, payable March 19 to holders of
  record March 12.
  

INDONESIA PRESSING FOR COMPROMISE OVER COFFEE
  Indonesian coffee exporters are
  preparing for a period of depressed prices while urging their
  government to lobby for a resolution of the deadlocked issue of
  export quotas, the chairman of the Association of Indonesian
  Coffee Exporters (AICE) told Reuters.
      Dharyono Kertosastro said in an interview that Indonesia,
  the world's third largest producer, is trimming costs and
  improving its marketing while seeking a compromise on quotas.
      "But as long as Brazil sticks to its hardline position, we
  can never bridge the gap," Dharyono said.
      Indonesia was one of a group of eight producing countries,
  along with Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
  Honduras, India, Papua New Guinea and Peru, which proposed a
  new quota system at last month's failed International Coffee
  Organistion (ICO) talks in London.
      Brazil, which would have had its quota reduced under the
  Group of Eight scheme, blocked the proposal.
      AICE officials are now hoping Colombia can use its contacts
  with Brazil to suggest a compromise.
      Edward Muda, an AICE official who attended the ICO
  negotiations, said Latin American members of the Group of Eight
  were in contact with Colombia, the world's second largest
  producer, but gave no details.
      "Colombia has shown interest because they will gain from a
  compromise. Without one, they will suffer if the present market
  stays like it is," Muda said.
      He said Indonesia was in contact with consumers such as the
  U.S., Japan, the Netherlands, West Germany and Canada ahead of
  an ICO executive board meeting scheduled for April 1.
      Dharyono said the AICE will send delegations to the U.S.
  And Japan to brief Indonesian embassy officials there and press
  them to present Indonesia's case more firmly.
      He urged the Indonesian government to do more to help the
  country's coffee traders through the ICO negotiations.
      Muda said the Group of Eight had some common ground with
  the big consumers because they agreed on the need for basing
  quotas on what he termed "realistic criteria."
      The breakaway group believes the old quota system, which
  gives Brazil a 30 pct share of the quota exports, does not
  reflect up-to-date supply and demand trends.
      Brazil has stuck rigidly to its insistence that the old
  system be applied.
      Export quotas were suspended in February 1986 when market
  prices surged because of the failure of the Brazilian crop.
      Although prices have long since come down to a point where
  export controls could be reintroduced, producers and consumers
  at the 75-member ICO have not been able to agree on new
  guidelines. Brazil and the U.S., The largest consumer, are both
  refusing to alter their positions.
      Dharyono said if new quotas are not agreed he believed
  Indonesia was well placed to survive low prices.
      Indonesian farmers are trimming production costs and the
  AICE is improving its marketing system, Dharyono said.
      Indonesia's coffee output in 1986/87, ending September 30,
  is expected to stagnate or fall slightly from last year's level
  of 360,000 tonnes, he said.
      He said stocks, at 90,000 tonnes, were about average for
  the time of year.
  

JAPANESE CORPORATE EARNINGS RECOVERY PREDICTED
  Japanese corporate earnings will rise 8.9
  pct in fiscal 1987/88 for the first year-on-year increase in
  three years, partly because of the yen's stable exchange rate,
  the Nomura research institute said.
      Sales of all industries are predicted to rise 1.9 pct in
  the year, which starts April 1, the research arm of Nomura
  Securities Co said in a statement.
      Recurrent profits were estimated to fall 20 pct in the
  current fiscal year with sales forecast to drop 14 pct.
      The forecast assumes an average rate of 148.5 yen to the
  dollar in 1987/88, compared with 160 yen in the current year.
      Corporate efforts to cope with the yen's appreciation, such
  as cutting production costs, are expected to bear fruit next
  fiscal year, the institute said. The economy should also
  benefit from pump-priming expected from the government and a
  halt in rising prices of manufactured goods, it said.
      Recurrent profits of manufacturing industries are projected
  to rise 29.6 pct next fiscal year against an estimated 40.1 pct
  fall in the current year.
      Non-manufacturing sector profits will decline 4.5 pct in
  1987/88 against an estimated 2.2 pct rise in the current year,
  it said.
  

BOLIDEN SAYS RESULTS BURDENED BY LOSS WRITEOFF
  Swedish mining and metals group
  Boliden AB &lt;BLDS ST> forecast a return to profitability during
  1987 after recording a 1.08 billion crown 1986 loss burdened by
  a massive write-off.
      The company, which consolidated the Swedish wholesale and
  investment conglomerate &lt;Ahlsell AB> this year, said the result
  included restructuring costs and write-offs of 802 mln crowns.
      "These costs have arisen as a results of a change of
  direction for the group. They are mainly one-off but they have
  burdened the annual accounts," the company said in a statement.
      Boliden said the company's liquid assets were 1.36 billion
  crowns at year-end which together with an investment portfolio
  of 1.60 billion made it one of the most liquid Swedish
  companies.
      As a result of the 1986 losses, the board proposed
  cancelling dividend for the year although it predicted a return
  to profitability during 1987, the statement added.
      Swedish tyres, process equipment and components firm
  &lt;Trelleborg AB> has taken a majority stake in Boliden since the
  beginning of this year. Trelleborg then said it had no plans
  for consolidating Boliden.
  

TAIWAN BUYS 27,000 TONNES OF U.S. SOYBEANS
  The joint committee of Taiwan's soybean
  importers awarded a contract to Richco Grain Ltd of New York to
  supply a 27,000-tonne cargo of U.S. Soybeans, a committee
  spokesman told Reuters.
      The shipment, priced at 210.34 U.S. Dlrs per tonne c and f
  Taiwan, is set for delivery between March 20 and April 5, he
  said.
      Taiwan's soybeans imports in calendar 1987 are targetted at
  1.81 mln tonnes, against an actual 1.74 mln tonnes imported in
  1986, he said.
      All the imports come from the U.S., He added.
  

CHINA JANUARY WHEAT/SUGAR IMPORTS BELOW YEAR AGO
  China's wheat imports in January were
  218,000 tonnes, down from 393,000 in January 1986, the China
  Daily Business Weekly said, quoting customs figures.
      It said imports of sugar were 25,165 tonnes, down from
  54,000, but exports of rice rose to 71,144 tonnes from 20,000.
  It gave no more details.
  

FRENCH 1986 CURRENT ACCOUNT SURPLUS REVISED
  The French 1986 current account balance
  of payments surplus has been revised slightly upwards to 25.8
  billion francs from the 25.4 billion franc figure announced
  last month, the Finance Ministry said.
      This compares with a 1.5 billion deficit in 1985, and while
  it is the first surplus since 1979, is substantially lower than
  the 50 billion surplus forecast by the previous socialist
  government before they lost office in March last year.
      Net long-term capital outflows rose sharply to 70.5 billion
  francs last year from 8.8 billion in 1985, largely due to a
  major program of foreign debt repayment, the ministry said.
      In the fourth quarter alone the unadjusted surplus rose to
  14.1 billion francs from 6.6 billion the previous quarter, but
  the adjusted surplus fell to 7.4 billion from 9.1 billion.
      Fourth quarter medium and long-term foreign debt repayments
  exceeded new credits by 11 billion francs.
  

PITTSTON &lt;PCO> AGREES TO ACQUIRE WTC &lt;WAF>
  Pittston Co said it has
  tentatively agreed to acquire WTC International N.V. in a
  tax-free exchange of stock.
      Pittston said it agreed to exchange 0.523 common share for
  each of the about 8,612,000 WTC common shares outstanding.
      Pittston said WTC's three principal shareholders, who own
  62 pct of its stock, are parties to this agreement. They have
  granted Pittston the right of first refusal to their shares.
      WTC has granted Pittston an option to buy WTC shares equal
  to 18.5 poct of its outstanding stock. The agreement is subject
  to approval of both boards and WTC shareholders.
      Pittston said described WTC as a fast growing air freight
  forwarding company with operations throughout the world. Its
  revenues totaled nearly 200 mln dlrs in the year ended November
  30 and for the quarter ended on that date it earned 1.3 mln
  dlrs on revenues of 55.8 mln dlrs.
      Pittston said its Burlington Air Express subsidiary
  generates about two-thirds of its 450 mln dlrs in annual
  revenes with its domestic air freight services.
  

MALAYSIA OPTIMISTIC OVER ECONOMIC OUTLOOK FOR 1987
  Malaysia's Central Bank, Bank
  Negara, said the economic outlook for 1987 is good in view of a
  marked improvement in commodity and oil prices in the later
  months of last year.
      It said in its latest quarterly review that real gross
  domestic product averaged an annual growth of 1.1 pct over the
  first nine months of last year compared with a decline of 0.1
  pct in the corresponding period in 1985.
      Growth was generated mainly by the manufacturing sector, it
  added.
  

ROWNTREE REPORTS PRETAX PROFIT AT 84 MLN STG
  Rowntree Mackintosh Plc &lt;RWNT.L>
  announced it made a pretax profit of 84 mln stg in the 53 weeks
  ending January 3, 1987, compared with 79.3 mln stg in the
  previous year.
      Turnover was up to 1.29 billion stg from 1.2 billion. A
  final dividend of 9.2p was proposed, after a final 8.2p last
  year. Earnings per share rose to 35p from 34.8p.
      The results were broadly in line with market expectations,
  leaving shares at 499p in early trading, up one pence from
  yesterday's close, but slightly off pre-announcement opening
  levels.
      Profit on ordinary activities after tax was 66.2 mln stg,
  up from the previous year's 60.7 mln.
      The U.K. Remained Rowntree's largest centre for trading
  profits, accounting for 47.9 mln stg, up from 45.3 mln in 1985.
  Profit from its second largest geographical area, North
  America, slipped to 34.7 mln stg from 37.2 mln. North American
  profits were affected by the fall of the value of the dollar.
      Operations in continental Europe made 7.8 mln stg in
  trading profit, up from 3.4 mln, with 4.0 mln stg made in
  Australasia, up from 2.3 mln, and 11.3 mln stg from the rest of
  the world, against 13.1 mln in the previous year.
      Extraordinary items amounted to a 11.3 mln debit after a
  16.5 mln debit previously. A company spokesman said this
  represented additional provisions for the cost of
  rationalisation plans announced in earlier years.
      Rowntree expects North American operations will this year,
  ahead of company expectations, be of the same order as those
  from the U.K. And the rest of Europe combined, the statement
  said. A spokesman said no specific figures had been forecast.
      Acquisitions will continue to be sought worldwide,
  including further moves in the speciality retailing business
  which Rowntree first entered in 1983, the statement said.
      Rising profit from Europe this year was forecast by
  chairman Kenneth Dixon in a statement. He added the performance
  of seven businesses bought last year was encouraging.
      The U.K. Confectionery side gained market share and
  increased trading margins. The Sun-Pat British grocery concern
  increased profit and Rowntree's small health food business,
  Holgates, raised earnings 10-fold, the statement said.
      Offsetting factors included currency movements, which cost
  the company nearly 5.0 mln stg. Sales tax hurt Canadian profits
  on confectionery operations, and the company faced strong
  competition in the U.K. Snack and Mid East export markets.
  

RISE SEEN IN FRENCH RAPESEED, SOYBEAN SOWINGS
  France's Oilseed and Bean Cooperatives
  Federation, FFCOP, said it expected French rapeseed sowings for
  the 1987 harvest to rise by between 54.6 pct and 67.5 pct to
  between 600,000 and 650,000 hectares from 388,000 planted last
  year.
      Its latest estimates also suggested a 66.7 pct rise in
  soybean sowings to 80,000 ha from 48,000 last year. Sunflower
  sowings were expected to increase by between 8.6 pct and 14.6
  pct from 829,000 ha. Pea sowings are estimated likely to rise
  27.7 pct to 350,000 ha against 274,000, while field bean
  sowings are forecast unchanged at 40,000.
  

CHINA TRADE DEFICIT FALLS IN JANUARY
  China's trade deficit in January fell to
  310 mln dlrs from 460 mln in January 1986, the China Daily
  Business Weekly said.
      Quoting customs figures, the paper said exports fell to
  1.75 billion dlrs from 1.84 billion and imports fell to 2.06
  billion from 2.3 billion.
  

JACOBS SUCHARD AG &lt;JACZ.Z> 1986 YEAR
  Net 190.9 mln Swiss francs vs 150.4 mln
      Turnover 5.24 billion vs 5.38 billion
      Dividend 160 per bearer vs 155 francs, 32 francs per
  registered vs 31 francs, 16 francs per participation
  certificate vs 15.50 francs
      Cash flow 294.3 mln vs 242.6 mln
      Note - Confirms forecast of results issued in January.
      Operating profit 337.6 mln vs 265 mln
      Depreciation 103.4 mln, up 12.2 pct
      Capital spending 84.6 mln, down 15.7 pct.
  

 British Telecom third quarter pre-tax profit 506 mln stg vs 452 mln

   British Telecom third quarter pre-tax profit 506 mln stg vs 452 mln
  

BANK OF ENGLAND OFFERS EARLY HELP IN MONEY MARKET
  The Bank of England said it had invited
  the discount houses to make an early round of bill offers to
  help offset a large liquidity shortage in the money market.
      It estimated the shortage at around 1.55 billion stg, one
  adverse factor being the unwinding of a sale and repurchase
  agreement, with the market having to buy back bills worth 542
  mln stg from the Bank.
      Bills maturing in official hands and the treasury bill
  take-up would drain 957 mln stg wile exchequer transactions and
  a note circulation rise would take out 15 mln and 25 mln
  respectively. Above target bankers' balances would add 10 mln.
  

BRITISH TELECOM 3RD QTR ENDED DEC 31
  Shr 5.1p vs 4.2p, making 15.3p vs 12.7p for nine months.
      Pre-tax profit 506 mln stg vs 452 mln, making 1.51 billion
  stg vs 1.35 billion.
      Net profit before minorities 320 mln vs 268 mln, making 960
  mln vs 807 mln.
      Note - Company's full name is British Telecommunications
  Plc &lt;BTY.L>.
      Third quarter turnover 2.40 billion stg vs 2.11 billion,
  making 7.01 billion vs 6.16 billion for nine months.
      Operating profit 578 mln vs 520 mln, making 1.72 billion vs
  1.56 billion.
      Net interest payable 72 mln vs 68 mln, making 208 mln vs
  203 mln.
      Tax 186 mln vs 184 mln, making 552 mln vs 547 mln.
      Minorities nil vs nil, making two mln vs nil.
  

SDC SYDNEY COST REVIEW MAY ELIMINATE PRODUCTS
  &lt;SDC Sydney
  Development Corp>, earlier reporting an increased nine month
  operating loss, said a cost control review now underway may
  result in cost reduction and elimination of unprofitable and
  non-strategic products and services.
      The company's operating loss for the nine months ended
  December 31, 1986 increased to 7.7 mln dlrs from a loss of 1.7
  mln dlrs in the prior year, it said earlier.
      Revenues increased by 20 pct to 11.8 mln dlrs from
  year-earlier 9.8 mln dlrs.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN EARLY ASSISTANCE
  The Bank of England said it had bought
  bills worth 1.059 billion stg from the market for resale on
  March 31 at rates of interest between 10-7/16 pct and 10-17/32
  pct.
      Earlier, the Bank said it estimated the liquidity shortage
  in the market today at around 1.55 billion stg.
  

DANISH UNEMPLOYMENT RISES TO 7.9 PCT IN JANUARY
  Denmark's seasonally adjusted
  unemployment rate rose to 7.9 pct of the workforce in January
  from 7.8 pct in December, unchanged from January 1986, the
  National Statistics Office said.
      The total of unemployed in January was 216,200 against
  212,200 in December and 216,600 in January 1986.
  

ROWNTREE MACKINTOSH PLC&lt;RWNT.L> YEAR TO END JANUARY
  Shr 35.0p vs 34.8p
      Div final div 9.2p vs 8.2p
      Pretax profit 84.0 mln stg vs 79.3 mln
      Net after tax 66.2 mln vs 60.7 mln
      Turnover 1,290.4 mln vs 1,205.2 mln
      Trading profit 105.7 mln stg vs 101.3 mln, consisting -
      U.K  47.9 mln vs 45.3
      Europe 7.8 mln vs 3.4 mln
      North America 34.7 mln vs 37.2 mln
      Australasia 4.0 mln vs 2.3 mln
      Rest of world 11.3 mln vs 13.1 mln
  

TAIWAN CLAMPS NEW CONTROLS ON CURRENCY INFLOWS
  Taiwan's new controls on currency
  inflows, implemented today, are a desperate bid to stem a flood
  of speculative money prompted by the local currency surge
  against the U.S. Dollar, local and foreign bankers said.
      The central bank now has to clear remittances exceeding one
  mln U.S. Dlrs earned from exports, shipping and insurance and
  bank lending plus remittances of more than 10,000 dlrs from any
  other source.
      Petitioners have to show their remittances relate to
  genuine commercial transactions.
      Meanwhile, traders are no longer required to report all
  outward payments concerning invisible trade, including freight,
  insurance and royalties, to the central bank.
      But bankers said they believed the new controls would be
  ineffective since businessmen could split up remittances into
  smaller units or simply remit money through Taiwan's
  flourishing currency black market.
      The bankers said the controls, announced on March 6, are a
  panic reaction to U.S. Pressure, which has intensified over the
  past week, for a faster appreciation of the Taiwan dollar to
  slow the growth of Taiwan's exports to the U.S.
      The government has denied local press reports Washington is
  pressing for an exchange rate of up to 28 dlrs.
      The Taiwan dollar opened four cents up today at 34.70.
      "I don't think the central bank has a final target," said an
  executive with a U.S. Bank. Other bankers and economists said
  they are wary of making any firm predictions about how far the
  Taiwan dollar will rise.
      Taiwan's trade surplus with the U.S. Hit 13.6 billion U.S.
  Dlrs last year against 10.2 billion in 1985. The surplus
  widened in the first two months of the year to 2.35 billion
  dlrs from 1.87 billion in the same period last year.
      Economists estimate up to five billion dlrs in speculative
  money flowed into Taiwan in 1986.
      This inflow helped boost foreign exchange reserves to more
  than 51 billion dlrs from just under 25 billion this time last
  year and provided further upward pressure on the currency.
      The Taiwan dollar has appreciated by almost 15 pct against
  the U.S. Currency since September 1985, further encouraging
  speculators.
      Central bank governor Chang Chi-cheng said last week
  Washington's pressure plus rising foreign exchange reserves
  meant a further strengthening in the currency is inevitable.
      Many local bankers argue the only effective solution to the
  currency problem is to drop foreign exchange controls and allow
  the local dollar to find its own level.
      "Lifting exchange controls is the final answer, but the
  central bank is not prepared to do it. It simply does not want
  to take the risk," said one local banker.
      He said he believed the new restrictions are a temporary
  measure designed to buy time as the central bank grapples with
  the exchange rate problem.
      The restrictions are a bureaucratic imposition and skirt
  around the real issue, he said.
      Taiwan needs a fundamental restructuring of foreign
  exchange controls, said an executive with a western bank.
      "The controls will create more paperwork, but the extra bank
  charges will not outweigh the profits of speculation," said the
  manager of a European bank.
      Economists criticised the controls, saying they could
  antagonise Washington, which is pushing for further economic
  liberalisation in Taiwan.
      "Instead of liberalising outflows, the government has
  restricted inflows," said Kate Newman, an economist with Vickers
  da Costa.
      A local banker, who declined to be named, said, "It's
  basically ridiculous. It's a backward movement and goes against
  the government's liberalisation programme."
      Taiwan last year eased some of its financial regulations to
  enable Taiwan nationals to invest in foreign government bonds,
  treasury bills and certificates of deposit and to allow
  individuals to take 5,000 U.S. Dlrs in cash out of the country
  each year.
  

GLYNWED INTERNATIONAL PLC &lt;GLYN.L> 1986 YEAR
  Shr, net basis 27.47p vs 22.15p
      Div 6.5p vs 5.4p making 10.1p vs 8.4p
      Pretax profit 46.1 mln stg vs 35.6 mln
      Net after tax 30 mln vs 23.3 mln
      Extraordinary items debit 3.8 mln vs debit 2.3 mln
      Interest payable 2.7 mln vs 4.0 mln
      Net borrowings 7.6 mln vs 16.1 mln
      Turnover 478.9 mln vs 464.1 mln
  

DUTCH SUGAR TRADE DENY INVOLVEMENT IN OFFER
  Dutch sugar traders deny involvement
  in a plan to offer more than 850,000 tonnes of sugar to
  intervention in protest at EC export policy and prices, traders
  told Reuters.
      Although some 2,500 tonnes of sugar have been offered to
  intervention in the Netherlands, Dutch producers and traders
  said this sugar was actually Belgian and was being offered by
  the Belgian industry.
      "We sympathise with the actions of the French, West German
  and Belgian traders and producers, but we are not party to it,"
  a spokesman said.
      EC Commission sources said yesterday French traders planned
  to sell 775,000 tonnes into intervention stocks, West German
  traders 75,000 tonnes and Dutch traders 2,500. Dutch trade
  sources gave the same figure for France, but estimated up to
  110,000 tonnes offered by German traders and producers.
      The Dutch spokesman added, "The weekly export tender policy
  and prices are squeezing the European sugar industry, and this
  is the only way in which they can really register their
  protest.
      "These are desperate actions, but we believe that most of
  this offered sugar will be withdrawn within the three-week
  breathing space allowed."
  

GLYNWED SEES FURTHER PROGRESS IN 1987
  Glynwed International Plc &lt;GLYN.L> in a
  statement accompanying their results that present indications
  are that 1987 has started well and it is confident that the
  year will be one of further progress.
      The company added that results in the U.S. Were poor and
  the deterioration in the South African economy left its Falkirk
  Industries unit with a loss of one mln stg. But it said there
  was a continuing improvement in its core businesses.
      The extraordinary items debit of 3.8 mln stg arose on the
  closure and disposal of various businesses.
  

BRITISH TELECOM SEES SATISFACTORY 1986/87 RESULTS
  British Telecommunications Plc &lt;BTY.L>
  expects to announce satisfactory results for its 1986/87
  financial year ending March, chairman Sir George Jefferson said
  in a third quarter statement.
      Full year results will be published in June. In the 1985/86
  financial year, pre-tax profit rose to 1.81 billion stg from
  1.48 billion in the previous period.
      Jefferson said good progress was made in the latest nine
  months, while most customers were able to maintain their normal
  level of calls during the recent strike by company engineers.
      The statement said a positive cash flow of 381 mln stg for
  the first nine months will diminish in the final quarter due to
  corporation tax and dividend payments.
      Earlier, the company reported third quarter pre-tax profit
  for the period ended December 31 of 506 mln stg compared with
  452 mln a year earlier. Nine month pre-tax was 1.51 billion stg
  against 1.35 billion.
      British Telecom shares were last quoted at 246-1/2p, level
  with late yesterday, in the wake of results which were in line
  with market expectations, dealers said.
  

INDIA BUYS WHITE SUGAR FROM LONDON TRADERS
  India yesterday bought two cargoes of
  white sugar from London traders for April/May shipment and
  granted the trade houses the option to sell an additional two
  cargoes at the same price for May/June shipment, the firms
  involved said.
      E D and F Man and Woodhouse, Drake and Carey both said they
  sold single cargoes at 237.35 dlrs a tonne cif for April/May
  and were granted options to sell an extra cargo each at the
  same price for May/June at the Indian buying tender for three
  to four cargoes of whites held yesterday. The tender had called
  for a single cargo of prompt and two to three cargoes of
  April/May.
  

HANDY AND HARMAN &lt;HNH> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Shr loss 51 cts vs loss three cts
      Net loss 7,041,000 vs loss 467,000
      Rev 138.9 mln vs 131.4 mln
      12 months
      Shr loss 64 cts vs profit 46 cts
      Net loss 8,843,000 vs profit 6,306,0000
      Rev 558.9 mln vs 556.7 mln
      NOTE: Net loss for 4th qtr 1986 includes charge for
  restructuring of 2.6 mln dlrs after tax, or 19 cts a share.
      1986 net loss includes after tax special charge of 2.7 mln
  dlrs, or 20 cts a share.
  

&lt;MULTI-STEP PRODUCTS INC> SIX MTHS DEC 31 LOSS
  Shr loss 11 cts
      Loss 739,146
      Revs 11,754,251
      Note: initial public listing December, 1986
  

&lt;NEXT PLC> &lt;NEXL.L> FIVE MONTHS TO END JANUARY
  Shr 7.67p vs 5.34p
      Div 1.5p vs 1.08p
      Pretax profit 30.12 mln stg vs 12.40 mln
      Net interest payable 2.55 mln vs 200 stg
      Net after tax 19.58 vs 7.44 mln
      Turnover excluding VAT 257.66 mln vs 74.09 mln
      Note - The company said it intends to issue a second
  interim statement for the six months to July 1987 and to pay a
  related dividend in early 1988.
  

AUSTRALIA EXPECTS RISE IN MEAT EXPORTS TO MIDEAST
  Australia expects meat and livestock
  exports to the Middle East to maintain an upward trend this
  year, managing director of the Australian Meat and Livestock
  Corp, Peter Frawley, said.
      He told Reuters an improvement in the economic climate and
  less competition from the European Community should lead in the
  Gulf area to higher beef sales, which dropped from 33,000
  tonnes in 1980 to just 2,300 tonnes last year.
      "In the last three to four months there has been a
  resurgence of inquiries," he said.
      Frawley is on a Gulf tour which will also take him to Saudi
  Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait to assess market
  potential.
      On beef exports, he said a 50 pct drop in European
  Community intervention stock in the past 12 months would help
  Australian sales.
      The fall meant the EC was not as aggressive in these
  markets, where the Australian trade was the natural source of
  supply, and Australia was "now back in," Frawley said.
      He said there was a debate in Australia as to whether the
  Middle East market for livestock, which accounts for two-thirds
  of meat export value to the area, would be maintained.
      He believed the trade would remain with a continuing demand
  for fresh meat.
      The number of live sheep shipped last year to Saudi Arabia,
  the biggest single market, was 3,214,159 compared with
  2,939,226 in 1985. The numbers shipped to the United Arab
  Emirates and Bahrain fell, however.
      Frawley said the slackening in demand in the Gulf had been
  offset by other Arab countries around the Mediterranean.
      Other than livestock, Australia's overall meat sales to the
  Middle East rose to 72,374 tonnes in 1986 from 52,403 tonnes
  the previous year, largely due to the sale of 25,790 tonnes of
  mutton and lamb to Iran.
      Australia sold 9,824 tonnes to Iran in 1985 after being
  virtually excluded by New Zealand competition for several
  years. Frawley said the 1986 sale contract had included a
  barter provision, but Iran had paid in full in cash.
      Negotiations with the Iranians for 1987 shipments were
  currently under way, with Iran again seeking credit and barter
  provisions, he said.
      Frawley said there had been a tremendous growth in demand
  for chilled lamb in the last four to five years and he
  predicted this would continue.
      "The Middle East, and the Gulf in particular, is now
  Australia's largest market for lamb, chilled and flown in.
  Australia is in an ideal position to provide the supplies if
  the market is willing to pay a premium for a fresh, young
  product," he said.
  

INDIA 1986/87 COTTON EXPORT QUOTA UP 190,000 BALES
  India's raw cotton export quota has
  been raised by 190,000 170-kg bales to 600,000 bales in 1986/87
  ending August, still well below the 1985/86 quota of 1.35 mln
  bales, Minister of State for Textiles R.N. Mirdha said.
      State and private agencies contracted to export 1.34 mln
  bales in 1985/86, he told journalists. But only 433,000 bales
  were shipped that year, with the rest to be delivered in
  1986/87. About 758,000 bales from 1985/86 contracts were
  shipped up to February 2 in 1986/87.
       The government will export 600,000 bales of long and
  extra- long staple cotton in the three years from 1986/87, he
  said.
  

STE LYONNAISE DES EAUX &lt;LYOE.PA> YEAR ENDED DEC 31
  Consolidated attributable net 1986 profit 360 mln francs vs
  279.8 mln.
      Parent company net profit 191 mln vs 150.9 mln.
  

LYONNAISE DES EAUX FORECASTS 1987 PROFIT RISE
  Consolidated attributable net profit of
  Ste Lyonnaise des Eaux &lt;LYOE.PA> is likely to rise by at least
  10 pct this year from the 360 mln francs reported for 1986,
  Chairman Jerome Monod told a news conference.
      Group turnover should rise about seven pct from the 15.7
  mln reported for this year, while group investments should
  total around 1.8 billion francs, somewhat above the 1.3 billion
  annual average of the past three years, he added.
      Investments will be aimed mainly at developing the group's
  leisure industry, health and communications activities, Monod
  said.
      In the leisure sector the group planned a joint development
  with Club Mediterranee &lt;CMI.PA>, Club Med, of a 200 hectare
  pleasure park at Puisaye in the Yonne department of Eastern
  Central France, he said.
      Wholly-owned subsidiary Lyonnaise de Developpement
  Touristique would carry out the construction work and financial
  planning of the development which would be leased to Club Med
  as operator of the complex, he said.
      He gave no financial details but said leisure sector
  investments would total about 100 mln francs over the next
  three years.
      Investments in the communications industry would go mainly
  to develop the group's cable television activities and its 25
  pct owned Metropole Television affiliate. Metropole recently
  won the concession to operate a sixth television channel in
  France.
      Financing requirement of Metropole would be about 700 mln
  francs over the next four years, of which Lyonaise des Eaux
  would provide about 175 mln, Monod said.
      Monod said Metropole aimed to win a 15 to 20 pct audience
  share and to capture about 10 pct of the national television
  advertising market.
      Total investment by the group in the communications sector,
  including cable activities, would be between 300 mln and 400
  mln francs over the next five years, mainly concentrated in the
  coming year.
      Investment in cable operations would total between 150 mln
  and 200 mln over the five years, with the aim of widening the
  audience to 280,000 subscribers from 12,000, and boosting
  turnover to around 450 mln francs a year from 10 mln.
  

GUS MAKES 8.2 MLN STG AGREED OFFER FOR PANTHERELLA
  Great Universal Stores Plc &lt;GUS.L> said
  it has made an agreed offer for &lt;Pantherella Plc>, valuing the
  company at 8.2 mln stg and each Pantherella ordinary share at
  205 pence.
      The offer is based on eight new "A" non voting ordinary
  shares in GUS plus 95.16 stg for every 100 ordinary
  Pantherella.
      The new GUS shares will not receive the eight pence per
  share interim dividend in respect of the year ending March
  1987, the statement said.
      GUS has received irrevocable undertakings to accept the
  offer in respect of 39.1 pct of Pantherella shares from the
  company's directors and their families.
      The Pantherella board estimates the company, which
  manufactures socks, will show a 1986 pretax profit of about
  690,000 stg.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET OFFERED BORROWING FACILTIES
  The Bank of England said it had offered
  borrowing facilities to those discount houses wishing to use
  them at 1430 GMT.
      The Bank also said it provided the money market 456 mln stg
  assistance in the afternoon session bringing its total help so
  far today to 493 mln stg. This compares with its forecast of a
  shortage in the system today of around 700 mln stg.
      The central bank purchased bank bills outright comprising
  41 mln stg in band one at 10-7/8 pct 361 mln stg in band two at
  10-13/16 pct and 54 mln stg in band three at 10-3/4 pct.
      Money market dealers said the Bank of England has recently
  used the offer of borrowing facilities to signal that it does
  not want to see an early reduction in U.K. Base lending rates.
      The Bank does this by lending to the discount houses at
  rates of interest higher than its prevailing money market
  dealing rates.
  

&lt;BOND CORP INTERNATIONAL LTD> NINE MOS TO DEC 31
  Shr loss 17.4 H.K. Cents (no comparison)
      Dividend nil (no comparison)
      Net loss 11.49 mln dlrs.
      Notes - Net excluded extraordinary losses 27.91 mln dlrs.
  Property valuation reserve surplus 67 mln dlrs.
      Results reflected trading in subsidiary &lt;Humphreys Estate
  Group> but excluded influence of a bulk of properties which the
  firm bought late last year from Hongkong Land Co Ltd &lt;HKLD.HK>
  for 1.4 billion dlrs.
      Company controlled by Bond Corp Holdings Ltd of Australia.
  

GERMAN PUBLIC AUTHORITY BUNDESBANK HOLDINGS FALL
  The net position of federal states
  worsened in the first March week, cutting public authority net
  holdings at the Bundesbank by 500 mln marks, the central bank
  said.
      States' cash deposits at the central bank fell to 800 mln
  and they also drew down 1.2 billion marks in book credit, 900
  mln marks more than in the prior week.
      By contrast, however, the federal government was able to
  reduce its credit drawdown at the central bank by 900 mln marks
  to 900 mln.
      Despite the stronger states' net needs in the week, their
  cash position and other market dependent influences just about
  balanced the outflow of liquidity from the money market through
  an increase in cash in circulation, the Bundesbank said.
      Cash in circulation rose by 1.4 billion marks in the week
  to 122.9 billion.
      Liquidity also came in through the maturing of short-term
  treasury bills bought from the Bundesbank in the prior week.
      Gross currency reserves rose in the week by 400 mln marks
  to 109.9 billion. Foreign liabilities of the Bundesbank were
  largely unchanged at 22.8 billion marks, giving a rise in net
  currency reserves of 400 mln to 87.0 billion, it said.
      The Bundesbank said its balance sheet total fell by 3.77
  billion in the week to 218.45 billion.
  

CANADA JANUARY TRADE SURPLUS 533 MLN DLRS AFTER DECEMBER 965 MLN DLRS SURPLUS

  CANADA JANUARY TRADE SURPLUS 533 MLN DLRS AFTER DECEMBER 965 MLN DLRS SURPLUS
  

CANADA JANUARY TRADE SURPLUS 533 MLN DLRS
  Canada had a trade surplus of 533 mln dlrs
  in January compared with an upward revised 965 mln dlrs surplus
  in December, Statistics Canada said.
      The December surplus originally was reported at 964 mln
  dlrs. The January surplus last year was 1.19 billion dlrs.
      January exports, seasonally adjusted, were 9.72 billion
  dlrs against 10.39 billion in December and 10.89 billion in
  January, 1986.
      January imports were 9.19 billion dlrs against 9.43 billion
  in December and 9.71 billion in January 1986.
  

HUNGARIAN 1987 SUGAR BEET AREA LITTLE CHANGED
  Hungary is to grow sugar beet on
  105,000 hectares of land this year compared with some 95,000 in
  1986, the official MTI news agency said.
      Diplomats said this reflected Hungary's policy of keeping
  the sugar beet area stable under the current five-year plan
  (1985-89) and producing enough to cover only domestic demand
  despite the recent rise of world prices to 10 month highs.
      Drought cut the 1986 harvest to 3.58 mln tonnes from 4.07
  mln in 1985. But a record yield of 130 kilos per tonne of beet
  kept production at 454,000 tonnes, with 30,000 extra refined in
  Yugoslavia from Hungarian beet. Output was 483,000 in 1985.
  

KIDSTON SAYS HIGHER NET REFLECTS GOLD SALE RISE
  &lt;Kidston Gold Mines Ltd> attributed
  the rise in 1986 net profit to higher prices and an increase in
  gold sales to 237,969 ounces from 206,467 ounces in 1985.
      The &lt;Placer Development Ltd> offshoot, which operates
  Australia's largest gold mine, in North Queensland, earlier
  reported net profit rose to 60.50 mln dlrs from 50.76 mln in
  the 1985 period of 10 months from the start of production.
      Sales of silver also rose to 165,968 ounces from 109,516.
      Kidston said in a statement it will spend about 5.5 mln
  dlrs to upgrade its mill grinding circuit to a mill-ball,
  mill-crushing circuit to boost output by 25 pct from end-1987.
  

BULLETIN SAYS TIN PRICE MAY RISE TO 20 RINGGIT
  The tin price is likely to rise to
  20 ringgit a kilo this year because of the producers' accord on
  export quotas and the reluctance of brokers and banks to sell
  the metal at lower prices, a Malaysian government bulletin
  said.
      The Malaysian Tin bulletin said it is in producers'
  interest to keep to their quotas to limit total exports to
  90,000 tonnes and to gradually deplete the 80,000 tonnes
  overhang.
      It said consumption by industrialised countries should stay
  at 160,000 tonnes and that International Tin Council creditors
  and brokers are not likely to dump their stocks excessively
  unless there is a large and abrupt price jump.
      The continued depreciation of the dollar could also help
  push up the price of tin, the bulletin said.
      A depreciation of the dollar means the depreciation of the
  ringgit which is closely pegged to it, making the price of tin
  cheaper in sterling terms, it added.
      "Even in the absence of economic rationale in the tin
  market, psychological optimism alone is sufficient to secure a
  price recovery of up to 20 ringgit per kilo," the bulletin said.
  

&lt;KIDSTON GOLD MINES LTD> 1986 YEAR
  Shr 48.4 cents vs 40.6
      Yr div 37 cents vs 15
      Net 60.50 mln dlrs vs 50.76 mln
      Turnover 134.54 mln vs 100.63 mln
      Other income 1.02 mln vs 920,000
      Shrs 125 mln vs same.
      NOTE - Company paid total 37 cents in previously declared
  quarterly divs vs 15. Net is after tax 173,000 dlrs vs 285,000,
  interest 9.67 mln vs 8.05 mln and depreciation 11.76 mln vs
  9.59 mln.
  

CHINA CLOSES SECOND ROUND OF OFFSHORE OIL BIDS
  China has closed the second round of
  bidding by foreign firms for offshore oil exploration rights,
  the China Daily has reported.
      It quoted a spokesman for the China National Offshore Oil
  Corp (CNOOC) as saying China signed eight contracts with 15
  foreign firms for blocks in the Pearl River mouth and south
  Yellow Sea covering a total area of 44,913 sq km.
      Second round bidding began at the end of 1984 and only one
  well has so far produced results -- Lufeng 13-1-1, 250 km
  south-east of Shenzhen, with an output of 6,770 barrels a day.
  The well was drilled by a group of Japanese companies.
      The spokesman added CNOOC was ready to enter into contracts
  for offshore blocks before third round bidding began. He did
  not say when this would be, but added the contracts would not
  be bound by restrictions imposed during the second round.
      China has signed 36 oil contracts and agreements with 37
  companies from 10 countries since 1979, when offshore
  exploration was open to foreigners. Eleven contracts were
  terminated after no oil was discovered.
      Foreign firms have invested 2.1 billion dlrs on offshore
  China since 1979.
  

LEIGH-PEMBERTON OPPOSES TAKEOVER PROTECTION RULES
  The Bank of England does not favour the
  introduction of rules to shield companies from hostile takeover
  attempts, its governor, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, said.
      Instead, merchant banks advising bidding companies must
  show restraint and responsibility to avoid the excesses that
  have marred recent takeovers, he told the Yorkshire and
  Humberside Regional Confederation of British Industries' annual
  dinner.
      Leigh-Pemberton also called on companies to improve ties
  with institutional investors, suggesting representatives of
  those institutions be granted seats on the boards of directors
  of companies they invest in.
      "Boards cannot expect protection from unwelcome predators,
  for that is but a short step from saying that they should be
  protected from their own shareholders -- who are, after all,
  the proprietors of the company," Leigh-Pemberton said.
      He added takeovers and mergers had an important role to
  play in furthering economies of scale, integration and more
  efficient market penetration. "The degree of success or failure
  (of a takeover) has not in my experience depended on whether or
  not the takeover was contested," he said.
      Leigh-Pemberton noted there had been excesses in takeover
  activity in the recent past. "The aim is to pressurise a
  company's management into action dedicated solely to a
  favourable impact on the share price in the short-term, partly
  or even primarily at the expense of the future," he said.
      Such bids "often depend for their success on creating a
  highly-charged and artificial situation in the share market,
  and give rise to temptations, on both sides of the battle, to
  engage in aggressive, even manipulative tactics that are
  immensely damaging to the interest of the shareholders," he
  said.
      In a clear reference recent events, he said "those in the
  City who act for companies or individuals .. Must, I suggest,
  be ready to accept a full measure of responsibility -- even if
  it entails opprobrium -- for the transactions that may result."
      They "should exercise the most careful judgment at the
  outset with respect to the clients for whom they act and the
  activities contenplated. Those who sow wind cannot expect the
  whirlwind to visit elsewhere," he added.
  

ECUADOR TO ASK OPEC TO RAISE EXPORT QUOTA
  Ecuador will ask OPEC to raise its oil
  export quota by 100,000 barrels per day to 310,000 to
  compensate for lost output due to last week's earthquake,
  deputy Energy Minister Fernando Santos Alvite said.
      Santos Alvite, who arrived in Caracas last night to discuss
  an aid plan for Ecuador, did not say when the Organisation of
  Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) would be approached.
      The additional output would be related to plans now under
  discussion for Venezuela and Mexico to lend Ecuador crude while
  it repairs a pipeline damaged by the quake.
      Earlier, Venezuelan Energy and Mines Minister Aturo
  Hernandez Grisanti said his country would supply an unspecified
  part of Ecuador's export commitments.
      But Santos Alvite told reporters he hoped a first cargo of
  300,000 barrels could leave Maracaibo this weekend to supply
  refineries near Guayaquil. He added Ecuador also wanted to make
  up for 50,000 bpd it shipped to Caribbean destinations. Mexico
  might supply Ecuador's South Korean market.
      Ecuador may be unable to export oil for up to five months
  due to extensive damage to a 25 mile stretch of pipeline
  linking jungle oilfields to the Pacific port of Balao.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN FURTHER 442 MLN STG HELP
  The Bank of England said it provided the
  market with a further 442 mln stg assistance during the morning
  to offset a liquidity shortage it estimated at 1.60 billion
  stg, revised up from 1.55 billion
      The bank bought outright eight mln stg of band one treasury
  bills and five mln stg of band one bank bills at 10-3/8 pct.
      It bought a further 429 mln stg of bills for resale to the
  discount houses on April 2 at an interest rate of 10-7/16 pct.
      So far today, the bank has given the market assistance
  worth a total of 1.501 billion stg.
  

JACOBS SUCHARD EXPECTS ANOTHER EXCELLENT YEAR
  Jacobs Suchard AG &lt;JACZ.Z> hopes for
  another excellent year in 1987 after a 27 pct increase in 1986
  net profit. Results in the first few months show it heading in
  the right direction, company president Klaus Jacobs said.
      The group reported 1986 net profit of 190.9 mln Swiss
  francs compared with 150.4 mln in 1985 and raised its dividend
  per bearer share to 160 francs from 155 francs.
      Jacobs said the increase in profit, which far exceeded the
  company's target of five pct real annual growth, had been made
  possible by restructuring measures introduced in January 1986
  which had also made some major acquisitions possible last year.
      Hermann Pohl, general director in charge of economic
  affairs, said the 2.7 pct decline in group turnover to 5.24
  billion francs was due to currency factors.
      A 5.2 pct negative currency influence was partially offset
  by growth in operations and by structural changes within the
  group.
      Turnover in the coffee business fell to 3.10 billion francs
  from 3.56 billion in 1985 while turnover in the chocolate
  sector rose to 2.14 billion francs from 1.82 billion. The
  tonnage sold in both sectors declined due to higher prices and
  lower consumer demand, especially in France and West Germany.
      Jacobs Suchard increased its market share in West Germany
  to 44.9 pct from 39.9 pct in 1985, largely as a result of
  acquisitions. Market share in France was little changed at 25
  pct against 25.3 pct.
      Pohl said the group's average tax rate rose to 32.5 pct
  from 28.8 pct because of the higher profits and despite
  write-offs on the losses of new acquisitions. A further
  increase in tax levels was expected in future.
      Taxes jumped 51.3 pct to 92 mln francs in 1986 from 61 mln
  the previous year.
  

JAPAN FIRM PLANS TO SELL U.S. FARMLAND TO JAPANESE
  A Japanese real estate company
  said it will launch a campaign to sell land in U.S. Farming
  areas to rich Japanese.
      Higashi Nippon House said it would offer around 2,200 acres
  of land in Illinois, California, Florida and Indiana from early
  April to gauge response. It set up International Farm Corp of
  America in Chicago last September to oversee the operation.
      American farmers would continue as working tenants and part
  of the profits from harvests of rice, corn, soybean and oranges
  would go to the Japanese investors as rental.
      Japanese Agriculture Ministry officials told Reuters sales
  were limited to farmers to keep land in agricultural use.
      "Two years ago, I began to seek my own farmland in Japan,"
  said Isao Nakamura, president of Higashi Nippon. "However, sale
  of Japanese farmland is strictly controlled by the government,
  so I began to look for the land in the U.S to make my dream to
  own farm land come true."
      Nakamura said hundreds of companies exist in the U.S. To
  sell farmland to investors as more and more farmers face
  difficulties due to the recession in U.S. Agriculture.
  

TAFT &lt;TFB> REJECTS 145 DLR/SHR OFFER
  Taft Broadacasting Co said its
  board of directors unanimously decided not to accept the
  pending buyout proposal of &lt;Theta Corp>, an investor group led
  by Dudley Taft.
      The decision was based on, among other things, the advice
  of its financial advisors, Goldman Sachs and Co, that the offer
  of 145 dlrs per share was inadequate.
      Taft said the board concluded that the offer failed to
  recognize fully the future propsects of the company and
  directed management to explore alternatives including possible
  financial restructuring.
  

PAKISTAN COULD IMPORT 100,000 TONNES OF PALM OIL
  Pakistan is likely to import 100,000
  tonnes of refined, bleached and deodorised palm oil between
  April and June this year, vegetable oil dealers said.
      They said the import would be financed by the Islamic
  Development Bank (IDB) which signed an agreement with Pakistan
  earlier this week in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
      Pakistan had imported 600,000 tonnes of edible oil since
  the beginning of the current financial year last July, they
  added. The palm oil would come from Malaysia or Indonesia.
  

TREASURY SECRETARY BAKER DECLINES COMMENT ON G-6
  U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker
  declined comment on the February 22 Paris accord between the
  six major industrial nations under which they agreed to foster
  exchange rate stability.
      Asked by reporters after a speech before the National
  Fitness Foundation banquet what, if any, currency intervention
  levels had been set in Paris, Baker replied: "We never talk
  about intervention."
      Baker also declined to comment on his views about the
  foreign exchange markets' reaction to the accord.
  

BEL FUSE INC &lt;BELF> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 22 cts vs 13 cts
      Net 1,063,000 vs 639,000
      Sales 7,489,000 vs 4,656,000
      Year
      Shr 55 cts vs 28 cts
      Net 2,633,000 vs 1,343,000
      Sales 23.3 mln vs 17.9 mln
  

SOUTHWEST REALTY &lt;SWL> YEAR LOSS
  Shr loss 44 cts vs profit 1.13 dlrs
      Net loss 1,544,000 vs profit 3,912,000
      NOTE: Cash flow 1,010,000 dlrs or 29 cts shr vs 2,835,000
  dlrs or 82 cts shr.
  

SOUTHWEST REALTY &lt;SWL> HAS LIQUIDITY PROBLEMS
  Southwest Realty Ltd said it believes it
  could make all of its scheduled montly debt service payments
  for 1987 despite the falloff in its rental operations, but
  making the payments would probably severely impair its
  liquidity and restrict its ability to maintain the quality of
  its properties.
      The company today reported a 1986 loss of 1,544,000 dlrs
  compared with a 1985 profit of 3,912,000 dlrs.
      Southwest said in addition to its monthly scheduyled debt
  service payments, a 1,743,000 dlr loan on one of its Houston
  properties is due to mature on April One.
      Southwest said a commitment to reduce the interest rate and
  extend the Houston loan for one year has been accepted.
      It said talks are underway with lenders on other Houston
  properties to obtain partial debt service moratoriums which, if
  granted, would cut 1987 cash deficits from 1986 levels.  The
  loan renegotiations could involve bankruptcy or other
  litigation connected with the specific properties involved and
  could involve the suspension of interest and principal payments
  to some of the lenders.  Southwest said if the attempts to
  restructure debt do not succeed, it could lose one or more of
  the properties.
      Southwest said the Houston properties made up about 10 pct
  of its current value equity as of December 31 of 14.20 dlrs per
  share, down from 16.68 dlrs a year before.
      The company said depending on the success of the talks and
  operating results for 1987, one or two more properties could
  become subject to similar negotiations.  The two additional
  properties comprised about 11 pct of its current value equity
  at year-end, Southwest said.
  

D.H. HOLMES CO LTD &lt;HLME> SETS PAYOUT
  Qtly div 12-1/2 cts vs 12-1/2 cts prior
      Pay April One
      Record March 20
  

POPE EVANS &lt;PER> REPURCHASES SHARES
  Pope, Evans and Robbins Inc said it
  has repurchased 780,000 common shares from Putnam Mills Corp
  principals Sidney and Peter Kaplan for 2.25 dlrs per share.
      It said the purchase price will be applied against the
  1,700,000 dlrs Putnam Mills currently owes Pope Evans for
  merchandise.  Pope Evans has about 7.6 mln shares outstanding.
      The company also said it has agreed in principle to acquire
  privately-held Pat Fashions Industries Inc for 18 mln dlrs in
  cash and notes, with financing to come partly from bank
  borrowings, subject to approval by the Pope Evans board and Pat
  shareholders.
      Pat Fashions imports apparel from the Far East and makes
  apparel domestically as well.  In the year ended November 30,
  Pat earned 5,400,000 dlrs pretax on sales of 83.0 mln dlrs.
  

BAIRD &lt;BATM> GETS TEMPORARY RESTRAINING ORDER
  Baird Corp said the Massachusetts state
  court for Suffolk county has granted it a temporary restraining
  order prohibiting Mark IV Industries Inc &lt;IV> from further
  purchases of Baird stock until Mark IV complies with the
  Massachusetts Anti-Takeover Statute.
      The company said Mark IV currently owns at least 17.6 pct
  of Baird stock and has indicated that it may attempt to acquire
  Baird.
      Baird said the U.S. District Court in Boston has denied
  Mark IV's application for a temporary restraining order to
  prevent enforcement of the Massachusetts takeover law.
  

JACOBS SUCHARD SEES 100,000 TONNE COCOA SURPLUS
  Jacobs Suchard AG expects a world cocoa
  surplus of around 100,000 tonnes in 1987 compared with a
  104,000 tonne surplus in 1986, Jens Sroka, head of commodity
  buying, told a news conference.
      The company expects prices to remain at around current
  levels despite the likelihood of agreement on buffer stock
  rules at the forthcoming London cocoa talks, and believes
  market intervention by the buffer stock manager would stabilise
  prices.
      Sroka said world coffee prices are expected to remain weak
  if any international coffee talks fail to produce agreement.
      Sroka said stagnating consumption and slight overproduction
  will continue to weigh on coffee prices and he forecast a
  continued build-up in stocks.
      The recent failure of the London coffee talks had surprised
  market observers.
      Unless reason prevails and the major producers return to
  the conference table, the world coffee market will remain free
  and the consequences for some producers dependant on coffee for
  their foreign exchange earnings would be catastrophic, Sroka
  added.
  

DUDLEY TAFT AND NARRAGANSETT CAPITAL TO PURSUE TAFT BROADCASTING BID

  DUDLEY TAFT AND NARRAGANSETT CAPITAL TO PURSUE TAFT BROADCASTING BID
  

GENERAL MINING UNION CORP LTD (GENM.J) YEAR NET
  Shr 616 cts vs 481
      Final div 150 cts vs 140, making 230 vs 195
      Pre-tax 705.4 mln rand vs 485.2 mln
      Net 591.7 mln vs 458.0 mln
      Tax 79.2 mln vs 82.2 mln
      Attrib to outside shareholders 123.7 mln vs 52.3 mln
  

U.S. RETAIL SALES ROSE 4.1 PCT IN FEB, NON-AUTO SALES ROSE 1.5 PCT

  U.S. RETAIL SALES ROSE 4.1 PCT IN FEB, NON-AUTO SALES ROSE 1.5 PCT
  

U.S. RETAIL SALES RISE 4.1 PCT IN FEBRUARY
  U.S. retail sales rose 4.77 billion
  dlrs, or 4.1 pct, in February to a seasonally adjusted 122.29
  billion dlrs, the Commerce Department said.
      The increase came after a revised 7.4 pct drop in January
  sales to a level of 117.52 billion dlrs. The department
  previously reported January retail sales fell 5.8 pct.
      Excluding autos, retail sales in February were up 1.5 pct
  after falling by a revised 0.4 pct in January.
      Department spokesmen said the major cause for the revision
  downward in January sales was a weaker January auto dealer
  sales figure than originally estimated.
      Auto dealer sales were 26.91 billion dlrs in February, a
  14.4 pct rise from January levels. But January sales dropped by
  27.7 pct from December levels to 23.52 billion dlrs, more than
  the 22.4 pct fall originally reported.
      The expiration of the sales tax deduction under new tax
  laws on January 1 was the main reason for the drop in January
  sales, department spokesmen said.
      Sales of durable goods rose in February by 8.8 pct to 46.72
  billion dlrs after dropping by 17.7 pct in January.
      Building materials rose 1.8 pct in February after falling
  by 1.7 pct in January.
      Non-durable goods sales rose by 1.3 pct to 75.58 billion
  dlrs in February after falling by 0.2 pct in January, the
  department said.
      General merchandise stores rose 1.4 pct after increasing
  sales by 1.6 pct in January, and department stores were up two
  pct in February after rising 1.5 pct in January.
      Food store sales increased 0.4 pct after declining by 1.0
  pct in January, while grocery store sales increased 0.3 pct in
  February after falling 0.6 pct in January.
      Gasoline service station sales rose 2.0 pct in February
  after a 1.9 pct January increase.
      Apparel store sales were up 0.8 pct last month after
  falling 3.0 pct in January, while sales at eating and drinking
  places increased 1.5 pct after rising 0.5 pct in January.
      February's retail sales were 4.4 pct above the year-ago
  level of 117.09 billion dlrs, the department said.
  

DUDLEY TAFT TO PURSUE TAFT BROADCAST &lt;TFB> BID
  Taft Broadcasting Co vice chairman
  Dudley Taft and Narragansett Capital Inc &lt;NARR> said they
  intend to pursue their effort to acquire Taft Broadcasting
  despite the rejection yesterday of their 145 dlr per share
  offer by the Taft Broadcasting board.
      Dudley Taft and Narragansett, in a joint statement, said
  they intend to explore alternatives to achieve the acquisition,
  including further talks with Taft Broadcasting.
      They said they are confident that the Taft Broadcasting
  board will conclude that the resolution of the company's
  current "unstable situation" as quickly as possible is in the
  best interests of all parties.
      They said the Taft board did not conclude that their offer
  was not fair to Taft shareholders.  Taft Broadcasting
  yesterday, however, said financial advisor Goldman, Sachs and
  Co found the offer to be inadequate.
  

HARPER GROUP &lt;HARG> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 24 cts vs 31 cts
      Net 2,245,000 vs 2,885,000
      Revs 50.7 mln vs 46.5 mln
      Avg shrs 9,396,000 vs 9,270,000
      Year
      Oper shr 96 cts vs 99 cts
      Oper net 8,994,000 vs 9,220,000
      Revs 191.5 mln vs 174.7 mln
      Avg shrs 9,394,000 vs 9,282,000
      NOTE: 1985 year net excludes 1,360,000 dlr loss from
  discontinued operations.
      Share adjusted for three-for-two stock split.    
  

CANADA LEADERS FAIL TO SET PACT ON FREE TRADE
  Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said he
  held "frank" discussions with the Canadian province premiers on
  the pace of free trade talks with the United States, but the
  longstanding issue of provincial ratification remains to be
  settled.
      Speaking to reporters after nearly five hours of meetings
  with the 10 premiers, Mulroney said further discussions would
  be held in June and September to discuss the role of the
  provinces in approving any new trade deal.
      But he maintained progress was being made in the sweeping
  talks with the Unites States that got under nearly two years
  ago.
      "It appears reasonable progress is being made (in the
  talks)," Mulroney said.
      Alberta Premier Don Getty agreed, "Things are running pretty
  quickly now."
      The talks, launched by Mulroney's Progressive Conservative
  government after concerns about protectionist sentiment in the
  U.S., are aimed reducing the remaining barriers between the
  world's largest trading partnership.
      But the provinces are expected to play a major role in any
  new trading arrangement, and some of the provincial leaders
  complained of a lack of progress on reaching a ratification
  formula.
      "It's my view that we should be thinking about these things
  right now, along with the questions of the substance of the
  agreement," commented Ontario Premier David Peterson, who has
  been highly critical of the talks in the past.
      But Newfoundland Premier Brian Peckford said an agreement
  was more likely to emerge by consensus and there would be no
  need for a "hard and fast formula."
      Peckford said it appears Canada is prepared to make
  concessions to the United States on financial services in order
  to make inroads on other bargaining areas, such as agriculture.
      Canadian published reports, quoting government sources, say
  the two countries are close to reaching a trade deal and it
  will involve eliminating border tariffs and many non-tariff
  barriers over the next 10 to 12 years.
      A rough draft of the accord is expected to be presented to
  the premiers at the June meeting while the finished document is
  hoped to be presented to Congress in October.
      "It's a very tight time frame," Ontario's Peterson said last
  night. "But at this moment it is tough to say what will
  transpire."
  

HEALTHSOUTH REHABILITATION CORP &lt;HSRC> 4TH QTR
  Shr profit eight cts vs loss 10 cts
      Net profit 622,000 vs loss 564,000
      Revs 7,508,000 vs 1,913,000
      Year
      Shr profit 15 cts vs loss 28 cts
      Net profit 933,000 vs loss 1,548,000
      Revs 19.8 mln vs 4,799,000
  

BALDRIGE OPPOSES JAPANESE PURCHASE OF FIRM
  Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige
  has asked the White House to consider blocking the planned
  Japanese acquisition of a major U.S. supercomputer and
  semiconductor manufacturer for national security reasons, U.S.
  officials said.
      The officials, who asked not to be named, said yesterday
  that Baldrige has "serious concerns" about the sale of Fairchild
  Semiconductor Corp. to Fujitsu Ltd., another major electronics
  firm.
      The officials told Reuters that if the sale went through it
  could leave the U.S. military overly dependent on a foreign
  /ompany for vital high technology equipment used in its
  advanced missiles, aircraft electronics and intelligence
  gathering.
      In addition, they said, the sale would also worsen the
  already strained trade relations between the U.S. and Japan
  stemming from the huge Japanese surplus.
      The White House Economic Policy Council would consider the
  sale in the coming weeks, they said.
      Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger's position was not
  immediately known but in the past he has opposed the transfer
  of high technology to foreign governments and companies.
      Supercomputers made by Fairchild and other U.S.
  manufacturers are widely used throughout the world, but none
  have been sold to the Japanese government or to Japanese
  government-run agencies and universities.
  

FIRST UNION &lt;FUNC> ACQUISITION ADVANCES
  First Union Corp said
  shareholders of First North Port Bancorp of Northport, Fla.,
  have approved a merger into First Union for 40 dlrs per share,
  or about 5,100,000 dlrs.
      The company said the acquisition is still subject to
  regulatory approvals and is expected to be completed during the
  second quarter.
  

SWISS SIGHT DEPOSITS RISE 3.10 BILLION FRANCS
  Sight deposits by commercial banks at the
  Swiss National Bank rose by 3.10 billion Swiss francs to 10.53
  billion in the last 10 days of February, the National Bank
  said.
      Foreign exchange reserves fell 3.06 billion francs to 30.64
  billion.
      Sight deposits are an important measure of Swiss money
  market liquidity.
      The decline in foreign exchange reserves reflected the
  dismantling of swap arrangements, the National Bank said.
      Banknotes in circulation rose by 834 mln francs to 24.79
  billion while other deposits on call - mainly government funds
  - fell 1.60 billion francs to 1.04 billion.
  

SAND TECHNOLOGY &lt;SNDCF> MULLING REVERSE SPLIT
  Sand Technology Systems Inc said it is
  considering a reverse stock split of at least one-for-10 and
  expects to report a second-quarter profit, compared to a loss
  last year.
      The stock consolidation "is something we're discussing, but
  it's not definite," Sand Technology president Jerry Shattner
  told Reuters in an interview.
      A private placement recently brought the number of
  outstanding shares to 106 mln, up from 97.1 mln shares on July
  31, 1986, the fiscal yearend.
      "The company has always had the aura of a penny stock,"
  Shattner said, adding that Sand plans, at some time, to apply
  for listing on the Montreal Stock Exchange.
      Shattner said the company expects to report a profit of
  five pct, or about 350,000 dlrs, on sales of seven mln dlrs,
  for the second quarter ended January 31. Results for the third
  quarter should be about the same as the second, he added.
      Last year, Sand lost 243,064 dlrs on revenues of 7,012,195
  dlrs in the second quarter.
      After "a disastrous first quarter," Sand hopes to break even
  in the current fiscal year, Shattner said. The company has
  scaled back its sales forecast to about 25 mln dlrs, from the
  33.5 mln dlrs projected in December.
      The rapid appreciation of the Japanese yen against U.S. and
  Canadian dollars last year led to Sand's loss of 2.1 mln dlrs,
  or two cts per share, on sales of 24.9 mln dlrs.
      In the first fiscal quarter this year, the company lost
  1,350,387 dlrs, or one ct per share, on sales of 3,570,585
  dlrs.
      Shattner believes the company will post better results this
  year due to several factors.
      "Last year, one of our biggest problems was we were buying
  products in Japanese yen. We now buy some products from Hitachi
  in U.S. dollars and the results are starting to show up in the
  second quarter," he said.
      Sand Technology sells, under its trademark, computer
  accessories such as disk drives, solid-state memory enhancement
  devices and printers manufactured by Hitachi Ltd &lt;HIT> of
  Japan.
      Shattner said Sand's affiliate in Detroit, ST Systems Inc,
  is developing software that lets large maniframe computers
  handle large databases and share them between applications.
      It is also distributing a new product called Sapiens, which
  is artificial intelligence computer language for use by major
  corporations.
      The company has also reduced costs through some staff
  cutting and a switch to profit sharing plans for sales staff
  instead of straight commissions, Shattner said.
      And Sand plans to market a laser printer in the fourth
  fiscal quarter, Shattner said.
  

&lt;CONCORDE VENTURES INC> IN MERGER AGREEMENT
  Concorde Ventures Inc said it has signed
  a letter of intent to acquire Englewood, Colo., homebuilder
  Winley Inc for 12 mln common shares.
      The investment company said after the merger the combined
  company will have 15 mln shares outstanding.
      For the year ended January 31, Winley earned 116,000 dlrs
  pretax on revenues of 11.7 mln dlrs.
  

DUNE RESOURCES &lt;DNLAF> RESERVES ROSE IN 1986
  Dune Resources Ltd said its oil
  reserves increased 225 pct during 1986 while its natural gas
  reserves were up six pct.
      The company said its proven oil reserves were estimated at
  605,682 barrels on December 31, up from 186,655 barrels a year
  earlier boosted by discoveries during the year put at 423,659
  barrels.
      It said gas reserves rose to 8.8 mln cubic feet from 8.3
  mln on Dec 31, 1985, as discoveries of nearly 1.3 mln cubic
  feet were partialy offset by production of 287,391 cubic feet
  and downward revisions of previous estimates totaling 491,694
  cubic feet.
  

BORG-WARNER TO SELL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS BUSINESS FOR ABOUT 240 MLN DLRS

  BORG-WARNER TO SELL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS BUSINESS FOR ABOUT 240 MLN DLRS
  

JAPAN ECONOMY MAY BE NEAR BOTTOM, ECONOMISTS SAY
  The worst may be just about over for
  Japan's battered economy but economists said they do not expect
  a vigorous recovery anytime soon. Japanese bank economists
  polled by Reuters said the economy's 18 month-old slowdown is
  likely to end in the first half of this year, helped by rising
  exports, stepped-up government spending and falling prices. "The
  economy will bottom out in the middle of the year," said
  Sumitomo Bank Ltd chief economist, Masahiko Koido.
      Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd senior economist Susumu
  Taketomi agreed. "It (the bottom) is in the offing," he said.
      But he added that the recovery will be slow. Growth in the
  fiscal year beginning next month will only pick-up 2.2 pct,
  from two pct in the current year, he said.
      Signs that the economy has just about weathered the worst
  are increasing.
      The volume of exports in the first two months of the year
  rose slightly on a year-on-year basis, after declining toward
  the end of last year.
      Although this may be due to extraordinary factors such as a
  sharp rise in car exports to rebuild depleted European stocks,
  several economists said it could mark the beginning of a
  recovery.
      Industrial production fell 0.7 pct in January, much smaller
  than expected, and is forecast by the government to rise 0.3
  pct in February and 2.6 pct in March. A Bank of Japan survey
  released last week showed that the decline in Japanese
  corporate earnings may be nearing its end.
      And the Paris currency accord last month has fostered hopes
  the rapid yen rise has come to the end, they said.
      Six nations - the U.K., Canada, France, Japan, the U.S. And
  West Germany - pledged in Paris last month to stabilise
  currencies around current levels.
      The yen's 40 pct climb against the dollar over the last two
  years has hit the export-driven economy hard, by forcing its
  companies to raise prices and lose sales in the U.S. Market.
      "The important thing is the exchange rate," Taketomi said.
      If it stabilises firms will grow more confident and raise
  investment in plant and equipment, although there are no signs
  of that yet, economists said.
      A stable yen would also help exporters regain some of their
  competitive edge just as the U.S economy may be starting to
  recover, economists said.
      Domestically, the economy may get a boost from some
  loosening of the government's tight fiscal policy said Haruo
  Muto, manager of national economics at the Bank of Tokyo Ltd.
      The next reading of the economy's health should come early
  next week with the release of gnp figures for the last quarter,
  1986.
      Most private economists expect a rise of about 0.5 pct from
  the previous quarter. In the third quarter, GNP rose 0.6 pct.
      But a senior government official said the fourth quarter
  figures could surprise by showing a rise of more than one point
  quarter-on-quarter. But he added that would be a statistical
  aberration and not a significant shift in economic activity.
      To maintain year-on-year growth of around 2.5 pct, the
  economy would have had to rise about 1.2 pct in the fourth
  quarter as the final quarter of 1985 was strong.
       The rise in the fourth quarter of 1985 was probably a
  statistical anomaly that was repeated in the final months of
  1986, the official said.
      Economists said the fourth quarter figures were also
  distorted by the government's sale of gold coins in the second
  half of 1986.
      Because the coins were classified as legal tender, their
  purchase did not show up in the statistics on consumer
  expenditure. Consumer spending also tailed off in December
  because of bad weather and smaller-than-normal end-year
  bonuses, they said.
      As the government had to buy back some of the coins from
  retailers because they were unsold, the government's
  contribution to the economy in the fourth quarter may have been
  boosted, economists said.
      Taketomi said it may have received a further boost from
  government buying of farm products as the domestic crop last
  year was good.
      The senior government official said the fourth quarter
  performance of the domestic sector was probably worse than
  generally expected, while that of the external sector was
  better.
  

QINTEX EXTENDS PRINCEVILLE &lt;PVDC> OFFER
  &lt;Qintex America Ltd> said it is again
  extending its offer of 13 dlrs a share for 3.3 mln Princeville
  Development Corp shares until today from yesterday.
      As reported yesterday, Qintex said, about seven mln
  Princeville shares had been tendered in response to the offer.
      Qintex said it is extending the offer to allow Princeville
  to comply with federal law restricting the ownership of U.S.
  airlines by non-U.S. citizens and to finalize the terms and
  conditions of the letter of credit or bank guarantee required
  under the previously announced acquisition agreement.
  

CORRECTED-NETWORK VIDEO INC &lt;NVID> 3RD QTR
  Feb 28 end
      Shr five cts vs one ct
      Net 161,019 vs 50,745
      Revs 1,048,543 vs 478,700
      Avg shrs 3,217,500 vs 4,350,000
      Nine mths
      Shr 12 cts vs four cts
      Net 390,179 vs 169,275
      Revs 2,658,692 vs 1,478,066
      Avg shrs 3,217,500 vs 4,350,000
      NOTE: Corrects reversed figures in March 11 item.
  

 2-MAR-1987 09:39:50.97
   2-MAR-1987 09:39:50.97

BANKERS OPPOSE STRICT TAIWAN CURRENCY CONTROLS
  Taiwan imposed currency controls today
  in what bankers called a desperate move to prevent speculation
  as the Taiwan dollar appreciated against the U.S. currency.
      The strict controls will require proof that large
  remittances to Taiwan are connected to commercial transactions
  rather than currency speculation.
      Bankers attacked the controls as ineffective, saying they
  were a panic reaction to pressure from Washington for faster
  appreciation of the Taiwan currency against the U.S. dollar,
  which would slow exports to the United States.
      Remittances exceeding one mln dlrs earned through exports,
  shipping, insurance or bank lending will now need government
  approval, along with remittances of more than 10,000 dlrs from
  any other source.
  

SAUDI SUPERTANKER REPORTED HIT BY IRAN OFF UAE
  Iran attacked the Saudi Arabian
  supertanker Arabian Sea off the United Arab Emirates last night
  but the vessel was able to proceed after the incident, Lloyds
  Shipping Intelligence reported.
      The 315,695-dwt Arabian Sea had set sail on Tuesday after
  loading oil at the Saudi port of Ras Tannurah. Lloyds said the
  attack occurred at about 2200 hrs local time (1800 GMT).
  

TAIWAN TO RELAX IMPORT CURBS ON MORE GOODS
  Taiwan will relax import controls on
  more foreign goods, a government spokesman said today.
      The move was to allow greater access to Taiwan markets by
  overseas trading partners, especially the United States, an
  official of the Council for Economic Planning and Development
  told Reuters.
      Import curbs on about 400 foreign goods, including
  stationery and books, would soon be relaxed, he said.
      Taiwan announced it would ease curbs on some 600 farming
  and industrial products last month.
      The official said the moves were intended to balance trade
  between Taiwan and the United States and other trading
  partners. Taiwan's trade surplus reached a record 15.6 billion
  dlrs last year, up from 10.62 billion in 1985.
  

U.K. RETAILERS SEE GROWTH IN CONSUMER SPENDING
  U.K. Retailers expect consumer spending
  to accelerate in March after a disappointing increase in
  February, according to a monthly survey by the Confederation of
  British Industry (CBI).
      Fifty-nine pct of the 325 retailers questioned for the
  latest Distributive Trades Survey expected sales to be higher
  in March than they were in March 1986, with only six pct
  expecting lower sales.
      The chairman of the Distributive Trades Survey Panel, Nigel
  Whittaker, said a favourable Budget next week would further
  help sales during the summer.
      Figures released earlier this week showed retail sales in
  January fell 2.2 pct, mainly due to exceptionally cold weather.
      "Sales did not recover in February as much as retailers had
  expected, and they are now looking for better business in
  March," today's survey said.
      It reported clothing stores were the most optimistic, with
  80 pct expecting sales in March to be higher than a year ago.
      Wholesalers also expected stronger sales in March, while
  both retailers and wholesalers reported slower growth in import
  penetration, it said.
  

MOST JAPAN FIRMS NOT RENEWING IRAN TERM CONTRACTS
  Most Japanese companies have decided not
  to renew term contracts to lift Iranian crude oil because spot
  prices remain considerably lower than OPEC's official levels,
  industry sources said.
      They said a cargo of the Mideast benchmark crude Dubai
  traded yesterday at 16.50 dlrs a barrel, compared to its
  official price of 17.42 dlrs.
      Only one Japanese company has renewed its term contract for
  Iranian crude oil for the second quarter, the sources said.
      The sources said Japanese companies had been lifting a
  total of about 185,000 barrels per day (bpd) of Iranian crude
  under term contracts, but only one firm has agreed to lift in
  the second quarter. It is lifting just 10,000 to 15,000 bpd.
      They said this move could inspire Iran to offer discounts
  on cargoes loading in April, but the likelihood of discounts
  depended largely on the levels of spot prices.
      "If the spot price of Dubai goes above 17.30 dlrs we would
  probably buy Iranian crude at the official price," one Japanese
  refiner said.
      "We don't intend to put pressure on them," he added.
      Buyers have little incentive to renew contracts to lift oil
  at official OPEC prices while spot prices on all grades are
  considerably lower, oil traders said.
      They said if spot prices move higher there will be no
  problem finding OPEC crude to purchase at the official prices.
  Qatar has chartered floating storage for its crude oil after
  finding no buyers at official prices in March. The problem is
  likely to recur in April, adding to that country's surplus.
      The traders added that Iraq had dissociated itself from
  OPEC's December production agreement, while agreeing to the
  fixed prices.
      But oil analysts said if OPEC keeps group output close to
  its first-half 1987 ceiling of 15.8 mln bpd, supply and demand
  would be balanced by the end of the second quarter.
      They also said if OPEC holds its official price structure
  based on a reference price of 18 dlrs, spot price fluctuations
  should be limited to a 16.50 to 17.20 dlrs range for Dubai and
  a 17 to 18 dlrs range for the North Sea's Brent blend.
      One Japanese refiner said, "At the moment there's a lot of
  pressure on OPEC, particularly on Qatar. But if they hold out
  there will be no problem, and I'm beginning to trust their
  ability."
      Nigerian oil minister and OPEC president Rilwanu Lukman
  told a news conference in Lagos yesterday, "Nigeria and all
  member countries of OPEC remain determined to uphold the
  December agreement by adhering strictly to their various quotas
  and official selling prices."
      He said OPEC believed consumers had drawn heavily on stocks
  of both crude oil and refined products, reducing them to levels
  well below this time last year. He said consumers would soon
  return to the market in search of crude.
      A Japanese refiner said, "The European and U.S. Markets are
  beginning to look better so OPEC might be quite lucky."
  

POSSIS &lt;POSS> VOTES 100 PCT STOCK DIVIDEND
  Possis Corp said its board approved
  a 100 pct stock dividend payable May One, record March 27.
      At the company's annual meeting Wednesday, Possis said
  shareholders approved a proposal to increase the authorized
  common shares to 20 mln from eight mln. The company currently
  has about 3.9 mln shares outstanding.
  

SEAL INC &lt;SINC> 1ST QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 29 cts vs 16 cts
      Net 610,000 vs 329,000
      Sales 6,714,000 vs 4,582,000
  

DOW CHEMICAL CO &lt;DOW> REGULAR DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 50 cts vs 50 cts prior
      Pay April 30
      Record March 31
  

TELCO &lt;TELC> DELAYS DEFENSIVE RIGHTS OFFERING
  Telco Systems Inc said its plan
  to distribute a dividend of common stock purchase rights to
  shareholders of record on March 16 has been delayed pending the
  completion of necessary regulatory approvals.
  

CONSOLIDATED TVX SAYS IT WILL ISSUE SHARES TO BUY STAKES IN THREE BRAZIL MINING FIRMS

  CONSOLIDATED TVX SAYS IT WILL ISSUE SHARES TO BUY STAKES IN THREE BRAZIL MINING FIRMS
  

CLAYTON AND DUBILIER NEW JOINT UNIT TO BUY FIRM
  Clayton and Dubilier Inc and senior
  management of a unit of Borg-Warner Corp &lt;BOR> said it will
  form a new company to buy Borg-Warner's industrial products
  group for about 240 mln dlrs.
      Borg-Warner industrial products has sales of about 300 mln
  dlrs from three divisions, which provide advanced technology
  fluid transfer and control equipment, systems and
  services worldwide, Clayton said.
      The new company will have 3,000 employees and be
  headquartered in Long Beach, Calif., the company said.
      Peter Valli, vice president of Borg-Warner Corp and
  president of its industrial products division, will become
  president and chief executive officer of the new company,
  according to Clayton.
      Clayton, a private investment firm, said this was the third
  mangement buyout of a divestiture completed by them since
  December 1986.
  

U.S. HEALTH INC &lt;USHI> 2ND QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 10 cts vs seven cts
      Net 1,541,000 vs 1,056,000
      Revs 20.1 mln vs 17.0 mln
      1st half
      Shr 19 cts vs 11 cts
      Net 2,945,000 vs 1,742,000
      Revs 38.2 mln vs 35.2 mln
  

K MART CORP 4TH QTR  SHR 2.11 DLRS VS NINE CTS

  K MART CORP 4TH QTR  SHR 2.11 DLRS VS NINE CTS
  

UK MONEY MARKET GIVEN FURTHER TWO MLN STG HELP
  The Bank of England said it gave the
  market further assistance of two mln stg during the afternoon,
  buying that amount of band two bank bills at 10-5/16 pct.
      The bank has given the market assistance worth 1.503
  billion stg today to offset a shortage it estimated at a
  revised 1.60 billion.
  

ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEMS CO &lt;ESC> 1ST QTR JAN 31
  Shr 13 cts vs 15 cts
      Net 2,193,000 vs 1,918,000
      Revs 18.2 mln vs 15.2 mln
      NOTE: Share after preferred dividends.
  

GENERAL MINING (GENM.J) CAUTIONS ON 1987 PROFITS
  General Mining Union Corp Ltd
  chairman Derek Keys cautioned that profits may not rise this
  year if the rand stays at its current level of 48 U.S. Cents.
      "We would do well to repeat last year's results if the rand
  stays depressed," Keys said.
      The level of the dividend, however, "ought not to be
  affected," he added, discussing the 1987 outlook.
      General Mining earlier reported that 1986 per share
  earnings rose 28 pct to 616 cts.
  

COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO &lt;CL> SETS PAYOUT
  Qtrly div 34 cts vs 34 cts
      Pay May 15
      Record April 24
  

ISCO INC &lt;ISKO> 2ND QTR ENDS JAN 30 NET
  Shr 12 cts vs 13 cts
      Net 414,968 vs 449,533
      Revs 5,726,722 vs 5,276,627
      Six mths
      Shr 23 cts vs 33 cts
      Net 779,981 vs 1,116,857
      Revs 11.3 mln vs 11.3 mln
  

CCC REALLOCATES CREDIT GUARANTEES TO EL SALVADOR
  The Commodity Credit Corporation,
  CCC, has reallocated two mln dlrs in credit gurantees
  previously earmarked for sales of U.S. protein meals to cover
  sales of vegetable oil and tallow to El Salvador, the U.S.
  Agriculture Department said.
      The action reduces coverage for sales of protein meals to
  14 mln dlrs from 16 mln dlrs and creates new lines of one mln
  dlrs for tallow and/or greases and one mln dlrs for vegetable
  oils, the department said.
      All sales under the credit guarantee lines must be
  registered and exported by Sepember 30, 1987, it said.
      The guarantee rates include a charge to provide for a
  yearly interest rate coverage of up to 4.5 pct on the
  guaranteed value, the department said.
  

ICO PRODUCERS TO PRESENT NEW COFFEE PROPOSAL
  International Coffee Organization, ICO,
  producing countries will present a proposal for reintroducing
  export quotas for 12 months from April 1 with a firm
  undertaking to try to negotiate up to September 30 any future
  quota distribution on a new basis, ICO delegates said.
      Distribution from April 1 would be on an unchanged basis as
  in an earlier producer proposal, which includes shortfall
  redistributions totalling 1.22 mln bags, they said.
      Resumption of an ICO contact group meeting with consumers,
  scheduled for this evening, has been postponed until tomorrow,
  delegates said.
  

WHITTAKER CORP &lt;WKR> 1ST QTR JAN 31 NET
  Oper shr 17 cts vs 25 cts
      Qtly div 15 cts vs 15 cts prior
      Oper net 1,522,000 vs 3,501,000
      Sales 98.0 mln vs 86.3 mln
      NOTE: Prior year net excludes loss from discontinued
  operations of 1,817,000 dlrs.
      Company said common shares outstanding down significantly
  to 7,814,000, reflecting retirement of about 5,200,000 shares
  since start of restructurining in August 1986.
      Dividend pay April 30, record April 16.
  

BORG-WARNER &lt;BOR> TO SELL UNIT FOR 240 MLN DLRS
  Borg-Warner Corp said it agreed to sell
  its industrial products group to &lt;Clayton and Dubilier Inc>
  and senior management of the group, for about 240 mln dlrs.
      Clayton and Dubilier is a New York-based private investment
  firm, which has completed two other management-led buyout
  transactions since December 1986.
      Borg-Warner's industrial products group, based in Long
  Beach, California, has sales of about 300 mln dlrs and employs
  about 3,000 staff.
      Its businesses include standard and custom engineered
  centrifugal pumps and mechanical seals for the petroleum
  industry and advanced controls for the aerospace and defense
  industries.
      The sale is part of Borg-Warner's planned restructuring.
      the proposed sale is subject to approval by Borg-Warner's
  directors, it said.
  

PANAMANIAN WHEAT SHIP STILL GROUNDED OFF SYRIA
  The Panamanian bulk carrier Juvena is
  still aground outside Tartous, Syria, despite discharging 6,400
  tons of its 39,000-ton cargo of wheat, and water has entered
  the engine-room due to a crack in the vessel bottom, Lloyds
  Shipping Intelligence Service said.
      The Juvena, 53,351 tonnes dw, ran aground outside Tartous
  port basin breakwater on February 25 in heavy weather and rough
  seas.
  

GUARDIAN-MORTON SHULMAN AGREES TO TAKEOVER BID
  &lt;Guardian-Morton Shulman Precious
  Metals Inc> said Morton Shulman and Guardman Investment
  Management Services Inc agreed in principle for Andrew Sarlos
  to make a takeover bid for all special shares and series II
  warrants of Guardian-Morton, subject to regulatory approval and
  completion of definitive documentation.
      Guardman Investment, current manager and owner of all
  common shares of Guardian-Morton, also agreed to sell the
  common and its management agreement to a company controlled by
  Sarlos if the takeover bid is successful, Guardian-Morton said.
      Price to be offered for the Guardian-Morton special shares
  under the takeover bid will be 90 pct of the net asset value of
  the special shares at the time of the bid, and two dlrs for
  each series II warrant, the company said.
      Guardian-Morton said the takeover bid will be conditional
  on Sarlos acquiring at least 90 pct of the special shares and
  90 pct of the series II warrants, when combined the number of
  special shares and warrants owned by the offeror at the time of
  the bid.
      Investment companies managed by Sarlos currently own
  slightly less than 10 pct of Guardian-Morton's special shares.
  

K MART CORP &lt;KM> 4TH QTR JAN 28 NET
  Shr 2.11 dlrs vs nine cts
      Net 285,000,000 vs 10,500,000
      Revs 7.35 billion vs 6.76 billion
      Avg shrs 134,300,000 vs 131,600,000
      Year
      Shr 4.35 dlrs vs 1.73 dlrs
      Net 582,300,000 vs 221,200,000
      Revs 24.13 billion vs 22.33 billion
      Avg shrs 134,300,000 vs 131,600,000
      NOTE: Latest year earnings include a loss in each period of
  16.4 mln dlrs, or 12 cts a share, for a premium paid in the
  early call of a 250 mln dlr 12.75 pct 30-year debenture
      Earnings include a gain from discontinued operations of
  30.8 mln dlrs, or 23 cts a share vs a loss of 238.9 mln dlrs,
  or 1.82 dlrs a share in the quarter and a gain of 28.4 mln
  dlrs, or 21 cts a share vs a gain of 472.0 mln dlrs, or 3.64
  dlrs a share for the year
  

HOG AND CATTLE SLAUGHTER GUESSTIMATES
  Chicago Mercantile Exchange floor
  traders and commission house representatives are guesstimating
  today's hog slaughter at about 290,000 to 310,000 head versus
  309,000 week ago and 328,000 a year ago.
      Cattle slaughter is guesstimated at about 128,000 to
  131,000 head versus 129,000 week ago and 127,000 a year ago.
  

VAN OMMEREN ACQUIRES DUTCH GAS CONTAINER UNIT
  Dutch shipping and transport group
  PHS Van Ommeren NV &lt;OMMN.AS> said it has taken over a small
  Dutch gas container firm as a first step in establishing a
  world-wide gas container organisation.
      The firm, Liquid and Gas Transport BV (LGT), employs 10
  people and has a fleet of 200 gas containers.
      Van Ommeren will shortly open an office in Singapore and
  expand its facilities in Houston to establish the gas container
  network.
  

DORCHESTER HUGOTON LTD &lt;DHULZ> RAISES PAYOUT
  Qtly div 10 cts vs eight cts prior
      Pay April 16
      Record March 31
  

INTERNATIONAL AMERICAN &lt;HOME> SETS ACQUISITION
  International American Homes inc
  said it has contracted to acquire &lt;Diversified Shelter Group
  Ltd> for about 11,850,000 dlrs to be paid 73 pct in cash and 27
  pct in International American common stock to be valued on a 30
  day trading average prior to closing.
      It said the price is based on Diversified's estimated 3.2
  mln dlrs pro forma pre-tax earnings for 1986 after adjustment
  for certain non-continuing expenses. Diversified, a developer
  of single family housing in the Atlanta market, had 1986
  revenues of about 25.3 mln dlrs. The acquisition if subject to
  International American arranging financing.
  

EC COMMISSION HAS OPEN ATTITUDE ON STEEL QUOTAS
  The EC Commission said it was
  adopting an "open attitude" about whether a system of production
  quotas should remain for the indefinite future on heavy steel
  products which account for about 45 pct of all EC steel goods.
      In a statement, the Commission reiterated its view that the
  industry needs to lose between 25 and 30 mln tonnes of capacity
  by 1990. It had previously said the quota system, started in
  1980, should be wound up completely by the end of next year.
      The industry has argued for the maintenance of existing
  quotas, which cover almost 70 pct of all output, saying almost
  all steelmakers are losing money due to the depressed market.
  

PRECISION AEROTECH INC &lt;PAR> 3RD QTR JAN 31 NET
  Oper shr 16 cts vs two cts
      Oper net 467,000 vs 52,000
      Sales 8,954,000 vs 6,338,000
      Avg shrs 2,939,459 vs 1,979,916
      Nine mths
      Oper shr 45 cts vs 18 cts
      Oper net 1,068,000 vs 387,000
      Sales 24.5 mln vs 19.6 mln
      Avg shrs 2,299,764 vs 1,979,916
      NOTE: Current year net both periods excludes 176,000 dlr
  gain from retirement of notes.
      Backlog 30.8 mln vs 26.7 mln at start of fiscal year.
  

GUARDIAN NATIONAL INSURANCE CO LTD &lt;GARJ J> YEAR
  Shr 100.6 cts vs 76.9 cts
      Final div 40 cts vs 32 making 58 cts vs 50
      Pre-tax 14.17 mln rand vs 8.85 mln
      Net 10.06 mln vs 7.69 mln
      Tax 4.10 mln vs 1.16 mln
      Gross premiums 210.16 mln vs 178.69 mln
      Net premiums written 143.99 mln vs 123.88 mln
      Underwriting loss 1.78 mln vs loss 6.25 mln
      Div pay April 10, register March 27.
      Note - period year to December 31 1986.
  

DATAMETRICS CORP &lt;DMCZ> 1ST QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr diluted five cts vs 13 cts
      Net 278,780 vs 442,532
      Revs 5,101,747 vs 4,293,393
      Avg shrs diluted 6,050,968 vs 3,414,145
      NOTE: Net includes tax credits of 123,500 dlrs vs 179,000
  dlrs.
  

STOP AND SHOP COS INC &lt;SHP> 4TH QTR JAN 31 NET
  Oper shr 1.80 dlrs vs 1.46 dlrs
      Oper net 25.0 mln vs 20.2 mln
      Sales 1.09 billion vs 996.4 mln
      Avg shrs 13.9 mln vs 13.8 mln
      Year
      Oper shr 3.20 dlrs vs 2.57 dlrs
      Oper net 44.4 mln vs 35.4 mln
      Sales 3.87 billion vs 3.43 billion
      Avg shrs 13.9 mln vs 13.8 mln
      NOTES: Operating net excludes losses of 12.1 mln dlrs, or
  87 cts a share, vs 321,000 dlrs, or two cts a share, in quarter
  and 6.0 mln dlrs, or 43 cts a share, vs 5.1 mln dlrs, or 37 cts
  a share, from discontinued operations. This includes provision
  in latest quarter of 12.2 mln dlrs for closing of Almys
  Department Store Co.
      Operating net in latest quarter and year includes 750,000
  dlrs charge for restructuring announced in early January
  

WIENER ENTERPRISES INC &lt;WPB> YEAR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 60 cts vs 85 cts
      Qtly div 10 cts vs 10 cts prior
      Net 1,407,000 vs 1,996,000
      Sales 75.4 mln vs 58.2 mln
      NOTE: Dividend pay April 16, record April Nine
  

K MART &lt;KM> SAYS RECORD 1986 NET "TURNING POINT"
  K Mart Corp said its record fiscal
  1986 net earnings of 582.3 mln dlrs, a rise from 221.2 mln dlrs
  a year ago, marked a "major turning point" for the world's
  second biggest retailer.
      K Mart said the earnings rise for the fourth quarter ended
  January 28 to 285 mln dlrs from 10.5 mln dlrs resulted from 
  "merchandising, refurbishing and expense control."
      A year ago, K Mart took a charge of 239 mln dlrs for
  discontinued operations. Earnings from continuing retail
  operations in the quarter totalled 270 mln dlrs or 2.00 dlrs a
  share compared with 249.4 mln dlrs or 1.91 dlrs a year ago.
      K Mart Chairman Bernard Fauber said "the success of these
  programs is better illustrated by the strong 35.9 pct increase
  in 1986 income from continuing operations before income taxes
  to 1.03 billion dlrs, the first time K Mart Corp has reached
  this milestone."
      Sales for the 1986 fiscal year reached a record 23.8
  billion dlrs, an 8.1 pct rise from 22.04 billion dlrs the prior
  year. K Mart said 1985 was restated to account for discontinued
  operations. Comparable store sales rose 5.5 pct in 1986 over
  1985, it said.
      Fauber said the sales growth came from greater consumer
  acceptance of K Mart's apparel merchandise, "a marked increase
  in hardline merchandise sales and a growing contribution from
  specialty retailing operations."
      K Mart said its fourth quarter pre-tax income from
  continuing operations was 493 mln dlrs, a 32.3 pct gain from
  372.6 mln dlrs last year. It said sales in the period grew 8.8
  pct to 7.23 billion dlrs from a restated 6.65 billion dlrs in
  1985 with comparable store sales up 4.7 pct.
      K Mart said its effective tax rate rose in 1986 to 44.6 pct
  from 37.6 pct in 1985. But it said selling, general and
  administrative expense eased to 23.2 pct of sales from 23.7 pct
  in 1985.
      "Our performance in 1986 marks a major turning point for K
  Mart," Fauber said in a statement.
      "In the years immediately prior to 1986, we focused on
  changing the look of our stores and the structure of the
  company."
      K Mart, he said, committed billion of dollars for store
  remodeling and installing a centralized point of sale system,
  upgraded its merchandise mix, acquired three large specialty
  retailers, divested underperforming businesses and restructured
  its long-term debt.
      "We were forced to pay a temporary price in the form of
  slower earnings growth and a lower rating by the investment
  community. However, beginning with the fourth quarter of 1985,
  our improved performance is proof that our approach is correct
  for the long term," the K Mart chairman said.
  

DAINIPPON INK TO INVEST IN QUIXOTE &lt;QUIX>
  Quixote Corp said Dainippon Ink and
  Chemicals Inc of Japan will buy 526,315 shares of Quixote
  common stock, a 6.7 pct stake, for 10 mln dlrs, or 19 dlrs a
  share.
      It said the two companies also agreed to share the results
  of their research and development activities in optical disc
  technology.
      Dainippon Inc's optical disc technology focuses on the
  development of a new Direct-Read-After-Write optical disc and
  an advanced erasable optical disc.
      Quixote said its wholly owned subsidiary, LaserVideo Inc,
  is making advancements in the art of mastering and
  manufacturing Compact Discs, CD-ROMs and laser-read videodiscs.
      Quixote said the agreement with Dainippon, which has annual
  sales of more than two billion dlrs, provides for a Dainippon
  representative to sit on the LaserVideo board of directors.
  

CIRCUIT CITY STORES INC &lt;CC> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 1-1/2 cts vs 1-1/2 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record March 30
  

KNOLL TO BUY AMERICAN SAVINGS &lt;AAA> SHARES
  American Savings and Loan Association of
  Florida said &lt;Knoll International Holdings Inc> has offered to
  purchase 500,000 new shares of American Savings for 10 mln
  dlrs, and the board has accepted Knoll's offer.
      Knoll already owns 796,413 shares or 9.9 pct of American
  Savings.
      American Savings said the purchase will resolve a
  previously-announced disagreement between American Savings and
  the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta on the replacement of the
  capital American Savings used to repurchase common shares in
  January 1985 from former chairman Marvin L. Warner.
      It said completion of the transaction would give Knoll 15
  pct ownership in American Savings.
      American Savings said Knoll also had talks with chairman of
  the executive committee Shepard Broad and chairman Morris Broad
  on the purchase of their American Savings shares as well at 20
  dlrs each but no agreement was reached.
      American Savings said The company said Knoll's offer to buy
  the new shares is not conditioned on other purchase of common
  stock from any person or entity.
      It said its previously-announced engagement of Salomon Inc
  &lt;SB> to evaluate alternatives to enhance shareholder values,
  including the possible sale of American Savings, is still being
  actively pursued.
  

JIM WALTER CORP &lt;JWC> REGULAR DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 35 cts vs 35 cts in prior qtr
      Payable April one
      Record March 14
  

IGENE BIOTECHNOLOGY &lt;IGNE> FINDS CROP LOSS AID
  IGENE Biotechnology Inc said its
  research teams at Auburn and Hebrew universities have found its
  patented pesticide is highly effective in combating a disease
  reponsible for approximately three billion dlrs in annual crop
  losses.
      The company said it learned ClandoSan controls nematodes,
  deadly plant pathogens formerly controlled by now-banned
  synthetic chemicals.
      Varieties of the deadly disease attack major cash crops
  such as cotton, vegetables, orchard trees, citrus fruits, and
  garden plants, the company said.
  

PHILLIPS &lt;P> TO EMPHASIZE CASH FLOW TO PARE DEBT
  Phillips Petroleum Co will emphasize
  improving its short-term cash flow this year to pare its debt,
  C.J. "Pete" Silas, chairman, told Reuters in an interview.
      "Our priority is to get cash flow increased from the assets
  already installed," he said, but he declined to estimate annual
  cash flow for 1987.
      Analysts estimate Phillips" cash flow at over one billion
  dlrs for 1987, while long term debt, which resulted from
  restructuring to find off corporate raiders in 1985, hovers
  about 5.9 billion dlrs as of December 1986.
       Silas said Phillips hope to achieve its goal by raising
  the capital expenditures budget to develop its oil and gas
  properties.
      "We plan to develop the properties with short-term high cash
  flow prospects," he said. He projected a capital expenditure
  budget of 730 mln dlrs, up from the 1986 expenditure of 655 mln
  dlrs.
      Nearly half of that will be spent on exploration and
  production, and most of that will be spend overseas, Silas
  said.
      "Phillips' top priority in 1987 will be to get the
  waterflooding in Norway and jack up the (Ekofisk) oil fields to
  improve our ability to extract oil and increase earnings," Silas
  said.
       Phillips estimates that the project, which is expected to
  cost 1.5 billion dlrs, will increase recovery by 170 mln gross
  barrels of oil over a period of 24 years.
      Phillips is also pursue opportunities in China where Silas
  said he was seeking "a modification of terms with the Chinese
  government to make oil discoveries (in the offshore Xijang
  fields) commercially viable."
      In the U.S. Silas said Phillips hopes to get the Point
  Arguello, Calif., field started up by the fourth quarter. "We
  expect to start up the first platform then," Silas said.
      But emphasis on short-term cash flow has also forced the
  company to part with several oil and gas assets.
      Phillips sold its interests in the T-Block in the U.K.
  North Sea and U.S. reserves totaling about 1.3 billion dlrs in
  1986 as part of a two billion dlrs asset sales program that is
  now completed, Silas said.
       "We sold high cost producing assets. They were not good
  value for us but possibly so for someone else," Silas said.
      Silas said the 1986 assets sales will not affect earnings
  for the company.
      "Everything we are doing is to manage our cash flow and we
  are using that to manage our debt. Even the asset sales, while
  regrettable, were necessary to reduce debt," Silas said.
      He said no asset sales are planned this year as long as oil
  prices don't fall sharply lower and stay at lower levels  for
  several months. "Then, everyone would be looking at sales (of
  assets), and we're no different from the others," Silas said.
      In other areas, Silas looks for improved earnings from
  Phillips chemical operations, which provided 299 mln dlrs in
  earnings for 1986, up from 219 mln dlrs in 1985.
      "This was our second best year pushed by a good supply and
  demand balance for products, low feedstocks and energy costs
  for our operations," Silas said, "In 1987 we think the market's
  supply and demand balance will be just as good but feedstock
  and energy costs will rise due to price recovery."
  

MERRILL LYNCH&lt;MER> CANADA MULLS BUYING BROKER
  Merrill Lynch Canada Inc, wholly owned
  by Merrill Lynch and Co, is considering acquiring another
  Canadian securities company as the result of federal and
  provincial government moves to lift investment dealer ownership
  restrictions on June 30, according to a published report.
      "We're talking to a number of people," Merrill Lynch Canada
  deputy chairman E. Duff Scott told The Toronto Star. "Whether
  we're going to do something, I don't know," he said.
      A Merrill Lynch Canada spokesman declined to comment on the
  newspaper report when queried.
      Scott did not disclose which investment dealers Merrill
  Lynch Canada was considering acquiring, but the Toronto Star
  quoted unidentified industry sources as saying serious
  discussions have already been held with Burns Fry Ltd.
      Burns Fry chairman Jack Lawrence told the newspaper the
  investment dealer has not made a final decision, but was
  examining "three or four alternatives."
      Discussions between brokers about possible mergers is to be
  expected pending industry deregulation, one investment industry
  source, who asked not to be named, told Reuters.
      "It's silly not to take a look (at making a merger or
  acquisition). If you're a businessman, you have to take a look,"
  the industry source said.
      Under federal and provincial government regulations
  expected to be in place by June 30, banks, trust companies and
  foreign companies will be allowed to acquire existing
  investment dealers or establish their own securities
  subsidiaries.
  

MOST AMERICAN AGGREGATES &lt;AMAG> STOCK ACQUIRED
  &lt;Consolidated Gold Fields
  PLC>'s ARC America Corp subsidiary said it has acquired
  7,521,643 American Aggregates Corp shares, about 95 pct of
  those outstanding, as a result of its tender offer which
  expired February 27.
      As soon as is practicable, ARC America will acquire
  American Aggregates, converting the company's remaining shares
  into the right to receive 30.625 dlrs a share.
  

BIOTECH CAPITAL &lt;BITC> TO BUY MAGAZINE
  Biotech Capital Corp said it agreed to
  buy High Technology magazine from the Goldhirsh Group of
  Boston.
      Terms were not disclosed.
      The magazine publishes information about emerging
  technologies and their impact on business. It has a circulation
  of 200,000 and is the largest of its kind in the world, the
  company said.
  

PAKISTAN'S TRADE DEFICIT NARROWS IN FEBRUARY
  Pakistan's trade deficit narrowed to
  2.64 billion rupees (provisional) in February 1987 from 2.85
  billion (final) in January and compared with 2.94 billion in
  February 1986, the Federal Bureau of Statistics figures show.
      Exports fell to 5.04 billion rupees (provisional) in
  February from 5.34 billion (final) in January and compared with
  3.90 billion in February 1986.
      Imports fell to 7.68 billion rupees (provisional) in
  February from 8.19 billion (final) in January and compared with
  6.84 billion in February 1986.
  

CORRECTED-INSITUFORM OF NORTH AMERICA INC&lt;INSUA>
  4th qtr
      Shr nine cts vs four cts
      Net 658,159 vs 299,930
      Revs 3,770,341 vs 2,614,224
      Avg shrs 7,382,802 vs 6,747,442
      Year
      Oper shr 33 cts vs 18 cts
      Oper net 2,287,179 vs 1,045,799
      Revs 13.1 mln vs 8,577,853
      Avg shrs 6,874,505 vs 5,951,612
      NOTE: 1985 year net excludes 13,000 dlr tax credit.
      Corrects March 11 item to exclude tax credit
  

DIAGNOSTIC &lt;DRS> MAKES A BID FOR ROSPATCH &lt;RPCH>
  Diagnostic Retrieval Systems Inc
  said it has made an offer to acquire, through a wholly owned
  unit, all outstanding shares of Rospatch Corp's common stock
  for 22 dlrs a share cash, or about 53 mln dlrs.
      DRS, a warfare systems producer, said it would make the
  transaction through a cash tender offer for all, but not less
  than 51 pct, of Rospatch's outstanding common stock followed by
  a merger with Rospatch, a labels, high technology and wood
  producer, at the same purchase price per share.
      DRS said the deal is subject to approval by the Rospatch
  board, and the tender offer expires on March 6, 1986.
  

COLGATE-PALMOLIVE CO &lt;CL> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 34 cts vs 34 cts prior
      Pay May 15
      Record April 24
  

CO-OPERATIVE BANCORP &lt;COBK> RAISES QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 12-1/2 cts vs 10 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record March 31
  

WILCOX AND GIBBS INC &lt;WG> SETS PAYOUT
  Semi div 7-1/2 cts vs 7-1/2 cts prior
      Pay April 30
      Record March 31
  

SAUDI OUTPUT SAID AT YEAR LOW TO HELP OPEC
  Saudi Arabian oil output has fallen to
  its lowest level in more than a year, giving fresh evidence of
  the kingdom's determination to keep oil prices at 18 dlrs a
  barrel, as agreed by Opec last December, oil industry sources
  said.
      They said Saudi output in the first eight days of March
  averaged 2.6 mln barrels per day (bpd) including oil from the
  neutral zone shared with Kuwait, compared to a February average
  of 3.5 mln bpd.
      They said Saudi Arabia was also selling oil from its crude
  oil stocks in tankers around the world, which OPEC says must be
  counted towards a member's production quota. Saudi Arabia's
  quota is 4.133 mln bpd.
      The lower production levels indicated Saudi Arabia, the
  world"s largest oil exporter, was insisting on getting Opec
  official prices, even at the cost of lower production, the
  sources said.
      King Fahd reiterated yesterday, in an interview with
  Reuters and the television news agency Visnews, the Saudi
  commitment to OPEC's December pact to boost oil prices to an
  average 18 dlrs.
      "Saudi Arabia is completely sticking to OPEC decisions," he
  said.
      The sources said the kingdom's exports from Gulf ports
  averaged one mln bpd during the eight days ending last Sunday,
  down from a February average of 1.9 mln bpd.
      They said Saudi Arabia was allowing production to fluctuate
  with lifting nominations and was not trying to maintain
  artificially high levels by putting oil into storage.
      The kingdom's main buyers, the four U.S. Oil firms with
  past stakes in the national oil company Aramco -- Mobil, Exxon,
  Texaco and Chevron -- enjoy considerable flexibility in the
  timing and volume of their liftings but are bound to pay
  official prices, the sources said.
      Spot market prices have firmed in the past two weeks but
  still remain below OPEC levels and major buyers have delayed
  liftings in the hope they would improve, the sources said.
      They expected low early March output to pick up towards the
  end of the month as buyers sought to fulfill their contractual
  obligations.
  

LEADER &lt;LDCO> BUYS PETROSURANCE STAKE
  Leader Development Corp said it
  has purchased 300,000 shares of convertible preferred stock in
  &lt;Petrosurance Inc> for 1,500,000 dlrs in cash and real estate.
      Petrosurance specializes in property and casualty insurance
  for the oil industry.
      Leader said the stock is convertible into a Petrosurance
  common. Leader said it already owns 12.5 pct of Petrorusrance
  and conversion would give it about 45.0 pct.
      The company said Petrosurance will use the sale proceeds to
  support growth and improve the structure of its reinsurance
  treaties to retain a larger part of premiums written.
  

RECORD N.Z. FUTURES VOLUMES TRADED IN FEBRUARY
  The volume of contracts traded on the
  New Zealand Futures Exchange (NZFE) reached a record 25,559
  contracts in February, the International Commodities Clearing
  House (ICCH) said.
      The previous high was 22,583 contracts in December 1986.
      The ICCH said the value of the contracts traded in February
  was 2.90 billion N.Z. Dlrs.
      The seven contracts currently traded on the NZFE are:
  five-year government bonds, the share price index, 90-day bank
  bills, 90-day prime commercial paper, the U.S. Dollar,
  crossbred wool, and wheat.
  

FEDERAL REALTY INVESTMENT TRUST &lt;FRT> IN PAYOUT
  Qtly div 27 cts vs 27 cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record March 25
  

WHITE HOUSE WELCOMES RETAIL SALES FIGURES
  The White House welcomed the
  February retail sales figures showing a 4.1 pct rise, following
  a slow performance in January.
      Spokesman Marlin Fitzwater told reporters: "The February
  sales growth was broad-based and good news for the economy."
      Commerce Department figures showed a larger than expected
  rise following depressed levels of sales and factory orders in
  January.
  

BEAUTICONTROL COSMETICS INC &lt;BUTI> 1ST QTR NET
  Qtr ends Feb 28
      Shr 10 cts vs 17 cts
      Net 411,275 vs 584,118
      Revs 4,977,818 vs 4,714,581
  

OLD DOMINION SYSTEMS INC &lt;ODSI> 1ST QTR JAN 31
  Shr loss 11 cts vs profit five cts
      Net loss 279,726 vs profit 76,591
      Revs 1,300,000 vs 2,200,000
  

SWEDEN SETS OCTOBER DEADLINE FOR S.AFRICA BOYCOTT
  Sweden announced its promised program
  of unilateral economic sanctions against South Africa and gave
  firms an October deadline to cut trading links.
      Foreign Trade Minister Anita Gradin said a trade boycott of
  South Africa and neighbouring Namibia would take effect from
  July 1, followed by a three-month period of grace to give
  companies time to wind down their operations.
      From October 1, no direct trade would be allowed in either
  direction, with certain exceptions covering medical supplies
  and printed matter, Gradin told a news conference.
      She said exceptions would also be granted in cases where a
  Swedish trade boycott would benefit South African firms and
  disadvantage South Africa's black-ruled neighbours, the
  front-line states.
      Gradin cautioned that legislation upon which the boycott
  would be based was not impossible to get round. She said a
  parliamentary committee would investigate ways of closing some
  of the bigger loopholes, including indirect trade with South
  Africa via Swedish subsidiaries in third countries.
  

FIDELITY NATIONAL FINANCIAL INC &lt;FNF> 1ST QTR
  Jan 31 end
      Shr profit 49 cts vs loss not given
      Net profit 1,360,000 vs loss 241,000
      Revs 20.8 mln vs 14.3 mln
      Avg shrs 2,760,000 vs 1,970,000
  

BRITISH TELECOM CAUTIOUS ON EARNINGS PROSPECTS
  British Telecommunications Plc's &lt;BTY.L>
  profit growth prospects for the coming years will be reduced by
  increasing competition and continued costs for replacing old
  telephone systems, deputy chairman Graeme Odgers said.
      Speaking at a news conference on the third quarter results
  which were released earlier today, Odgers said the company
  faced heavy costs for installing new digital telephone systems
  in Britain for three to five years.
      He said &lt;Mercury Communications Ltd>, a Cable and Wireless
  Plc &lt;CAWL.L> subsidiary, was becoming a significant competitor.
      Odgers said Mercury was seeking to make inroads into some
  of British Telecom's most profitable areas.
      One company official privately estimated that British
  Telecom still had a 99 pct share of the U.K. Telecommunications
  market but feared that this could slip to 95 or 90 pct.
      The recent two-and-a-half-week engineering strike, which
  lead to some disruption in service, could well have encouraged
  clients to consider using the Mercury system, Odgers said.
      However, he forecast that the last quarter's results
  overall should not be adversely affected by the walkout.
      He calculated salary savings as a result of the strike at
  50 mln stg and while loss of income on telephone calls should
  be limited revenue probably dropped on peripheral activities.
      But on balance Odgers said that group's financial strength,
  economies of scale and the fact that it operates in a growth
  industry will help produce annual profit increases for the
  forseeable future.
      British Telecom will also seek to expand into
  manufacturing, he said, adding that research and development
  expenditure will rise both in terms of value and compared with
  the current proportion of two pct of overall turnover.
      Analysts said the company's downbeat forecasts helped
  shares dip to 242p in mid-afternoon, down 4p from yesterday's
  close and off an early high of 248p.
      Philip Augar of stockbrokers Wood Mackenzie and Co Ltd said
  the market expects slower profit growth, but forecast a seven
  to eight pct rise in both earnings per share and pretax profit
  over the next two years. In the 1985/86 financial year, pre-tax
  profit rose to 1.81 billion stg from 1.48 billion.
      Augar noted that a government-imposed formula linking
  charges to inflation meant that the company's scope for raising
  prices was limited as long as inflation remains low.
  

NO NEAR TERM BRAZIL COFFEE MOVES EXPECTED
  The Brazilian Coffee Institute,
  IBC, is unlikely to disclose its future export policy until the
  end of next week at the earliest, trade sources said.
      IBC president Jorio Dauster is meeting government
  ministers, producers, exporters and market analysts to assess
  Brazil's position in the light of the failure of talks in
  London earlier this month to set new International Coffee
  Organization, ICO, export quotas.
      "The failure of the talks means Brazil has got to rethink
  its position completely," one Santos exporter said.
      A meeting of the National Coffee Policy Council is set for
  Thursday, March 19, and Dauster will almost certainly explain
  his plan to members then before announcing any new measures.
      Dauster told reporters on his return from London last week
  that no decisions would be made on exports before he had held
  talks with all sectors of the industry.
      Exporters said Dauster is not under any great pressure to
  start marketing coffee immediately. World prices have been
  recovering from the lows which followed the collapse of the ICO
  talks and Brazil has sold a reasonable 5.5 mln bags of 60 kilos
  for export in the first four months of this year.
      The exporters said the key factor in the eventual opening
  of May and June export registrations will be the amount at
  which the contribution quota is set.
      With little expectation of other sales incentive mechanisms
  such as discounts, bonuses and price fall guarantees being
  introduced, the level of the quota will be decisive in
  determining the competitiveness of Brazilian coffee on world
  markets, they said.
      They noted that on February 16, the eve of a planned
  increase in the quota, April registrations were opened and
  closed after 1.68 mln bags were registered for export, a record
  amount for a single day.
      If May/June registrations are opened under similar
  conditions as before, Brazil would have no difficulty in
  selling at least 2.0 mln bags per month.
      "The problem would be how to limit sales," one exporter said.
      Brazil's present foreign trade and payments problems mean
  there are pressures from the government to boost exports to
  maximise foreign exchange earnings.
      However, the sources said they expect the IBC to adopt a
  marketing strategy aimed at regaining Brazil's dominant
  position as an exporter, but without causing a price war.
      General opinion among exporters was that Brazil would plan
  to export between 17 and 18 mln bags this year of which between
  1.5 and 2.0 mln would be to non-members of the ICO.
      The 15.5 mln to 16 mln bags sold to members would be around
  the figure Brazil had offered to ship if ICO quotas were
  reintroduced, although Dauster has said this offer expired with
  the breakdown of talks.
      With the prospects of a crop of at least 28 mln bags this
  year, Brazil has the capacity to export up to 20 mln bags after
  meeting local consumption of around 7.0 mln, the sources added.
      However, the sources said Brazil is unlikely even to
  consider exporting such quantities, as this would almost
  inevitably lead to a fall in world prices as Brazil tried to
  encroach on other producers' markets.
      Maximum export earnings would be achieved by orderly
  marketing of traditional amounts, thus re-establishing Brazil's
  market share after last year's unusually low exports of 9.9 mln
  bags, enabling it to rebuild stocks and maintaining cordial
  relations with the producer group which backed Brazil's stance
  at the ICO talks, they added.
  

TENNEY ENGINEERING INC &lt;TNY> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr two cts vs nine cts
      Net 86,469 vs 325,937
      Revs 5,119,637 vs 6,390,995
      12 mths
      Shr 10 cts vs 33 cts
      Net 354,820 vs 1,148,476
      Revs 21.2 mln vs 23.2 mln
  

FED NOT EXPECTED TO ADD RESERVES
  The Federal Reserve is not expected to
  intervene in the government securities market today, several
  economists said.
      They said the Fed does not have a much of an adding need
  this week and may wait until tomorrow or Monday before
  supplying reserves.
      But a few economists said there was an outside chance that
  the Fed may inject reserves indirectly via a small round of
  customer repurchase agreements.
      Federal funds hovered at 6-1/8 pct this morning after
  averaging 6.32 pct yesterday.
  

MODERN CONTROLS INC &lt;MOCON> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 10 cts vs 11 cts
      Net 226,000 vs 236,000
      Sales 1.3 mln vs 1.5 mln
      Year
      Shr 38 cts vs 45 cts
      Net 819,000 vs 1,001,000
      Sales 5.8 mln vs 6.4 mln
  

INSTINET &lt;INET> SETS MEETING ON MERGER
  Instinet Corp said its board has
  scheduled a special shareholders' meeting for May 21 to vote on
  its proposed merger into Reuters Holdings PLC &lt;RTRSY>.
      It said shareholders of record as of April 10 will be
  eligible to vote at the meeting.
      Instinet said the meeting date is subject to adjustment,
  based on the length of time needed for the U.S. Securities and
  Exchange Commission to complete its review of the filing of
  merger proxy materials, which Instinet expects to make before
  the end of March.
      Instinet said the filing of the preliminary merger proxy
  materials is tied to the finalization of audited financial
  statements of Instinet and Reuters for 1986.
      Under a merger agreement entered into in November, Reuters
  tendered for up to 5.10 mln Instinet common shares, or about 45
  pct of those not already owned by Reuters. As a result of the
  tender, Reuters now owns about 49 pct of Instinet shares.
      In the merger, holders of remaining Instinet shares will
  receive 8.50 dlrs of Reuters American Depositary Shares for
  each Instinet share.
      The ADS's will be valued at the average of their closing
  prices in the 10 trading days before the effective date of the
  merger.
      Instinet said it expects the merger to become effective as
  soon as possible after shareholder approval at the special
  meeting.
  

EC GRANTS 5,000 TONNES SOFT WHEAT EXPORT  LICENCES AT 134.75 ECU REBATE - BRUSSELS TRADE

  EC GRANTS 5,000 TONNES SOFT WHEAT EXPORT  LICENCES AT 134.75 ECU REBATE - BRUSSELS TRADE
  

DAYTON HUDSON CORP 4TH QTR OPER SHR 1.24 DLRS VS 1.55 DLRS

  DAYTON HUDSON CORP 4TH QTR OPER SHR 1.24 DLRS VS 1.55 DLRS
  

EC GRANTS LICENCES FOR 35,000 TONNES  BARLEY AT 137.35 ECUS REBATE - BRUSSELS TRADE

  EC GRANTS LICENCES FOR 35,000 TONNES  BARLEY AT 137.35 ECUS REBATE - BRUSSELS TRADE
  

UNION PACIFIC SAYS WILL SIGN PACT IN CARACAS ON MARCH 17 FOR SALE OF HALF ITS CORPUS CHRISTI REFINERY

  UNION PACIFIC SAYS WILL SIGN PACT IN CARACAS ON MARCH 17 FOR SALE OF HALF ITS CORPUS CHRISTI REFINERY
  

CYACQ OFFERS TO RAISE CYCLOPS BUYOUT TO 92.50 DLRS/SHR FROM 80 DLRS

  CYACQ OFFERS TO RAISE CYCLOPS BUYOUT TO 92.50 DLRS/SHR FROM 80 DLRS
  

WASTE MANAGEMENT SAYS WAITING PERIOD ENDS ON ITS CHEMLAWN BID 

  WASTE MANAGEMENT SAYS WAITING PERIOD ENDS ON ITS CHEMLAWN BID 
  

PETRIE STORES CORP &lt;PST> REGULAR PAYOUT
  Qtrly div 17.5 cts vs 17.5 cts prior
      Pay April 20
      Record April 2
  

UNILEVER FRAGRANCE UNIT HAS LOWER 1986 EARNINGS
  The flavours and
  fragrances firm &lt;Naarden International N.V.>, acquired by
  Anglo-Dutch food and detergents group Unilever Plc N.V. &lt;UN.AS>
  last year, said net profits for 1986 fell 11.4 pct to 19.5 mln
  guilders.
      Naarden said earnings were hit by the fall in the value of
  both the dollar and sterling, noting the figure was in line
  with prior expectations. Net profit was 22.0 mln guilders in
  1985.
      Earnings per share fell to 4.64 guilders from 5.48 in 1985
  on turnover of 627.8 mln, down from 662.6 mln. Naarden set a
  cash dividend of 1.80 guilders, unchanged from last year but
  without last year's share option for payment.
  

EAGLE-PITCHER INDUSTRIES INC &lt;EPI> 1ST QTR NET
  Shr 81 cts vs 81 cts
      Net 8,750,024 vs 7,772,932
      Revs 157.6 mln vs 162.4 mln
      Avg shrs 10.8 mln vs 9.6 mln
  

PORTUGAL GRAIN AGENCY BARRED FROM IMPORT TENDERS
  A Portuguese court has made a
  preliminary ruling that the state grain buying agency EPAC
  should not be allowed to take part in public import tenders
  open to private importers, grain traders and officials said.
      Under the terms of Portugal's January 1986 accession to the
  European Community, EC, a grain import monopoly held by EPAC
  (Empresa Publica de Abastecimento de Cereais) is being reduced
  by 20 pct annually until all imports are liberalised in 1990.
      Private traders protested last year that EPAC was being
  permitted to take part in tenders open to them for the first
  liberalised 20 pct share of the country's annual import needs.
  The grain and oilseed importers association ACICO opened legal
  proceedings to stop EPAC participating in the public tenders.
      Miguel Ascensao of ACICO told Reuters that Lisbon's civil
  court, in a preliminary ruling, had decided EPAC should not be
  allowed to take part in tenders open to private traders.
      Trade sources said the ruling, though effective
  immediately, was subject to appeal and would have to be
  confirmed in further proceedings.
      A member of the government Cereals Market Commission said
  that, as a result of the court's decision, the Commission would
  not be able to accept offers from EPAC in a public tender being
  held today for the import of 80,000 tonnes of corn.
      Ascensao said the court ruling stated that EPAC's
  participation in the public tenders violated the clauses of
  Portugal's EC accession treaty dealing with the gradual
  dismantling of the state agency's import monopoly.
      It also said the participation of EPAC, which still
  controls the national grain storage and distribution network,
  was unfair competition to the private traders.
      Traders said they believed the EC's Executive Commission
  was unlikely to get involved in the dispute, preferring to
  leave the case to be resolved as an internal Portuguese issue.
      "They (the EC Commission) will be keeping a low profile," one
  trader said.
      ACICO says it is ready to take its case to Brussels if
  necessary.
  

U.S. RETAIL SALES RISE MASKS WEAK TREND - ANALYSTS
  U.S. retail sales rose sharply in
  February but many economists said the underlying consumer
  spending trend remains weak.
      February retail sales jumped 4.1 pct, more than the 2.5-3.0
  pct rise the financial markets had anticipated. But January's
  sales were revised down to a 7.4 pct drop, from a previously
  reported 5.8 pct decline.
      "The trend is toward continued spending but certainly at a
  much more sluggish pace," said Don Maude of Midland Montagu
  Capital Markets Inc.
      Maude averaged out the wide swings in the retail sales data
  over past four months to show that the pace of consumer
  spending is slowing.
      Combining the latest data with a 0.6 pct drop in November
  and a 4.6 pct gain in December, the average retail sales gain
  over the four months was 0.2 pct, he said, compared to to a 0.4
  pct rise for year-over-year sales through February.
      "You can see a pattern developing," Maude said. "I wouldn't
  be surprised to see a fall-off in March, especially since sales
  probably won't be boosted by auto sales as they were in
  February."
      Despite the weak underlying trend, economists were
  impressed by a robust 1.5 pct gain in total sales excluding
  autos in February. This compared to a revised 0.4 pct decline
  in January, previously reported as a 0.1 pct decline.
      "The increase in non-auto sales was broadbased, with gains
  in durable goods as well as non-durables," noted Ward McCarthy
  of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets Inc. "It was a pretty healthy
  report."
      He noted that building materials rose 1.8 pct in February
  after falling 1.7 pct in January. General merchandise store
  sales gained 1.4 pct after a 1.6 pct rise in January.
      "There are signs of life in the economy," McCarthy said.
  "But it's jumping to conclusions to extrapolate this report
  into the future." 
      A 0.7 pct increase in disposable personal income in January
  which may be linked to the new tax laws probably helped boost
  spending in February, he said.
      "A lot of people may be inadvertently under-withholding
  taxes from their paychecks," he said. "When people in this
  country get an increase in disposable income, the inclination
  is to go out and spend it," he said.
      Economists said tomorrow's release of U.S. auto sales for
  the first 10 days of March will be an important indicator of
  how much this sector will add to first quarter spending.
       Auto sales accounted for the lion's share of total
  February sales, rising 14.4 pct. This followed a 27.7 pct drop
  in January, previously reported as a 22.4 pct fall, due largely
  to the expiration of the sales tax deduction under new tax laws
  January 1, the Commerce Department noted.
      Some economists argued that the because the gain in total
  sales excluding autos also followed a decline in January, the
  strength in the February report is less than impressive.
      "There is strength in the February data, but that's because
  they were compared to low sales levels in January," said said
  Beth Reiners of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. "We don't see it as a
  precursor of continued strength."
      Durable goods sales rose 8.8 pct in February, after falling
  17.7 pct in January. February non-durable goods sales gained
  1.3 pct, after declining 0.2 pct in January.
      Gasoline service station sales rose two pct in February,
  following a 1.9 pct gain in January, but economists said higher
  oil prices rather than an increased volume of gas sales
  probably accounted for these gains.
      Reiners also emphasized that the trend in consumer spending
  is weakening. Total retail sales on average were 123 billion
  dlrs in the fourth quarter of 1986, she said. In January, they
  fell to a seasonally adjusted 117.52 bilion dlrs, and in
  February rose to 122.29 billion dlrs.
      "On average, it looks like they'll total 120 to 121 mln
  dlrs in the first quartrer," she said. "We don't look at this
  as indication that the economy is barrelling along."
      "The number is not really that problematic for those of us
  who are constructive on the bond market," agreed Elliot Platt
  of Donaldsen Lufkin and Jenrette Securities Corp.
      Platt does not foresee potential for tighter monetary
  policy on the basis of the latest retail sales report.
      "The Fed is on hold now because the data have been so
  confusing," he said.
      "Before the 337,000 gain in February non-farm payroll
  employment, I would have looked for a discount rate cut in
  March," he said. "But now Fed officials will have to wait for
  the first quarter real U.S. gross national product data in
  April to sort things out."
  

MAGMA &lt;MGCPV> SEES PROFITABLE COPPER PRODUCTION
  Newmont Mining Corp &lt;NEM> said Magma
  Copper Co anticipates being able to produce copper at a profit
  by 1991, assuming copper prices remain at their current levels.
      In an information statement distributed to Newmont
  shareholders explaining the dividend of Magma shares declared
  Tuesday, Newmont said Magma had a net loss of 46.6 mln dlrs in
  1986, adding this was equal to 1.22 cts a share.
      Newmont holders will receive 80 pct of Magma's stock as a
  dividend of one share for each of the 30,458,000 Newmont shares
  now held. Newmont will retain 15 pct of the stock.
      The 1986 net loss was on a pro forma basis, Newmont said.
  On a historical basis, it added, Magma had a 1986 net loss of
  58.1 mln dlrs on a loss from operations of 42.3 mln dlrs.
      On Dec 31, 1986, Newmont said, Magma had about 85.0 mln
  dlrs of net operating loss carryforwards expiring in 1999-2000
  and about 4.0 mln dlrs of investment tax credit carryover
  expiring in 2000-2001.
      Newmont said Magma has pre-tax losses of 290 mln dlrs
  during the 1981 through 1985 period, noting the five major U.S.
  primary copper producers reported aggregate pre-tax losses of
  1.9 billion dlrs during five year period.
      Newmont said Magma had total sales of 347.3 mln dlrs last
  year, including copper sales of 293.4 mln dlrs.
      It said the copper sales value was up from 267.6 mln dlrs
  in 1985 reflecting a 10.1 pct increase in quantity sold to
  212,000 short tons and a 0.4 pct decrease in price.
  

RPT-INSITUFORM OF NORTH AMERICA INC &lt;INSUA> NET
  4th qtr
      Shr nine cts vs four cts
      Net 658,159 vs 299,930
      Revs 3,770,341 vs 2,614,224
      Avg shrs 7,382,802 vs 6,747,442
      Year
      Oper shr 33 cts vs 18 cts
      Oper net 2,287,179 vs 1,045,799
      Revs 13.1 mln vs 8,577,853
      Avg shrs 6,874,505 vs 5,951,612
      NOTE: 1985 year net excludes 131,000 dlr tax credit.
  

FED SAYS IT SETS TWO BILLION DLRS OF CUSTOMER REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS

  FED SAYS IT SETS TWO BILLION DLRS OF CUSTOMER REPURCHASE AGREEMENTS
  

EC COMMISSION GRANTS EXPORT LICENCES - TRADE
  The European Community's, EC, cereal
  management committee granted export licences for 5,000 tonnes
  of quality soft bread-making wheat at a maximum export rebate
  of 134.75 European currency units, Ecus, per tonne, traders
  said.
      The committee also granted export certificates of 35,000
  tonnes of barley at 137.35 Ecus per tonne, but rejected all
  bids for the export of soft feed wheat, they said.
      Certificates were also granted for the export of 15,000
  tonnes of maize at a maximum rebate of 132.90 Ecus per tonne,
  the traders said.
  

GERMAN BANKS SAY UNCERTAINTY ABOUT ECONOMY GROWING
  Uncertainty is growing about the prospects
  for the economy as orders for industry fall and companies scale
  back investment plans, the German Savings Banks and Giro
  Association said.
      Exporters expect foreign demand to remain weak, while
  industry is less optimistic than it was, the association said
  in a report.
      However, last month's agreement among the six leading
  western industrialized countries to keep currencies around
  present levels was expected to be a stabilizing influence for
  exporters, it added.
      The banking association said the possibility of using
  monetary policy to stimulate the economy should not be
  overestimated.
      Another small drop in already low interest rates could not
  be expected to cause any significant rise in purchases of
  consumer or capital goods, it said.
      The Bundesbank's half-point cuts in the discount and
  Lombard rates in January have largely exhausted the scope for
  any further monetary moves, the association added.
      On Tuesday the Federal Statistics Office said gross
  national product stagnated in real, seasonally and calendar
  adjusted terms in the fourth quarter of 1986 compared with the
  third quarter.
      The Economics Ministry, commenting on the figures, said GNP
  in the 1987 first quarter was also expected to be relatively
  weak.
      Bank economists have forecast the economy will either
  stagnate or contract slightly in the first quarter. Official
  first-quarter figures are due in early June.
  

FED ADDS RESERVES VIA CUSTOMER REPURCHASES
  The Federal Reserve entered the U.S.
  Government securities market to arrange two billion dlrs of
  customer repurchase agreements, a spokeswoman said.
      Dealers said Federal funds were trading at 6-1/8 pct when
  the Fed began its temporary and indirect supply of reserves to
  the banking system.
  

WAITING PERIOD ENDS ON WASTE MANAGEMENT&lt;WMX> BID
  Waste Management Inc said it
  received notice of early termination of the Hart-Scott-Rodino
  waiting period for its 270 mln dlr takeover bid for Chemlawn
  Corp &lt;CHEM>.
      The waiting period was terminated March 11, Waste
  Management said.
      Chemlawn has rejected Waste Management's 27 dlrs a share
  bid. It has said it was talking with other parties about
  selling its business.
  

ASA LTD &lt;ASA> 1ST QTR FEB 28 NET
  Shr 1.42 dlrs vs 1.61 dlrs
      Net 13.6 mln vs 15.5 mln
      NOTE: Net asset value per share 77.72 dlrs vs 54.35 dlrs.
  

INVESTORS TO RAISE CYCLOPS &lt;CYL> TENDER PRICE
  Cyacq Corp, an investor group
  bidding for Cyclops Corp, said it would raise its outstanding
  tender offer price for Cyclops common to 92.50 dlrs a share
  from 80 dlrs, if certain conditions were met.
      The increased offer would exceed the 90.25 dlrs a share
  price offered by Dixons Group PLC in a tender offer for Cyclops
  that is part of a definitive agreement to acquire the
  Pittsburgh-based maker of carbon tool and specialty steel
  products.
      Cyacq includes Audio/Video Affiliates Inc and Citicorp
  Capital Investors Ltd and other investors.
      Cyclops has about 4.1 mln shares outstanding.
      For the tender price to be raised, Cyclops must provide
  Cyacq with all non-public information provided to Dixons Group
  and Cyacq must be satisfied with financial projections made in
  offering material by Dixons based on the information, Cyacq
  said.
      Additionally, Dixon Group's rights to buy Cyclops common
  and its rights to fees or expenses if the Dixon-Cyclop merger
  agreement is broken must be rescinded, Cyacq said.
      Cyacq said financial projections it developed for Cyclops
  were materially lower than the financial projections provided
  by Cyclops to Dixons Group.
      A Cyclops spokeswoman said the company had no details of
  the new Cyacq proposal and could not comment. "We have nothing
  in hand," she said.
      In addition to making specialty metal products, Cyclops
  also operates about 115 specialty stores that sell consumer
  electronics products. The stores are located in 17 states
  concentrated in the Northeast, Northwest and Southwest.
      Cyclops employs about 8,900 people in Pennsylvania, Ohio
  and other states. It also has interests in non-residential
  construction.
      In 1986, Cyclops earned 21.3 mln dlrs or 5.26 dlrs a share
  on sales of 1.5 billion dlrs, compared to 1985 earnings of 26.2
  mln dlrs or 6.20 dlrs on sales of 1.4 billion, the spokeswoman
  said.
      The agreement with Dixons Group calls for Cyclops's steel
  and construction businesses to be sold to a unit of Alleghany
  Corp &lt;Y> for about 110 mln dlrs once the merger is completed.
      A Cyacq spokesman said the new conditional tender price
  would be all cash. He had no comment on whether Cyacq plans to
  withdraw its current offer, which is scheduled to expire
  midnight on March six.
      Dixon Group's offer extends to March 17.
  

DAYTON HUDSON CORP&lt;DH> 4TH QTR JAN 31 OPER NET
  Oper shr 1.24 dlrs vs 1.55 dlrs
      Oper net 120,800,000 vs 150,100,000
      Revs 3.12 billion vs 2.74 billion
      Year
      Oper shr 2.62 dlrs vs 2.89 dlrs
      Oper net 255,000,000 vs 280,500,000
      Revs 9.26 billion vs 8.26 billion
      NOTE: 1986 period ended February One
      NOTE: Results exclude earnings from discontinued operations
  of 9.0 mln dlrs, or nine cts a share vs 3.2 mln dlrs, or three
  cts a share in the quarter and 2.1 mln dlrs, or two cts a share
  vs 3.1 mln dlrs, or three cts a share for the year
      1987 earnings exclude gain on sale of B. Dalton Bookseller
  of 85.2 mln dlrs, or 88 cts a share in each period
      1987 earnings exclude extraordinary charge from purchase
  and redemption of debt of 12.6 mln dlrs, or 13 cts a share in
  the quarter and 32.3 mln dlrs, or 33 cts a share for the year
  

INDIA BUYS RBD PALM OLEIN AT TENDER
  The Indian State Trading Corp bought
  one, or possibly two, 6,000 tonne cargoes of Malaysian refined
  bleached deodorised palm olein at its vegetable oil import
  tender today for Mar 15/Apr 15 shipment at 355 dlrs per tonne
  cif, traders said.
  

SPANISH UNEMPLOYMENT RISES IN FEBRUARY
  The number of Spanish registered
  unemployed rose by 15,608 to 2.98 mln or 21.5 pct of the
  workforce in January in the sixth consecutive monthly increase,
  the Labour Ministry said.
      Registered unemployed totalled 2.81 mln or 21.1 pct of the
  workforce in February 1986.
  

VSE CORP &lt;VSEC> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 49 cts vs 39 cts
      Net 886,937 vs 892,323
      Revs 25.9 mln vs 23.7 mln
      Year
      Shr 1.78 dlr vs 1.34 dlr
      Net 3,254,301 vs 2,472,676
      Revs 100.6 mln vs 87.4 mln
      NOTE: 1986 4th qtr and year net includes income loss of
  MetCap subsidiary of 14,881 dlrs and 311,848 dlrs or 17 cts per
  share, respectively.
      1985 4th qtr and year net includes loss in MetCap unit of
  108,598 dlrs and 298,412 dlrs or 16 cts per share,
  respectively.
  

SECURITY PACIFIC &lt;SPC> BUYS ORBANCO &lt;ORBN>
  Security Pacific Corp said it
  completed its previously announced acquisition of Orbanco
  Financial Services Corp after receiving federal approval of the
  deal.
      Security Pacific said the Federal Reserve Board approved on
  Wednesday its purchase of the Portland, Ore.-based bank holding
  company and financial services concern.
      The purchase of Orbanco, for about 47 mln dlrs in cash and
  common stock, will be effective in 30 days, a Security Pacific
  spokeswoman said.
      Terms call for each share of Orbanco common stock to be
  exchanged for about 14 dlrs of Security Pacific common stock,
  plus 1.50 dlrs cash.
      Each share of Orbanco's 100-dlr par value preferred stock
  will be exchanged for 100 dlrs cash, plus accrued dividends.
      Orbanco, with one billion dlrs in assests, is the holding
  company for the Oregon Bank, Orbanco Real Estate Service Co,
  American Data Service Inc and Orbanco Securities Corp.
      Security Pacific now has four major regional bank purchases
  outside California completed or pending.
      Security Pacific bought The Arizona Bank, with assets of
  four billion dlrs, in the fourth quarter of 1986.
      Pending approval currently is the purchase of Rainier
  Bancorporation &lt;RBAN>, with assets of 9.2 billion dlrs. In
  anticipation of legislative changes that take effect in 1989,
  Security Pacific has also negotiated the future purchase of The
  Nevada Bank, with assets of 615 mln dlrs.
      Security Pacific is the sixth largest U.S. bank holding
  company, with assets of about 61.60 billion dlrs.
  

DRANETZ TECHNOLOGIES INC &lt;DRAN> YEAR DEC 31 NET
  Shr 46 cts vs 77 cts
      Qtly div six cts vs six cts prior
      Net 2,198,469 vs 3,635,565
      Revs 23.1 mln vs 26.0 mln
      Note: 1986 net includes one-time charge of 249,000 dlrs or
  five cts a share from discontinuation of Boat Sentry and
  Lakontek products.
      Qtly div payable April 15 to shareholders of record March
  24.
  

U.S. TO ASK FOR SHARE OF JAPAN'S RICE MARKET
  U.S. Agriculture Secretary Richard
  Lyng said he will ask Japan to offer a share of its rice market
  to U.S. exporters when he visits that country next month.
      In an interview with Reuters, Lyng also said the Reagan
  administration will ask Tokyo to remove its quotas on U.S. beef
  and citrus exports.
      Lyng, who plans to be in Japan April 14-27, said he will
  not ask Tokyo to liberalize fully its rice market. "We will urge
  that they consider sharing their rice market," he said.
      The USDA secretary would not say how big a share of the
  Japanese rice market the U.S. would request. "We've got none of
  it now. If we got one per cent of it, it would be a big
  improvement," he said.
      Last year, the Reagan administration rejected a petition by
  the U.S. rice industry seeking relief from Japanese import
  restrictions.
      However, the U.S. said it would reexamine the issue if by
  mid-1987 Japan did not roll back import barriers to U.S. rice
  exports.
      Lyng said he would not be conducting formal negotiations
  next month with Japan over their beef and citrus quotas, but
  that his visit "may be a forerunner in a general way" to talks
  prior to expiration of the bilateral agreement in March 1988.
      He said, however, that the U.S. "will ask for a definite
  liberalization of those items (beef and citrus).... When you
  translate 'liberalization' into Japanese, it means do away with
  the quota."
  

UNION PACIFIC &lt;UNP> TO SELL PART OF REFINERY
  Union Pacific Corp said it will sign a
  pact in Caracas on March 17 with Petroleos De Venezuela, PDVSA,
  to sell the state owned company half of its Corpus Christi,
  Texas refinery owned by its Union Pacific's Champlin Petroleum
  Co subsidiary.
      The sale will also include the related marketing and
  distribution system for the refinery's products.
      A spokesman for the company said that a statement may be
  issued later today giving details of the transaction.
      There was no immediate comment from PDVSA officials in New
  York.
      The Corpus Christi refinery has a capacity of about 160,000
  barrels per day, the Union Pacific spokesman said, and is a
  largely upgraded facility but he would place no value on the
  transaction.
      The additional acquisition of refinery and distribution
  assets by PDVSA has been expected as Venezuela has been moving
  aggressively to enhance its role in the oil industry from
  producer to excpanding its presence in the downstream sector.
      Purchase of part of Champlin's operations also fits a
  profile which PDVSA officials have said previously they looked
  for in any acquisition.
      One PDVSA official said the company was looking for
  independent oil companies with good refinery and distribution
  network and a strong regional presence.
      The potential purchase of the interest in Champlin followed
  its earlier acquisition of a part interest in Southland Corp's
  &lt;SLC> Citgo Petroleum Corp subsidiary.
      In that agreement signed September 15, 1986, PDVSA paid
  Southland 290 mln dlrs for half of Citgo's stock.
      The potetnital acquisition of half Champlin's Corpus
  Christi plant will also give Venezuela an additional outlet for
  its crude oil production while giving the refiner an assured
  source of supply, trade sources said.
      In the earlier deal with Southland, PDVSA agredd to to
  supply Citgo with at least 130,000 bpd of crude oil and other
  feedstocks.
  

LANDS END INC &lt;LEYS> YEAR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 1.46 dlrs vs 1.13 dlrs
      Net 14,650,000 vs 11,270,000
      Sales 265 mln vs 227.1 mln
      Avg shrs 10,020,000 vs 9,980,000
      Note: Earnings are pro forma, including the increase in
  common shares that took place last October when the company
  went public through an initial offering of 1.4 mln shares. Avg
  shrs assume the shares sold to public and employees were
  outstanding during the entire period.
  

BANCROFT &lt;BCF> SUES ZICO
  Zico INvestment Holdings INc said that
  Bancroft Convertible Fund Inc filed suit seeking to enjoin
  Zico's 30 dlr-a-share tender offer for 500,000 Bancroft shares.
      In its complaint, Bancroft said the tender offer materials
  and letters to shareholders are false and misleading and that
  the tender offer violates the investment company act of 1940.
      Zico said the suit is totally without merit and vigorously
  intends to contest it.
      A motion is scheduled to be heard on March 16.
  

SEABOARD CORP &lt;SEB> 31 WEEK YEAR NET
  Shr 14.63 dlrs
      Net 21.8 mln
      Revs 252.9 mln
      NOTE: Company changed its reporting period to Dec 31 from
  May 31. It said prior year comparisons were thus not
  applicable.
  

TURKISH SHIP HEADED FOR FLORIDA AFTER EXPLOSION
  The Turkish ore/bulk/oil vessel Obo
  Engin, 78,078 tonnes dwt, had an explosion in its boiler
  yesterday, Lloyds shipping Intelligence Service reported.
      The vessel has retained some power and yesterday evening
  was in position Lat. 25 57 N., Long. 75 06 W. It is diverting
  to Jacksonville, Florida, with its cargo of 58,000 tons of
  coal.
     The vessel was bound for Iskenderun, Turkey from Lake
  Charles.
  

REUTER INC &lt;REUT> 4TH QTR
  Shr 67 cts vs six cts
      Net 1.6 mln vs 131,630
      Revs 6.5 mln vs 4.5 mln
      Year
      Shr 85 cts vs 19 cts
      Net 2.0 mln vs 427,749
      Revs 25.1 mln vs 17.4 mln
      NOTE: 1986 net includes 1.4 mln dlrs in tax loss carryback.
  Reuter Inc is a spindle maker. It is not connected with Reuters
  Holdings PLC.
  

CENTEL CORP &lt;CNT> REGULAR PAYOUT SET
  Qtly div 62-1/2 cts vs 62-1/2 cts previously
      Pay April 30
      Record April Seven
  

MOBIL &lt;MOB> TO RESTRUCTURE EXPLORATION UNIT
  Mobil Oil Corp said it will
  restructure its Dallas-based Mobil Exploration and Producing
  Services Inc operations April one, to provide stronger
  technological support to its U.S. and overseas operations.
      Mobil said the operation will consist of two new units,
  Technical Services and Application Technology, along with the
  existing Drilling and New Exploration Ventures groups. It said
  R.C. Mills, president and general manager of its Exploration
  and Producing Southeast Inc, has been named vice president and
  general manager of the new operation reporting to P.J.
  Hoenmans, president of its Exploration and Producing division.
  

EQUITY OIL CO &lt;EQTY> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Shr loss nine cts vs profit 11 cts
      Net loss 1,102,592 vs profit 1,364,763
      Revs 2,836,508 vs 5,547,121
      Year
      Shr loss six cts vs profit 32 cts
      Net loss 789,300 vs profit 3,953,822
      Revs 11.7 mln vs 21.1 mln
      NOTE:  Per share figures reflect five pct stock dividend
  paid December 1986.
  

FN RESULTS HIT BY STRIKES, DOLLAR IN 1986
  Fabrique Nationale Herstal SA
  &lt;FNHB.BR> said it suffered a net loss of 2.99 billion francs
  last year after being hit by strikes, the falling dollar and
  declining oil prices.
      An FN statement said the loss, which compared with a 6.8
  mln franc profit the previous year, included considerable
  charges for restructuring in 1986 and 1987. Without these the
  net loss would have been 1.45 billion francs, it said.
      It added that the restructuring plan would allow the firm
  to return to long term profitability once it had been approved
  by local authorities, banks and the workforce.
  

MILLIPORE &lt;MILI> ACQUIRES EQUITY IN PROTEIN
  &lt;Protein Databases
  Inc> said Millipore Corp through its venture capital
  subsidiary, Millicorp, acquired an equity position in the
  company.
      Protein said it and Millipore intend to establish an
  "interactive relationship."
      No other details were disclosed about the amount of
  Millipore's investment in Protein.
  

WILDLIFE UNIT PROPOSES ALASKA REFUGE OIL STUDY
  The National Wildlife Federation 
  rejected an Interior Department draft plan to open wilderness
  lands in Northern Alaska to oil and gas exploration.
      The federation, the nation's largest conservation group,
  said further study was needed to assess any possible damage
  that development might have on the wildlife in the area, the
  coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
      Jay Hair, the federation's executive vice president, called
  the Interior's research into the effects of development "so
  fundamentally flawed that it provides little or no basis on
  which to make a public policy decision."
      Hair called the department's proposal a "reflection of a
  largely political decision," adding "we have no confidence in
  Interior to represent the broad public interest in this area."
      Interior wants to open the 1.5 million acre coastal plain
  to oil and gas exploration, but it said only with tough 
  safeguards to protect the area's caribou and musk-oxen.
      It said a preliminary survey showed the region could hold
  billions of barrels of oil and gas, and that its potential as
  an energy resource would never be known without exploration.
      Interior said oil on the coastal plain could match the 10
  billion barrels found at Prudhoe Bay, just west of the plain.
      Under existing law, Congress must agree to oil and gas
  exploration, and if it does not act, the land will remain a
  wildlife refuge protected from commercial development.
      Hair said Interior's report failed to stress the
  probability that finding recoverable oil is only 19 pct.
      He said Interior's study also failed to weigh oil, gas,
  fish and wildlife information the State of Alaska had gathered
  nor had the department consulted the Environmental Protection
  Agency on the possible effects of exploration.
      The federation, in letters to Congressmen, proposed that a
  nine-member commission be set up to study all aspects of the
  issue and report back to Congress in about two years.
      Hair said the federation was not opposed to the possible
  exploration of oil, only that Interior's study was inadquate to
  make a sound judgement.
      Congressional observers said that at present there was
  little sentiment in Congress to open the wildlife area for
  commercial exploitation dispite increasing concern that the
  United States is becoming overly dependent on foreign oil.
  

&lt;GEMINI FOOD CORP> SIX MTHS JANUARY 31 NET
  Shr profit one ct vs loss one ct
      Net profit 150,594 vs loss 55,352
      Revs 19.0 mln vs 12.4 mln
  

MERRILL LYNCH &lt;MER> FIRES VASKEVITCH
  Merrill Lynch and Co Inc fired the
  head of the mergers department in its London office today,
  saying he had been unable to provide a "satisfactory
  explanation" in response to insider trading charges filed
  yesterday by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
      Merrill had suspended the official, Nahum Vaskevitch,
  yesterday saying at the time it was "disappointed and angry" if
  the SEC charges are true.
      Merrill Lynch's statement at midday today said the firm
  will continue to cooperatie fully with authoriteis in the U.S.
  and London investigating Vaskevitch's activities.
  

LINCOLN NATIONAL CORP &lt;LNC> VOTES DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 54 cts vs 54 cts prior qtr
      Pay 1 May
      Record 10 April
  

ST LAWRENCE SEAWAY TO OPEN ON SCHEDULE
  The St Lawrence Seaway and the Welland
  Canal linking Lakes Erie and Ontario were expected to open as
  scheduled on March 31 and April 1, respectively, a St Lawrence
  Seaway official said.
      The entire Seaway is already free of ice due to the mild
  Winter and could be open for navigation today, "but there
  doesn't seem to be enough demand from shipping companies to
  warrant an early opening," the Canadian official said.
      Repairs are continuing at a stepped up pace on the Welland
  Canal and should be completed by the April 1 start-up date, she
  added.
  

LVI GROUP INC &lt;LVI> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr profit two cts vs loss 19 cts
      Oper net profit 523,000 vs loss 2.2 mln
      Revs 102.5 mln vs 39.9 mln
      12 mths
      Oper shr profit 11 cts vs loss 29 cts
      Oper net profit 2.2 mln vs loss 2.9 mln
      Revs 304.4 mln vs 50.3 mln
      NOTE: All 1986 and last two months of 1985 include results
  of NICO Inc acquired Oct 1985.
      Prior year excludes discontinued operations loss of 14 cts
  per share in the quarter and loss 18 cts a share in the year.
      1986 excludes extraordinary gain of two cts per share in
  the quarter and four cts per share in the year.
  

PROTOCOMDEVICES &lt;PRCM> SEES MORE PROFIT EROSION
  ProtocomDevices Inc said it has seen
  more erosion of its general financial condition since December
  31, and is actively engaged in negotiations to secure
  additional financing. It also said it has undergone a
  restructuring of its management and is instituting further
  staff reductions.
      It said Ramon Morales has relinquished his role as
  president and chief operating officer and assumed the position
  of executive vice president in charge of international sales.
      It also said Rafael Collado has assumed the positions of
  president and chief operating officer in addition to his role
  as chief executive officer.
      For the year ended January 31, 1986, the company had a net
  loss of 51,000 dlrs or 24 cts a share on revenues of 2.8 mln
  dlrs.
  

ICO BOARD MEETING DELAYED ONE DAY
  The International Coffee Organization
  (ICO) executive board meeting scheduled for the end of this
  month has been delayed by one day and will now run from March
  31 to April 2 and not March 30 to April 1, ICO officials said.
      On March 30, the ICO ad hoc working group will meet to
  consider management consultants Ernst &amp; Whinney's report on the
  ICO secretariat. This report was commissioned late last year to
  report on the administrative structure of the ICO.
  

WHITTAKER &lt;WKR> TO HAVE GAINS FROM SALES
  Whittaker Corp said it will have a
  gain on the sale of discontinued businesses after any operating
  losses from the businesses up until the dates of disposition,
  but it will defer reporting the gain until its restructuring
  program hsa been substantially completed.
      The company said in the first quarter ended January 31,m it
  completed the divestiture of its health maintenance
  organization operations to Travelers Corp &lt;TIC> , sold its
  Whittar Steel Strip operations to &lt;DofascoxInc> and sold its
  equity investment in Bertram-Trojan Inc to an affiliate of
  &lt;Investcorp>.
      The company said it has entered into definitive agreements
  to sell Whittaker General Medical Corp, Bennes MArrel SA of
  France and Juster Steel Corp as well.
      The company said to date it has received proceeds of about
  90 mln dlrs from divestitures and has used the funds to reduce
  debt incurred in the repurchase of its common shares.
      Whittaker today reported first quarter earnings from
  continuing operations fell to 1,522,000 dlrs from 3,501,000
  dlrs a year before. The year-earlier figure excluded a
  1,817,000 dlr loss from discontinued operations.
  

PARADISE FRUIT CO INC &lt;PARF> YEAR NET
  Shr 86 cts vs 99 cts
      Net 435,610 vs 497,160
      Sales 16.6 mln vs 17.7 mln
      NOTE: 1986 year net penalized 13 cts shr from loss of
  investment tax credits.
  

SAMSON ENERGY CO LIMITED PARTNERSHIP &lt;SAM> YEAR
  Net loss 14,144,000 vs loss 863,000
      Revs 10.3 mln vs 16.7 mln
      NOTES: 1986 loss includes write-down of 15.1 mln dlrs in
  the carrying value of oil and gas properties taken in the first
  quarter 
      Cash flow from operationswas 6,237,000 dlrs, or 3.01 dlrs
  per unit, vs 9,315,000 dlrs, or 4.56 dlrs per unit
  

LYNG SAYS NO DECISION ON SOVIET EEP OFFER
  U.S. Agriculture Secretary Richard
  Lyng said the Reagan administration had not decided on offering
  the Soviet Union subsidized wheat but that such an offer had
  not been ruled out.
      In an interview with Reuters, Lyng also said that he had no
  knowledge of any upcoming discussion of the matter within the
  cabinet.
      Asked if the administration had ruled out offering to
  subsidize wheat exports to the Soviet Union under the
  department's export enhancement program, Lyng said, "No. We
  haven't made a decision on it, haven't even talked about it,
  haven't even looked at it."
      Reminded that there have been reports that Moscow would buy
  U.S. wheat if competitively priced, Lyng responded, "If they
  (the Soviets) would offer to buy some wheat, would we accept
  it? It would depend on what price they offered."
      Lyng added that he did not think the price of U.S. wheat
  was far off the world price.
      Asked about persistent speculation that the administration
  would offer Moscow a wheat subsidy, Lyng said, "Some people
  think they're doing it to see if they can get a little spurt in
  the market."
      Agriculture Undersecretary Daniel Amstutz last week asked
  the Commodity Futures Trading Commission to investigate reports
  that wheat prices were being manipulated by reports that a U.S.
  wheat subsidy offer was imminent.
  

ACCELERATION CORP &lt;ACLE> 4TH QTR
  Shr 22 cts vs 19 cts
      Net 1.1 mln vs 994,000
      Year
      Shr 83 cts vs 60 cts
      Net 4.3 mln vs 3.1 mln
      NOTE:1985 net includes tax loss carryforward gain of 8,000
  dlrs.
  

&lt;ENERGY OPTICS INC> 2ND QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr profit nil vs loss five cts
      Net profit 232 vs loss 124,380
      Revs 143,397 vs 61,901
      1st half
      Shr profit one ct vs loss 10 cts
      Net profit 15,722 vs loss 264,539
      Revs 354,843 vs 120,403
  

THE JAPAN FUND &lt;JPN> GETS BUYOUT OFFER
  The Japan Fund Inc said it has received
  an unsolicited offer from &lt;Sterling Grace Capital Management
  LP>, acting together with certain other persons and entities,
  to purchase all the assets of the fund at five pct below its
  aggregate net asset value.
      The Japan Find said tne deal is subject to obtaining
  satisfactory financing and a due diligence review.
      It added that the proposal has been referred to its Board
  of Directors for consideration.
  

BLUE GASS BREEDERS &lt;BLGR> COMPLETES ACQUISITION
  Blue Grass Breeders Inc said it has
  completed the acquisition of Equine Enterprises Inc for four
  mln common shares.
      It said it is obligated to deliver another 2,741,660 shares
  on the attainment of a certain level of shareholders' equity
  during any fiscal quarter within 12 months of closing.
      If all the contingent shares are issued, Blue Grass said
  former owners of Equine will have a 75 pct interest in Blue
  Grass.
      Equine is a New Mexico quarter horse breeding and racing
  company.
  

DIGIMED CORP 2ND QTR DEC 31 LOSS
  Shr loss two cts vs loss five cts
      Net loss 17,334 vs loss 51,507
      Sales 245,560 vs 179,839
      Avg shrs 1,136,785 vs 1,046,785
      Six mths
      Shr profit four cts vs loss 17 cts
      Net profit 47,749 vs loss 174,373
      Sales 721,937 vs 284,809
      Avg shrs 1,136,785 vs 1,046,785
  

FLIGHT INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC &lt;FLTI> 3RD QTR
  periods ended January 31
      Shr profit 22 cts vs loss 26 cts
      Net profit 439,000 vs loss 522,000
      Revs 5,600,000 vs 3,859,000
      Nine mths
      Shr profit 46 cts vs loss three cts
      Net profit 912,000 vs loss 59,000
      Revs 14.6 mln vs 18.3 mln
      NOTE: Year ago revenues include 400,000 dlrs in quarter and
  2,227,000 dlrs in nine months from operations of subsidiary
  sold in April 1986
  

NORD EST PLANS 400 MLN FRANC BOND ISSUE
  Financial and industrial holding company
  Nord Est plans to make a convertible bond issue for a total of
  400 mln francs, President Gustave Rambaud said.
      He told a news conference Nord-Est expected to receive
  approval from the Bourse supervisory body COB in the next two
  week, when terms would set according to market conditions.
      He said the issue was meant to boost capital ahead of new
  investments.
      Rambaud said the company would pay a 1986 dividend of 5.25
  francs, unchanged on 1985. Parent company net profit last year
  rose to 99.5 mln francs against 71.1 mln in 1985.
      Provisional consolidated profits were lower at 185 mln
  francs compared with 200 mln in 1985, of which 120 mln, against
  147 mln, was attributable to the group. He said the lower
  profit was mainly due to losses made by steel-tube maker
  Vallourec, in which Nord Est has a 12.5 pct stake.
      Rambaud said he forecast a 1987 parent company net profit
  before provisions of around 135 mln francs.
  

SOLV-EX &lt;SOLV> SHELL CANADA &lt;SHC> PACT COMPLETE
  Solv-Ex Corp said it
  successfully completed its oil sands pilot testing program
  under its agreement with Shell Canada Limited &lt;SHC> and
  received a 250,000 U.S. dlr bonus payment.
      It also said that Shell Canada exercised its option to take
  over Solv-Ex's 25 pct working interest in the construction of
  the oil facility, relieving it of its obligation to raise about
  62.5 mln Canadian dlrs for plant construction.
      It said 30 pct of that loan was guaranteed by the
  Government of Alberta.
      In exchange for Shell's participation, Solv-Ex said Shell
  is obligated to pay it an up-front royalty and a running
  royalty based on the operating profits of the oil sands
  facility. It said the Shell Canada 7,500 barrel per day oil
  sands project will be built on Shell's oil sand lease about 40
  miles north of Fort McMurray in the Athabasca region of
  northern Alberta.
      Solv-Ex said the project will cost about 260 mln Canadian
  dlrs. It said that following a final feasibility study the
  plant should open in the early 1990s when oil prices are
  expected to exceed 20 U.S. dlrs per barrel.
  

SPAIN HAS 68 MLN DLR JANUARY PAYMENTS SURPLUS
  Spain had a 68 mln dlr current account
  balance of payments surplus in January compared with a 556 mln
  deficit in December and 370 mln surplus in January last year,
  Bank of Spain figures show.
      The trade deficit rose to 664 mln dlrs in January from 146
  mln in January 1986.
  

UNION PACIFIC &lt;UNP> IN PARTNERSHIP WITH PDVSA
  Union Pacific Corp said it will enter
  a 50-50 partnership with Petroles de Venezuela, PDVSA, to own
  and operate Union Pacific's 160,000 barrel-per-day Corpus
  Christi, Texas, oil refinery.
      The assests to be acquired by the partnership are valued at
  190 mln dlrs, Union Pacific said.
      Closing is expected to take place in early April and the
  venture is to be called Champlin Refining Co.
      The partnership will acquire the refining and distribution
  systems currently owned and operated by Champlin Petroleum, a
  wholly owned subsidiary of Union Pacific.
      The venture will acquire the related inventories and the
  Champlin trade name, the company said.
      PDVSA and Union Pacific will each contribute half the
  capital required by the venture and arrange a revolving credit
  facility with U.S. and foreign banks to finance inventories and
  receivables, Union Pacific said.
      Petroles de Venezuela also signed a 25-year agreement to
  supply at least 140,000 bpd of Venezulean crude oil and naphtha
  to the refinery at market related prices.
      Under various options the in the agreement PDVSA could
  supply another 50,000 bpd on similar terms, the company said.
      "This will provide a stable, long-term supply to the
  refinery at competitive costs, thereby assuring the economic
  viability of the plant," a statement issued by Union Pacific
  said.
     The statement said the agreement with PDVSA will enable the
  company to supply a steady flow of refined products to its
  customers.
     Union Pacific said employees of the refinery would be
  transfered to the new company and would retain the same
  benefits as in the past.
  

PUROLATOR &lt;PCC> DIRECTOR QUITS OVER BUYOUT
  A Purolator Courier Corp director
  resigned from the company's board, saying he plans to take
  steps to make or find an offer that tops the 265 mln dlr buyout
  deal already accepted by Purolator's board, the company said.
      The director, Doresy Gardner, resigned in a March 10 letter
  to the Purolator board, which was included in a filing made by
  the company to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
      Gardner noted that the terms of the merger agreement in
  which the company would bought out by a group of its managers
  and E.F. Hutton LBO Inc bar directors from taking action to
  solicit, initiate or encourage acquisition proposals.
      "I, as a shareholder, wish to solicit, initiate or
  encourage such an offer or indication of interest, and believe,
  therefore, that I should resign as a director of the
  corporation," Gardner said in the letter.
      "Accordingly, I hereby resign as a director of Purolator
  Courier Corp, effective immediately," he said.
      Gardner said he believes shareholders could get a better
  deal than the buyout offer if the company would agree to be
  sold to some other entity, or if it could sell off all or part
  of its U.S. courier division.
      On March 4, another Purolator shareholder, Rodney Shields,
  filed a class action suit on behalf of the company's
  shareholders charging the company and its board with breaching
  their fiduciary duty by failing to take steps to ensure that
  shareholders got the highest possible price in the buyout.
      The deal would give shareholders 35 dlrs a share in cash if
  just 83 pct of Purolator's 7.6 mln shares are tendered. If more
  are tendered, they would receive 29 dlrs in cash and six dlrs
  in debentures and a warrant to buy stock in the new company in
  exchange for each share.
  

UNR INDUSTRIES INC &lt;UNRIQ> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr profit 75 cts vs profit 25 cts
      Net profit 2,742,962 vs profit 936,333
      Sales 74.9 mln vs 70.1 mln
      Year
      Shr profit 1.05 dlrs vs loss 1.07 dlrs
      Net profit 3,868,888 vs loss 3,931,580
      Sales 299.3 mln vs 281.1 mln
  

CENTURY TELEPHONE &lt;CTL> TO SELL PROPERTIES
  Century Telephone Enterprises Inc
  said it has accepted an offer to sell its cable television
  properties in Michigan, Tennessee, Florida, Arkansas and
  Louisiana for a "substantial" gain.
      The company said details were not disclosed.
  

VOLT INFORMATION SCIENCES INC &lt;VOLT> 1ST QTR
  Shr 12 cts vs seven cts
      Net 817,000 vs 512,000
      Revs 107.5 mln vs 99.9 mln
      Avg 6.9 mln vs 7.2 mln
      NOTE: 1987 net includes 2.4 mln dlr pretax gain on
  settlement, 743,000 dlrs gain on securities sale, interest
  expense net of investment income of 2.2 mln dlrs and 920,000
  dlrs in fiscal 1986. Change of European operations method
  resulted in pre-tax translation losses of 1.1 mln dlrs in 1987.
  Period ended January 30.
  

PARADISE FRUIT &lt;PARF> SETS LOWER DIVIDEND
  Paradise Fruit Co Inc said its
  board declared a dividend of 25 cts per share, payable March 31
  to holders of record March 19.
      The company last paid 50 cts per share in January 1986 and
  before that paid 60 cts in January 1985.
      Paradise said commercial bank lending agreements it entered
  into in June 1986 include retained earnings requirements that
  limit the amount of earnings available for distribution to
  shareholders.
  

&lt;CANADA MALTING CO LTD> YEAR NET
  Oper shr 1.30 dlrs vs 1.51 dlrs
      Oper net 4.06 mln vs 4.17 mln
      Sales 146.3 mln vs 155.9 mln
      Note: 1985 excludes extraordinary loss of 7.45 mln dlrs, or
  2.70 dlrs per share.
  

NORTH AMERICAN HOLDING CORP &lt;NAHL> 3RD QTR NET
  Dec 31 end
      Shr profit nil vs loss four cts
      Net profit 6,891 vs loss 590,460
      Revs 6,518,133 vs 2,521,884
      Avg shrs 13.1 mln vs 12.0 mln
      Nine mths
      Shr profit six cts vs loss seven cts
      Net profit 772,703 vs loss 758,620
      Revs 20.1 mln vs 7,599,017
      Avg shrs 13.2 mln vs 10.9 mln
  

&lt;SAMSUNG CO> CALENDAR 1986
  Div 50 won vs 50 won
      Net profit 6.91 billion won vs 6.10 billion
      Sales 4,275.4 billion vs 3,801,7 billion
      Note - Company has set 1987 sales target of 4,800 billion
  won.
  

GENERAL HOST CORP &lt;GH> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div six cts vs six cts prior
      Pay April Three
      Record March 23
  

U.S.-SOVIET GRAIN ACCORD QUESTIONED BY LYNG
  U.S. Agriculture Secretary Richard
  Lyng said he was not sure a long-term U.S.-Soviet grain
  agreement would be worth extending when it expires next year.
      "It hasn't been worth much in the last two years....They
  haven't lived up to the agreement as I see it," Lyng said in an
  interview with Reuters.
      "It would be my thought that it's not worth any effort to
  work out an agreement with someone who wants the agreement to
  be a one-sided thing," he said.
      However, Lyng said he did not want to make a "definitive
  commitment one way or another at this point."
      Under the accord covering 1983-88, the Soviets agreed to
  buy at least nine mln tonnes of U.S. grain, including four mln
  tonnes each of corn and wheat.
      Moscow bought 6.8 mln tonnes of corn and 153,000 tonnes of
  wheat during the third agreement year, which ended last
  September, and this year has bought one mln tonnes of corn.
      Lyng said he had no knowledge of how much U.S. grain Moscow
  would buy this year.
      "I've seen people making comments on that and I don't know
  how they know, unless they talk to the Soviets," he said. "I have
  no knowledge, and I really don't think anyone other than the
  Soviets have any knowledge."
      Lyng said he thought the Soviets bought U.S. corn last
  month because "they needed it and because the price was right."
      "Our corn has been pretty reasonably priced. And I think
  they've always found that our corn was good," he said.
  

GROW GROUP INC &lt;GRO> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 7-1/2 cts vs 7-1/2 cts prior
      Pay April 30
      Record April 15
  

DIGIMED CORP 2ND QTR DEC 31 LOSS
  Shr loss 1.5 cts vs loss five cts
      Net loss 17,334 vs loss 51,507
      Sales 245,560 vs 179,839
      Six mths
      Shr profit four cts vs loss 17 cts
      Net profit 47,749 vs loss 174,373
      Sales 721,937 vs 284,809
  

POWERINE REFINERY TO RESUME OPERATIONS
  &lt;Powerine Oil Co> said
  its refinery here will resume operation today, with initial
  crude oil runs of 20,000 barrels per day.
      Powerine, a privately-held company, said it expects the
  refinery to become fully operational by May, with crude oil
  throughput at 35,000 bpd.
      Initial oil products deliveries are scheduled for Monday,
  Powerine said. The refinery had been closed due to a change of
  ownership, the company said.
  

TRINITY INDUSTRIES INC &lt;TRN> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 12-1/2 cts vs 12-1/2 cts prior
      Pay April 30
      Record April 15
  

COASTAL BANCORP &lt;CSBK> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div five cts vs five cts prior
      Pay April 15
      Record March 30
  

IDAHO POWER CO &lt;IDA> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 45 cts vs 45 cts prior
      Pay May 20
      Record April 24
  

&lt;DAEWOO CORP> CALENDAR 1986
  Div 50 won vs 50 won
      Net profit 35.4 billion won vs 34.2 billion
      Sales 4,214.9 billion won vs 3,779.2 bilion
      Note - company has set 1987 sales target of 5,200 billion.
  

U.S. SOYBEAN MARKETING LOAN NOT NEEDED - LYNG
  U.S. Agriculture Secretary Richard
  Lyng said a marketing loan for soybeans would serve no present
  purpose because the U.S. price is not above the world price.
      Asked in an interview if it was time to consider a
  marketing loan for soybeans, Lyng said, "I don't think so. I
  don't think the world price is lower than our price anyway."
      However, the USDA secretary said that if current conditions
  of surplus production persisted, it might be appropriate to
  consider a marketing loan.
      "I suppose that under that condition there is a danger our
  exports will continue to drop and that the government will
  continue to accumulate large stocks of soybeans," he said. "It
  might be (worth contemplating a marketing loan), if there were
  a world market that was lower than our market."
  

UNITED STATIONERS INC &lt;USTR> SETS DIVIDEND
  Qtly dividend six cts vs six cts
      Pay April 15
      Record March 31
  

LINCOLN NATIONAL CORP &lt;LNC> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 54 cts vs 54 cts prior
      Pay May One
      Record April 10
  

PETRIE STORES CORP &lt;PST> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 17-1/2 cts vs 17-1/2 cts prior
      Pay April 20
      Record April 2.
  o
  

MCLEAN'S &lt;MII> U.S. LINES SETS ASSET TRANSFER
  McLean Industries Inc's United
  States Lines Inc subsidiary said it has agreed in principle to
  transfer its South American service by arranging for the
  transfer of certain charters and assets to &lt;Crowley Mariotime
  Corp>'s American Transport Lines Inc subsidiary.
      U.S. Lines said negotiations on the contract are expected
  to be completed within the next week. Terms and conditions of
  the contract would be subject to approval of various regulatory
  bodies, including the U.S. Bankruptcy Court.
  

CORNING TO OFFER 0.5165 SHARE FOR EACH HAZLETON SHARE UNDER EARLIER AGREEMENT

  CORNING TO OFFER 0.5165 SHARE FOR EACH HAZLETON SHARE UNDER EARLIER AGREEMENT
  

DESOTO &lt;DSO> SELLS INDUSTRIAL CHEMICAL ASSETS
  DeSoto Inc said it sold the
  plant, inventory and certain other assets of some of its
  industrial chemical operations to Plastic Specialities and
  Technologies Inc, a privately-held company headquartered in
  Parsippany, New Jersey.  Terms were not disclosed.
      Desoto's industrial chemical operations are based in Fort
  Worth, Texas, and has annual sales of about 17 mln dlrs.
  

SAFEGUARD HEALTH &lt;SFGD> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Shr loss 30 cts vs profit 12 cts
      Net loss 2,374,000 vs profit 970,000
      Revs 15.7 mln vs 13.4 mln
      Year
      Shr loss 13 cts vs profit 46 cts
      Net loss 1,054,000 vs profit 3,425,000
      Revs 61.8 mln vs 49.9 mln
      Note: Full name Safeguard Health Enterprises Inc.
      Current qtr and year figures include 2.9 mln dlr reserve
  for estimated loss from proposed divestment of one-third of
  existing 40 offices.
  

RUBBER TALKS CHAIRMAN CITES SLIGHT PROGRESS
  There has been slight progress towards
  reaching a rubber pact, the chairman of a United Nations
  conference on a new International Natural Rubber Agreeement,
  INRA, Manaspas Xuto of Thailand, said.
      "There has been some slight progress but it is not the end
  of the road yet," he said.
      The conference, which began Monday, is seen as the last
  effort to adopt an accord to replace the current one which
  expires in October. Some 40 producing and consuming countries
  are taking part in the two-week meeting.
      Xuto said if the key outstanding issues are not resolved by
  tomorrow he would hold weekend meetings.
      At the beginning of the conference, the fourth such meeting
  in nearly two years, Xuto said it was imperative to settle
  those issues this week so that technical drafting work can be
  done next week.
      Conference sources said it is highly unlikely that
  producers will accept a pact that will provide for any possible
  downward adjustment of the floor price, as proposed by
  consumers under certain circumstances.
      The sources said this means that any possible adjustment
  would centre on the reference price, and the "may buy" (or "may
  sell") and "must buy" (or "must sell") levels without changing the
  "lower indicative price" (or floor price) of 150
  Malaysian/Singapore cents a kilo in the present pact.
      The present five-day average of the indicator price is
  around 192 Malaysian/Singapore cents.
      Consumers are seeking an adjustment of the reference price,
  set in the current accord at 201.66 Malaysian/Singapore cents a
  kilo, and of the "lower indicative price" if the buffer stock,
  currently 360,000 tonnes, rises to 450,000 tonnes.
      Consumers want price reviews at 12-month intervals instead
  of the 18 at present, and the price revision mechanism to
  respond automatically to market trends.
      At present, if the market price has been above or below the
  reference price for six months, the reference price is revised
  by five pct or by an amount decided by the International
  Natural Rubber Organisation council.
      Consumers say that, in these circumstances, the adjustment
  be automatic at five pct or more.
      Producers have resisted reducing the role of the council in
  the price adjustment procedure and have expressed concern that
  changes proposed by consumers would weaken the present pact.
  

"BRITANNIA" COIN TO SELL AT PREMIUM
  The new British one ounce gold coin, the
  "Britannia," will be priced on the basis of the gold price on the
  day of purchase plus a "competitive premium," Treasury officials
  said.
      Value added tax will be levied on all purchases by members
  of the U.K. Public, as is currently the case with foreign
  coins, although transactions between members of the London Gold
  Market and all exports of the coins will be zero-rated. No
  decision has yet been taken on the face value of the coins.
      Although a number of gold coins, especially the Canadian
  Maple, have been issued elsewhere in an attempt to take the
  place of the South African krugerrand, the British government
  still feels that there is a gap in the market for a British one
  ounce gold coin. The only British gold coin available at
  present is the sovereign, which contains 0.2354 ounces of gold.
      Gold from South Africa or the Soviet Union will not be used
  in the coin, officials said, adding that bullion would be
  bought on the world gold market. But analysts said it would be
  difficult to ascertain the origins of such purchases.
      No details are yet available on how many coins will be
  issued or how much gold will be bought, but traders said that
  the amounts involved would be unlikely to move the gold price.
      There were some enquiries on the "Britannia" from coin
  dealers today, but value added tax would prove a major factor
  in the success of the coin, with the 15 pct tax likely to put
  off many investors, traders said.
      Some said that the "Britannia" had come too late, with the
  Canadian Maple Leaf, the American Eagle and other gold coins
  already well established.
  

CYTRX &lt;CYTR> UNIT BUYS SWEDISH COMPANY
  CytRx Corp said its 60 pct owned CytRx
  Biopool Ltd subsidiary has acquired Biopool AB of Umea, Sweden,
  for undisclosed terms.
      It said former shareholders of Biopool AB own the remaining
  40 pct in CytRx Biopool Ltd. Biopool AB develops cardiovascular
  and fibrinolytic products for diagnostic applications.
      The company said CytRx Biopool is studying the possible
  combination of CytRx Corp's RheothRx drug to reduce platelet
  aggregation and viscosity in blood with Biopool AB's drug t-PA
  for dissolving blood clots.
  

CANADA 91-DAY T-BILLS AVERAGE 7.03 PCT, MAKING BANK RATE 7.28 PCT

  CANADA 91-DAY T-BILLS AVERAGE 7.03 PCT, MAKING BANK RATE 7.28 PCT
  

BANK OF NEW YORK &lt;BK> TO HAVE GAIN ON UNIT SALE
  Bank of New York Co said it and the
  management of RMJ Securities Corp have agreed to sell 80 pct of
  their interests in RMJ Holding Corp to &lt;British and
  Commonwealth Holdings PLC> and Bank of New York expects to
  realize a substantial gain on the transaction.
      RMJ Holding is the holding company for RMJ Securities, a
  large broker of U.S. government securities and agency
  obligations  Bank of New York owns a majority interest in RMJ
  Holding and management of RMJ Securities the remainder.
      Bank of New York said the sale is expected to be completed
  during the second quarter.
      It said it and RMJ Securities management will continue to
  own 20 pct of RMJ Holding for now, but the agreement provides
  for the sale of that remaining interest to British and
  Commonwealth over the next six years.
  

NORTH AMERICAN &lt;NAHL> SEES RECORD FOURTH QTR
  North American Holding Corp
  said it expects to have record fourth quarter earnings and for
  sales to exceed 10 mln dlrs.
      For the fourth quarter ended March 30, 1986 the company
  reported net income of 631,720 dlrs on sales of 5.2 mln dlrs.
      It also said it expects revenues for the year to exceed 30
  mln dlrs. For fiscal 1986, North American reported a net loss
  of 126,900 dlrs on sales of 12.8 mln dlrs.
  

INVESTORS UP INTERMEDICS &lt;ITM> STAKE TO 16.8 PCT
  A group of investment firms told the
  Securities and Exchange Commission they raised their stake in
  Intermedics Inc to 1,721,900 shares, or 16.8 pct of the total
  outstanding, from 1,565,900 shares, or 15.2 pct.
      Bessemer Securities Corp, a New York investment firm,
  Cilluffo Associates L.P., a New York investment partnership,
  and related entities said they bought 156,000 Intermedics
  common shares between February 24 and March 9 for 1.4 mln dlrs.
  

WAL-MART STORES INC &lt;WMT> RAISES QUARTERLY
  Qtly div six cts vs 4-1/4 cts prior
      Pay April 10
      Record March 23
  

OPTROTECH LTD &lt;OPTKF> YEAR NET
  Shr 13 cts vs 50 cts
      Net 651,397 vs 2,602,120
      Revs 26.4 mln vs 21.6 mln
      NOTE: 1986 net includes gain 291,027 dlr gain from quantity
  discount rebates on purchases of materials in prior years.
  

CORNING &lt;GLW>, HAZLETON &lt;HLC> SET EXCAHNGE RATIO
  Corning Glass Works said the
  exchange ratio for its previously announced acquisition of
  Hazleton Laboratories Corp has been established at 0.5165
  Corning common share for each Hazleton common share.
      Corning said the prospectus regarding the merger is
  expected to be mailed tomorrow to all Hazleton holders of
  record February 18. Hazleton shareholders will vote on the
  proposed merger at a special meeting on March 31.
  

NORTH ATLANTIC TECHNOLOGIES &lt;NATT> 4TH QTR
  Shr loss 20 cts vs loss 14 cts
      Net loss 352,000 vs loss 248,000
      Revs 285,000 vs 681,000
      Year
      Shr loss 92 cts vs loss 49 cts
      Net loss 1,613,000 vs loss 842,000
      Revs 1,523,000 vs 2,557,000
      NOTE: Full name is North Atlantic Technologies Inc
  

MONTEDISON, OTHER REFINERIES TO SHUT FOR WORK
  Selm-Societa Energia Montedison is to
  close its Priolo crude refining units from March 15th to March
  28th for maintenance, a company spokesman said.
      Throughput at the refinery is currently estimated at
  140-150,000 bpd, although total capacity is nearer 200,000 bpd.
      Several other Mediterranean refineries are currently
  shutdown for maintenance, most of which were scheduled some
  months ago. But industry sources said that shutdowns may have
  been rearranged to avoid running negative-netback crude.
       Tighter availabilities of products as a result of the 
  shutdowns in the Med is helping to keep products markets
  bullish, particularly for March deliveries, oil traders said.
      Garrone's refinery at San Quirico (capacity 130,000 bpd) is
  due to shutdown on March 14th for three weeks, and the
  jointly-owned ISAB/Garrone refinery at Mellili, capacity
  220,000 bpd, is due to start up around March 20-25th following
  its closure for maintenance a month ago, a company spokesman
  said.
      The Esso Italiana refineries at Augusta and Siracusa will
  not be closing this spring, a spokesman for the company said.
      In France, the distillation unit at Societe Francaise de
  BP's Lavera refinery has been closed for maintenance since
  March 2, and is due to restart early April. Total capacity is
  181,900 bpd. It is currently operating at around 50 pct
  capacity, a company spokesman said.
      Shell Francaise's Berre l'Etang refinery will shut down in
  early April until mid-June, a company spokesman said. Capacity
  is around 150,000 bpd. Compagnie Francaise de Raffinage (CFR)
  will close the visbreaker at its La Mede refinery in early
  April, but would not affect crude throughput at the refinery, a
  company spokesman said. Current capacity is 136,000 bbl/day.
      Despite current bullish sentiment in the Med, however,
  traders noted that crude netbacks are beginning to look more
  attractive, and most maintenance shutdowns should be finished
  in two to three weeks.
      As a result, oil industry sources suggest that the
  situation may ease by mid-April.
  

ATTACKS AFFECT COLOMBIA'S OIL OUTLOOK-ECOPETROL
  Continuous rebel raids against oil
  pipelines and foreign exploration camps endanger Colombia's
  present oil bonanza, Franciso Chona, manager of the state-run
  oil company Ecopetrol said.
      "It seems the subversion wants to end with our oil bonanza,"
  he told reporters.
      He was speaking after a meeting with Defense Minister
  Rafael Samudio, military chiefs and Mines and Energy Minister
  Guillermo Perry to review the security situation in the light
  of a recent upsurge of leftist guerrilla attacks in the
  oil-rich Arauca region, bordering Venezuela.
      Ecopetrol chief of security, Retired General Carlos
  Narvaez, said security measures would be stricter and that the
  armed forces were closely collaborating but gave no details.
      Samudio said new plans had been designed and hoped they
  would be effective. Samudio stressed that, despite the most
  recent attacks, which cost more than four mln dlrs in damage,
  the overall situation had improved compared with last December
  when initial measures were taken to combat a wave of attacks.
      Repeated bombings of a vital pipeline from the Cano Limon
  oilfield to the Caribbean then led to a loss of 51,000 barrels
  of crude.
  

HEALTH EXPERTS URGE ERADICATION OF RINDERPEST
  World animal health experts called for a
  campaign to eradicate the lethal cattle disease Rinderpest in
  Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal and Pakistan, a statement from
  a Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) meeting here said.
      Some 230 mln dlrs is needed over two years to vaccinate the
  entire susceptible cattle population in Bangladesh and Pakistan
  and high-risk areas of the other three countries. In India some
  240 mln cattle are estimated to be at risk from the disease.
      The experts recommended the campaign be funded mostly by
  the governments of the five nations, with help from the FAO.
  Similar campaigns are needed in Egypt, Yemen, Iraq and Iran.
  

PERU'S CENTROMIN SAYS NO COPPER FORCE MAJEURE
  Peru's biggest state mining firm,
  Centromin SA, said today there was no immediate force majeure
  possibility on its copper shipments after guerrillas blew up a
  railway line, interrupting train traffic from the Cobriza
  copper mine to the Pacific coast.
      A Centromin spokesman said the managers of the mine at
  Cobriza could always ship the the mineral by road to the coast
  for export if the train line continued interrupted. Cobriza
  produced the equivalent of around 40,600 fine tonnes of copper
  last year.
      Maoist guerrillas using dynamite interrupted train traffic
  two days ago when they blew up railway tracks and derailed a
  train laden with minerals 225 km (135 miles) east of Lima at
  Chacapalca, between the coast and Cobriza.
      An official at Minero Peru Comercial, Minpeco, Peru's state
  minerals marketing firm, confirmed there had been no
  declaration of force majeure on the shipments from Cobriza.
      Officials at National Train Company, Enafer, headquarters
  in Lima, the Peruvian capital, declined to comment on when
  train traffic would be restored to Cobriza.
      But an Enafer official, reached by telephone in the central
  Andean city of Huancayo, near Chacapalca, said traffic could be
  restored by Saturday.
  

PARKER DRILLING SUSPENDS QUARTERLY DIVIDEND

  PARKER DRILLING SUSPENDS QUARTERLY DIVIDEND
  

FIRST GRANITE BANCORP INC AGREES TO BE ACQUIRED BY MAGNA GROUP INC FOR STOCK

  FIRST GRANITE BANCORP INC AGREES TO BE ACQUIRED BY MAGNA GROUP INC FOR STOCK
  

ARGENTINE VEGETABLE OILS SHIPMENTS IN JAN/NOV 1986
  Argentine Vegetable oils shipments
  during January/November 1986 totalled 1,693,951 tonnes, against
  1,469,208 tonnes in the same 1985 period, the Argentine grain
  board said.
      The breakdown was: cotton 4,000 (27,900), sunflower 929,847
  (816,727), linseed 113,827 (132,954), groundnutseed 26,248
  (25,508), soybean 603,335 (448,344), tung 8,402 (10,633), olive
  2,234 (3,465), maize 6,058 (3,677), rapeseed nil (nil), grape
  nil (nil), the board added.
      Shipments during November 1986 amounted to 138,257 tonnes,
  against 109,250 tonnes in the same month of 1985.
      The breakdwon was, in tonnes, cotton nil (nil), sunflower
  27,715 (43,064), linseed 5,228 (4,473), groundnutseed 819
  (3,647), soybean 104,314 (56,901), tung 20 (nil), olive 161
  (858), maize nil (307), rapeseed nil (nil), grape nil (nil),
  the board said.
      The ten principal destinations during January/November
  1986, with comparative figures for the same 1985 period in
  brackets, were, in tonnes:
      Holland 201,660 (204,391), Iran 182,042 (181,228), Soviet
  Union 163,150 (266,389),Egypt 158,119 (159,350), Algeria
  116,330 (11,492), Brazil 101,116 (59,430) , South Africa 94,700
  (101,062) , Cuba 89,957 (98,740) , United States 80,109 (nil),
  India 67,182 (17,403), the board added.
  

PARKER DRILLING &lt;PKD> SUSPENDS PAYOUT
  Parker Drilling Co said its board
  of directors voted to suspend the payment of dividends to
  shareholders.
      Parker Drilling said it has been paying a quarterly
  dividend of one ct a share of common stock.
      The company said it expects to save 1.3 mln dlrs a year
  through the dividend suspension.
  

EQK REALTY INVESTORS &lt;EKR> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr nine cts vs 22 cts
      Net 700,000 vs 2,200,000
      Revs 5,400,000 vs 5,700,000
      Avg shrs 7,589,344 vs 10.1 mln
      12 mths
      Shr 43 cts
      Net 3,500,000
      Revs 21.6 mln
      NOTE: 12 mth figures not available for 1985 since company
  started operations March 31, 1985.
  

MASCO CORP &lt;MAS> REGULAR DIVIDEND SET
  Qtly div nine cts vs nine cts previously
      Pay May 11
      Record April 17
  

TURKISH RETAIL PRICES RISE 2.7 PCT IN FEBRUARY
  Turkish retail prices rose 2.7 pct in
  February after 2.9 pct in January and 1.7 pct in February 1986,
  the State Statistics Institute said.
      Prices in the year to February rose 31.6 pct, compared with
  30.3 pct in the year to January and 38.8 pct in the 12 months
  to February 1986.
      The index (base 1978/79), covering 14 towns and five
  regions, was 1,886.8 in February, 1,837.2 in January and
  1,434.0 in February 1986.
  

EQK REALTY INVESTORS I &lt;EKR> SETS PAYOUT
  Qtrly div 41.5 cts vs 41.5 cts prior
      Pay July 29
      Record June 15
  

12-MAR-1987
  12-MAR-1987

IPCO CORP &lt;IHS> SETS REGULAR PAYOUT
  Qtrly div nine cts vs nine cts prior
      Pay May 1
      Record April 9
  

FIRST GRANITE &lt;FGBI> AGREES TO BE ACQUIRED
  First Granite Bancorp Inc
  said it agreed in principle to become a wholly owned subsidiary
  of Magna Group Inc &lt;MAGI>.
      Under terms of the agreement, First Granite shareholders
  will receive 2.175 shares of Magna for each First Granite share
  held. First Granite shareholders will be asked to approve the
  tranaction in late summer.
      First Granite, which has 675,000 shares outstanding, as of
  Dec 31, 1986 had assets of 186.5 mln dlrs. It owns First
  Granite City National Bank and Colonial Bank of Granite City,
  Ill.
      Magna Groups as of Dec 31, 1986 had assets of 1.47 billion
  dlrs. It owns 13 banks, a data services company, a mortgage
  company and a trust company, serving St. Louis as well as
  Springfield, Centralia and Decatur, Ill.
  

CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE CUTS PRIME RATE TO 8.75 PCT FROM 9.25 - TOMORROW

  CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE CUTS PRIME RATE TO 8.75 PCT FROM 9.25 - TOMORROW
  

THERMWOOD CORP &lt;THM> 2ND QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr three cts vs three cts
      Net 165,798 vs 143,872
      Sales 1,787,561 vs 1,072,686
      Six mths
      Shr four cts vs four cts
      Net 175,928 vs 191,310
      Sales 3,137,695 vs 2,723,557
      Avg shrs 4,862,046 vs 4,722,150
  

PERINI INVESTMENT PROPERTIES &lt;PNV> RAISES PAYOUT
  Qtly div 15 cts vs 12 cts in prior qtr
      Payable June 25
      Record May 28
  

SUN &lt;SUN> RAISES CRUDE POSTINGS 50 CTS
  Sun Co said it raised the contract
  price it will pay for crude oil 50 cts a barrel, effective
  today.
      The increase brings Sun's posted price for the West Texas
  Intermediate and West Texas Sour grades to 17.50 dlrs/bbl. The
  Light Louisiana Sweet grade was also raised 50 cts to 17.85
  dlrs/bbl.
      Sun Co last changed its crude postings on March 4.
  

PETROLEUM AND RESOURCES CORP &lt;PEO> DIVIDEND
  Interim income dividend 20 cts. Last paid 1.14 dlrs
  February 27, including capital gains of 50 cts.
      Pyable April 20
      Record April eight
  

ROYAL BANK OF CANADA LOWERS PRIME RATE TO 8-3/4 PCT, DOWN 1/2

  ROYAL BANK OF CANADA LOWERS PRIME RATE TO 8-3/4 PCT, DOWN 1/2
  

NEW LINE CINEMA CORP &lt;NLN> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 11 cts vs nine cts
      Net 677,498 vs 461,485
      Revs 6,271,010 vs 5,135,729
      Year
      Shr 81 cts vs 20 cts
      Net 4,406,065 vs 973,967
      Revs 26.5 mln vs 14.1 mln
      Avg shrs 5,457,339 vs 4,978,965
  

OTTAWA SEEKS EXPLANATION OF CREDIT CARD RATES
  Minister of State for Finance Tom Hockin
  said he has asked the Canadian Bankers Association, an industry
  lobby group, for an explanation of the level of credit card
  interest rates.
      Hockin said he hopes to here the association's response on
  the "important" issue soon. Hockin was responding to questions
  in the House of Commons about why credit card rates, which run
  as high as 28 pct per year, remain high when other rates are
  falling.
      Today, the Canadian bank rate fell to 7.28 pct from 7.54
  pct last week and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce cut
  its prime rate, effective tomorrow, to 8.75 pct from 9.25 pct.
  

IPCO CORP &lt;IHS> REGULAR DIVIDEND
  Qtly div nine cts vs nine cts in prior qtr
      Payable May one
      Record Apreil nine
  

ASAMERA INC YEAR OPER SHR LOSS 48 CTS VS PROFIT 50 CTS

  ASAMERA INC YEAR OPER SHR LOSS 48 CTS VS PROFIT 50 CTS
  

DIAMOND SHAMROCK RAISED CRUDE BY 50 CTS/BBL TODAY. WTI UP TO 17.50 DLRS.

  DIAMOND SHAMROCK RAISED CRUDE BY 50 CTS/BBL TODAY. WTI UP TO 17.50 DLRS.
  

ALLEGHNEY INTERNATIONAL &lt;AG> FACES ADDED COUNT
  Alleghney International Inc said the
  plaintiffs in the existing lawsuits opposing its sale requested
  an amendment to their complaint to include a class action
  count.
      Alleghney said the suit, filed in the U.S. District Court
  for the Western District of Pennsylvania, was aimed at blocking
  the sale of Alleghney to an affiliate of First Boston Inc.
      Allegheney said the additional count sought by the
  plaintiffs alleges the price to be offered for AI's common
  stock, 24.60 dlrs, is grossly unfair and one the purposes of
  the proposed sale is to absolve the individual defendants of
  liability in the lawsuit.
       The additional count among other forms of relief, requests
  an injunction against the defendants from taking any steps to
  accomplish the proposed sale, Alleghney said.
  

PHILLIPS RAISES CRUDE POSTINGS 50 CTS EFFECTIVE TODAY, WTI TO 17.50 dlrs/bbl

  PHILLIPS RAISES CRUDE POSTINGS 50 CTS EFFECTIVE TODAY, WTI TO 17.50 dlrs/bbl
  

U.S. SEISMIC CREW COUNT DROPS 6 PCT IN FEBRUARY
  The number of seismic crews
  searching for oil and gas in the United States dropped by nine
  to a total of 151 crews, a decrease of six pct from January,
  the Society of Exploration Geophysicists said.
      The February total represented a 49 pct decrease from
  February 1986.
      Worldwide, the association's monthly survey showed that
  seismic exploration for oil and gas increased to 395 in
  February, up three from the month before. Africa added three
  seismic crews, the Middle East increased by two and the Far
  East added one while reductions were reported in Central and
  South America, Europe and the United States.
  

12-MAR-1987
  12-MAR-1987

BALLY &lt;BLY> COMPLETES PURCHASE OF GOLDEN NUGGET
  Bally Manufacturing Corp said it
  completed the acquisition of the Golden Nugget Casino Hotel in
  Atlantic City, New Jersey from Golden Nugget Inc.
      Bally also acquired from Golden Nugget various parcels of
  real estate in Atlantic City, it noted.
      The transaction included 140 mln dlrs in cash and stock and
  the assumption of a 299 mln dlrs mortgage.
  

PESSIMISM MOUNTS OVER BAHIAN TEMPORAO COCOA CROP
  Pessimism over the effects of a
  prolonged dry spell on the coming Bahian temporao cocoa crop is
  rising with trade forecasts generally in the 2.0 mln to 2.5 mln
  bag range against 2.5 mln to 3.0 mln a fortnight ago.
      Trade sources told Reuters from the state capital of
  Salvador that despite scattered rains since mid-February, which
  broke a six week drought, plantations have not picked up as
  hoped and very little cocoa is expected to be gathered in the
  first three months of the May/September crop.
      The sources said arrivals from May through July might only
  reach around 600,000 bags whereas in normal years a figure of
  1.0 mln to 1.5 mln bags might be expected.
      Arrivals from then should start to pick up sharply as pods
  from current flowering are gathered. However, the sources noted
  a late temporao is always more susceptible to pod rot, which
  flourishes if conditions turn cold and humid, and which is more
  likely from late July on.
      This year's crop is doubly susceptible because poor prices
  mean farmers were not encouraged to invest in fertilisers and
  insecticides and are also unlikely to treat against pod rot.
      A severe attack of pod rot can cause the loss of over
  500,000 bags in a very short period, one source said.
      Because of the increased exposure to pod rot damage,
  estimates of the final outcome of the temporao are extremely
  vulnerable and production could easily drop to below the 2.0
  mln bag mark if the disease hits.
      Although flowering was good following the start of the
  rains, pod setting was not up to expectations, possibly because
  the drought had caused a drop in the insect population which
  pollinates flowers, the sources said.
      However, reports from farms indicate moisture levels are
  now generally back to near normal levels and that current
  flowering and pod setting is good, which should result in
  mature fruit from August through September.
      The sources said they expect no break in the harvesting of
  beans between the end of the temporao and the beginning of the
  main crop, which officially starts on October 1.
      "The cut-off date is completely artificial. If things go
  well from now on we should see heavy harvesting without a break
  from August through November or even December," one said.
      If predictions of a 2.0 to 2.5 mln bag temporao prove
  accurate this would be below the 2.7 mln bag average for the
  past 10 years. The last poor temporao was in 1984 when
  prolonged drought and later pod rot cut production to 1.79 mln
  bags, the lowest since 1974.
      Good growing conditions the following year produced a
  temporao of 3.12 mln bags, just below the 1983 3.17 mln bag
  record, while last year's output, which also suffered some
  drought damage, was 2.77 mln bags.
      Figures for the coming temporao might be distorted upwards
  by the inclusion of undeclared current main crop beans.
      The sources said large quantities of beans are believed to
  have been undeclared from this year's record total harvest and
  they were unsure how much of this would be unregistered by the
  end of the official crop year on April 30.
      Recent official arrivals figures have been swollen by the
  inclusion of beans which had been delivered previously to port
  warehouses but not declared.
      Because of the high turnover of beans this year,
  significant amounts have deteriorated because they were stored
  too long at the back of warehouses. Some of these are expected
  to be held for mixing in with early temporao arrivals.
      With official arrivals figures for the 1986/87 temporao and
  main crops totalling over 6.1 mln bags, and over seven weeks
  still to go to the end of the year, the total outturn should be
  at least a record 6.5 mln bags if all production is declared,
  the sources said.
      This would compare with the previous record set last year
  of 6.03 mln.
      However, there is no way of telling how many current crop
  beans will be declared after the May 1 start of the temporao
  and thus the true size of the 1986/87 harvest may never be
  officially registered.
  

ROSE'S STORES INC &lt;RSTO> 4TH QTR JAN 28
  Shr 37 cts vs 37 cts
      net 7.6 mln vs 7.5 mln
      Revs 383.9 mln vs 326.3 mln
      Year
      Shr 1.17 dlrs vs 99 cts
      Net 24.0 mln vs 20.3 mln
      Revs 1.2 billion vs 1.0 billion
  

U.S. EXPORTERS REPORT 120,000 TONNES WHEAT  PURCHASED FROM FOREIGN SELLERS FOR 1987/88

  U.S. EXPORTERS REPORT 120,000 TONNES WHEAT  PURCHASED FROM FOREIGN SELLERS FOR 1987/88
  

PHILLIPS &lt;P> RAISES CRUDE POSTINGS 50 CTS
  Phillips Petroleum said it raised the
  contract price it will for all grades of crude oil 50 cts a
  barrel, effective today.
      The increase brings Phillip's posted price for the West
  Texas Intermediate and West Texas Sour grades to 17.50 dlrs a
  bbl.
      Phillips last changed its crude oil postings on March 4.
      The price increase follows similar moves by USX's &lt;X>
  subsidiary, Marathon oil, and Sun Co &lt;SUN> earlier today.
  

ASAMERA INC &lt;ASM> YEAR LOSS
  Oper shr loss 48 cts vs profit 50 cts
      Oper net loss 11.3 mln vs profit 18.1 mln
      Revs 262.8 mln vs 399.7 mln
      Note: 1986 net excludes tax gain of 1.1 mln dlrs or three
  cts shr vs yr-ago gain of 5.6 mln dlrs or 17 cts shr.
      1986 net includes 15 mln dlr charge for reduction in
  carrying value of refinery and related assets. 1985 net
  includes 10.8 mln dlr gain on sale of Canadian natural gas
  property.
      U.S. dlrs.
  

LVI GROUP INC &lt;LVI> 4TH QTR OPER NET
  Oper shr profit two cts vs loss 19 cts
      Oper net profit 523,000 vs loss 2,191,000
      Revs 102.5 mln vs 39.9 mln
      Avg shrs 20.0 mln vs 11.1 mln
      Year
      Oper shr profit 11 cts vs loss 29 cts
      Oper net profit 2,240,000 vs loss 2,884,000
      Revs 304.4 mln vs 50.3 mln
      Avg shrs 19.4 mln vs 9,759,000
       NOTE: 1986 4th qtr and year oper net excludes a gain of
  492,000 dlrs and 1,241,000 dlrs, respectively, for
  carryforwards and a loss of 135,000 dlrs and 533,000 dlrs,
  respectively, for early extinguishment of debt.
      1985 4th qtr and year oper net excludes a loss of 1,457,000
  dlrs or 14 cts per share and loss 1,735,000 dlrs or 18 cts per
  share, respectively, for discontinued operations.
  

TALKING POINT/PUROLATOR COURIER CORP &lt;PCC>
  Purolator Courier corp's stock rose on
  specualtion that a disgruntled former Purolator director would
  find a new suitor for the company, traders said.
      Purolator agreed in late February to a 35 dlr-a-share, 265
  mln-dlr offer from E.F. Hutton LBO Inc and certain members of
  its Purolator courier division's management.
      The stock today hit 36-1/4, up one.
      Today, Purolator revealed in a filing with the Securities
  and Exchange Commission that director Doresy Gardner resigned
  from its board of directors in a letter dated March 10.
      The letter from Gardner said he resigned the board because
  the merger agreement with Hutton barred directors from
  soliciting new offers and he believes shareholders might get a
  better deal. Gardner said he believes a better offer might be
  found if the company would agree to be sold to some other
  entity, or if it could sell off all or part of its U.S. courier
  division.
      "Basically, (the courier division) is a company that has
  450 mln dlrs in revenues. It's a very large company and it's
  being sold for 50 or 60 mln dlrs," said Gardner in a telephone
  interview with Reuters.
      Gardner is an official of Kelso Management, a firm
  associated with Fidelity International Ltd. A group of Fidelity
  companies owns eight pct of Purolator, and Gardner said he
  personally owns 20,000 shares.
      A Purolator official said the company has no comment on the
  letter from Gardner.
      Arbitragers speculated another overnight messenger service
  may emerge as a likely bidder for Purolator. Before the
  transaction with Hutton LBO was announced, analysts had also
  speculated another courier company would be the most likely
  suitor.
      While one arbitrager acknowledged there in fact may be no
  new bidders, he said the possibility one could appear pushed
  the stock into play again.
      "There's no shortage of possibilities. It's just a question
  of management's willingness to let the process continue," said
  one arbitrager.
      Arbitragers said a new buyer might be found because they
  believe Hutton LBO has taken on no risk in the transaction.
  Hutton has begun a tender for 83 pct of Purolator at 35 dlrs
  cash per share. The balance of Purolator's stock will be bought
  for securities and warrants in a new company holding the U.S.
  courier operations.
      The arbitragers said tender offer documents show that
  Hutton does not need to use its cash in the transaction and
  will emerge with a giant, majority equity interest in
  Purolator.
      "As far as I can tell from the public documents from the
  deal that's on the table, Hutton is basically putting up zero.
  One always likes a situation like that. You always like to
  think if they can do this deal at no risk, there should be
  someone else in the world that could do it higher," said one
  arbitrager.
      The firm, however, is supplying temporary financing, and
  sources close to the transaction disputed the claim that the
  firm will not end up paying for its equity position.
      While one scenario mentioned in the tender offer document
  did note that the E.F. Hutton Group subsidiary may not have to
  keep cash in the transaction, the sources said there is some
  risk to the firm.
      "There are a variety of contingencies and restricted cash,
  and all sorts of things that make it very speculative," said
  one of the sources, adding there are also severance payments to
  employees.
      The E.F. Hutton Group subsidiary is supplying 279 mln dlrs
  in so-called "bridge" financing for the transaction. The bridge
  financing is a temporary loan from Hutton.
      The financing is to be replaced with permanent financing,
  expected to come from banks. However, it may take some time to
  replace the financing, the source said, resulting in what could
  be a substantial expense to the firm.
      Gardner said Hutton stands to gain fees of 10 to 20 mln
  dlrs from the transaction, but sources close to the transaction
  said fees are at the low end of the scale.
      "It's a very complex transaction, but basically what
  happens is they ostensibly put up money but the fees recapture
  any investment they might have once the merger takes place,"
  Gardner said.
  

USDA SAYS WHEAT PURCHASED FROM FOREIGN SELLERS
  The U.S. Agriculture Department said
  private U.S. exporters reported purchases from foreign sellers
  of 120,000 tonnes of wheat for delivery to unknown
  destinations.
      The wheat, consisting of 60,000 tonnes of hard red winter
  and 60,000 tones of soft red winter, is for delivery during the
  1987/88 season, which begins June 1.
      A purchase from a foreign seller is a transaction in which
  a U.S. exporter contracts to buy U.S.-produced commodities from
  a foreign firm, the department said.
  

CONSOLIDATED TVX TO BUY BRAZIL GOLD MINE STAKES
  &lt;Consolidated TVX Mining Corp> said it
  agreed to issue 7.8 mln treasury shares to acquire interests in
  three gold mining companies in Brazil and an option to increase
  the company's interest in a platinum property.
      The company said the transactions will bring immediate
  production and earnings to Consolidated TVX, enhance its
  precious metal potential and is expected to improve cash flow
  and earnings on a per share basis. The company did not give
  specific figures.
      Consolidated TVX said it will acquire 29 pct of CMP, a
  public gold mining company in which TVX already holds a 15 pct
  interest, making TVX the largest single shareholder.
      The company also agreed to acquire a 19 pct stake in Novo
  Astro, a private company, and a 16 pct interest in Teles Pires
  Mining, increasing the TVX's ownership to 51 pct.
      In addition, Consolidated TVX said it will acquire the
  right to add a 10 pct interest to a platinum property in which
  it already owns a 29.4 pct stake.
      CMP earned 11 mln Canadian dlrs in 1986 and expects to
  produce 42,000 ounces of gold in 1987 at a cost of 160 U.S.
  dlrs an ounce, Consolidated TVX said.
      Novo Astro operates Brazil's richest gold mine located in
  Amapa State, with an average grade of 0.8 ounces of gold a ton
  in a hardrock quartz vein, Consolidated TVX said. Mining of
  eluvial surface material produced 25,000 ounces in 1986 and is
  expected to produce 60,000 ounces in 1987.
      It also said Teles Pires Mining controls rights to a 350
  kilometer section of the Teles Pires River, where one dredge is
  expected to produce 10,000 ounces of gold in 1987.
  

VOLCKER SEES NO CLEARCUT EVIDENCE THAT U.S. TRADE DETERIORATION HAS YET BEEN REVERSED

  VOLCKER SEES NO CLEARCUT EVIDENCE THAT U.S. TRADE DETERIORATION HAS YET BEEN REVERSED
  

 DIAMOND SHAMROCK &lt;DIA> RAISES CRUDE POSTINGS
  Diamond Shamrock said it raised the
  contract price it will pay for crude oil 50 cts a barrel,
  effective today.
      The increase brings the company's posted price for the
  benchmark grade, West Texas Intermediate, to 17.50 dlrs/bbl.
      Diamond Shamrock last changed its postings on March 4.
  

TORONTO DOMINION BANK CUTS PRIME RATE TO 8-3/4 PCT FROM 9-1/4 PCT - TOMORROW

  TORONTO DOMINION BANK CUTS PRIME RATE TO 8-3/4 PCT FROM 9-1/4 PCT - TOMORROW
  

BANK OF MONTREAL CUTS PRIME RATE TO 8-3/4 PCT FROM 9-1/4 PCT, EFFECTIVE FRIDAY

  BANK OF MONTREAL CUTS PRIME RATE TO 8-3/4 PCT FROM 9-1/4 PCT, EFFECTIVE FRIDAY
  

VOLCKER SAYS FED REMAINS CONCERNED ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF RENEWED INFLATION

  VOLCKER SAYS FED REMAINS CONCERNED ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF RENEWED INFLATION
  

ASSETS OF MONEY MARKET MUTUAL FUNDS FELL 35.3 MLN DLRS IN LATEST WEEK TO 237.43 BILLION

  ASSETS OF MONEY MARKET MUTUAL FUNDS FELL 35.3 MLN DLRS IN LATEST WEEK TO 237.43 BILLION
  

WEINBERGER OPPOSES FUJITSU BUYING U.S. FIRM
  Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger
  will join Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige in fighting
  Fujitsu Ltd's &lt;ITSU.T> plan to buy 80 pct of &lt;Fairchild
  Semiconductor Corp>, Pentagon officials said.
      "He (Weinberger) opposes it. It is not in the best interests
  of the country to have more of the micro-electronics business
  leaving the United States," one of the Pentagon officials, who
  asked not to be identified, told Reuters.
      Commerce Department officials told Reuters yesterday that
  Baldrige opposed the planned sale and that the White House
  Economic Policy Council will take up the matter within weeks.
      Commerce and defense officials said Baldrige and Weinberger
  feared the U.S. military is already leaning too heavily on
  foreign electronic support.
      But the Defense Department also said today that Weinberger
  and Baldrige differed on the proposed sale of U.S. computer
  equipment to Iran.
      The Commerce Department advised the Pentagon recently that
  defense objections to two proposed sales -- to an Iranian power
  company and the Islamic Republic of Iran News Agency -- were
  not valid and the sales of small and medium computers would go
  through unless more evidence was presented.
  

WARWICK INSURANCE MANAGERS INC &lt;WIMI> 4TH QTR
  Oper shr 17 cts vs 19 cts
      Oper net 636,000 vs 358,000
      Revs 10.6 mln vs 7,024,000
      Avg shrs 3,808,000 vs 1,924,000
      Year
      Oper shr 73 cts vs 65 cts
      Oper net 2,467,000 vs 1,199,000
      Revs 31.5 mln vs 22.9 mln
      Avg shrs 3,372,000 vs 1,785,000
      NOTE: Net excludes investment gains 20,000 dlrs vs 86,000
  dlrs in quarter and 586,000 dlrs vs 195,000 dlrs in year.
      1985 year net excludes 304,000 dlr tax credit.
      Share adjusted for one-for-two reverse split in November
  1985.
  

GLICKMAN PUSHES HARD FOR 0/92 FARM PLAN
  Implementation of a one-year 0/92
  pilot program for wheat and feedgrains was strongly promoted
  today by the chairman of a key house agriculture subcommittee
  as a way to cut farm costs and simultaneously give farmers
  another option when making their planting decisions.
      "We have a budget driven farm policy. It may be a shame,
  but we are locked into this," said Dan Glickman, (D-Kans.),
  chairman of the subcommittee on wheat, soybeans and feed
  grains. "We need to look at ways to cut costs and not hurt the
  farmer. A 0/92 plan, if properly done, could do both."
      Glickman announced this week plans to introduce a 0/92 bill
  for 1987 and 1988 wheat and feedgrains. An aide to Glickman
  said that it will probably be introduced next week.
      Glickman said a 0/92 program, which allows a farmer to
  forego planting and still receive 92 pct of his deficiency
  payment, would not be a major revision of the 1985 farm bill --
  only an extension of the 50/92 option already provided under
  the current bill.
      It is premature to make any major changes in the farm bill,
  he said, but if agriculture has to make further cuts to meet
  budget goals, a voluntary 0/92 plan would be better than
  sharply cutting target prices, as USDA has proposed.
      A 0/92 plan, however, would not be decoupling, but simply a
  different type of acreage diversion program, Glickman said.
      Decoupling -- delinking planting decisions from government
  payments -- is too much of a policy change to approve at this
  point, he said.
      "I don't think there is any interest in pursuing a
  decoupling bill this year. Period. Unequivocal," Glickman said
  at the hearing.
      Sen. Rudy Boschwitz (R-Minn.), cosponsor of the
  Boren/Boschwitz decoupling plan, said he supports a short term
  0/92 program as a move to a more permament decoupling plan.
      Boschwitz plans to introduce a 0/92 plan in the senate. His
  plan would guarantee a certain deficiency payment to
  participating farmers, require that idled acreage be put to
  conservation use only, prohibit haying and grazing on extra
  idled acreage, limit participation to a certain number of acres
  in a county and provide tenant protection provisions.
      "I know we cannot obtain complete decoupling in 1987, but
  we can at least move in that direction," Boschwitz said.
      Robbin Johnson, vice president of Cargill, Inc., testified
  in favor of decoupling. Decoupling would end the current bias
  in U.S. farm policy towards overproduction and reduce farmers'
  dependency on the government, he said.
      A 0/92 plan does not go far enough in decoupling, Johnson
  said, and would still encourage farmers to plant.
      Officials from the National Corn Growers Association and
  the National Cattlemen's Association said their groups oppose
  any 0/92 or decoupling plan due to concerns about reopening the
  farm bill and creating more confusion among farmers.
      But when asked if his association were forced to choose
  between a ten pct cut in target prices or a 0/92 program, Larry
  Johnson of the Corn Growers said they would agree to 0/92
  rather than take sharp cuts in target levels.
  

SAFEGUARD SCIENTIFIC &lt;SFE> IN EQUITY DEAL
  Safeguard Scientifics Inc
  said it made a 2.5 mln dlr equity investment in &lt;Sanchez
  Computer Associates Inc>, a private computer software firm
  based in Malvern, Pa.
     Safeguard said the investment gives it a "major ownership
  position" in Sanchez, which specializes in software products
  for financial institutions.
  

CORE INDUSTRIES INC &lt;CRI> 2ND QTR FEB 28 NET
  Shr 20 cts vs 22 cts
      Net 1,948,000 vs 2,124,000
      Sales 40.9 mln vs 41.0 mln
      Six mths
      Shr 40 cts vs 50 cts
      Net 3,864,000 vs 4,835,000
      Sales 81.7 mln vs 79.9 mln
      NOTE: 1986 results include gain on sale of land of 571,000
  dlrs, or six cts a share
      1986 results include loss from discontinued operations of
  403,000 dlrs, or four cts a share in the quarter and 598,000
  dlrs, or six cts a share in the six months
  

FIRST FINANCIAL &lt;FFMC> IN STOCK SPLIT
  First Financial Management Corp said
  its board declared a three-for-two stock split of its common
  stock.
      The split will be effected by a 50 pct stock dividend for
  shareholders of record March 23 to be distributed on April six.
  

BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA CUTS PRIME RATE TO 8-3/4 PCT FROM 9-1/4 PCT, EFFECTIVE TOMORROW

  BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA CUTS PRIME RATE TO 8-3/4 PCT FROM 9-1/4 PCT, EFFECTIVE TOMORROW
  

CHEMLAWN &lt;CHEM> RISES ON HOPES FOR HIGHER BIDS
  ChemLawn Corp &lt;CHEM> could attract a
  higher bid than the 27 dlrs per share offered by Waste
  Management Inc &lt;WNX>, Wall Street arbitrageurs said.
      Shares of ChemLawn shot up 11-5/8 to 29-3/8 in
  over-the-counter- trading with 3.8 mln of the company's 10.1
  mln shares changing hands by late afternoon.
      "This company could go for 10 times cash flow or 30 dlrs,
  maybe 32 dollars depending on whether there is a competing
  bidder," an arbitrageur said. Waste Management's tender offer,
  announced before the opening today, expires March 25.
      "This is totally by surprise," said Debra Strohmaier, a
  ChemLawn spokeswoman. The company's board held a regularly
  scheduled meeting today and was discussing the Waste Management
  announcement. She said a statement was expected but it was not
  certain when it would be ready. 
      She was unable to say if there had been any prior contact
  between Waste Management and ChemLawn officials.
      "I think they will resist it," said Elliott Schlang,
  analyst at Prescott, Ball and Turben Inc. "Any company that
  doesn't like a surprise attack would."
      Arbitrageurs pointed out it is difficult to resist tender
  offers for any and all shares for cash. Schlang said ChemLawn
  could try to find a white knight if does not want to be
  acquired by Waste Management.
      Analyst Rosemarie Morbelli of Ingalls and Snyder said
  ServiceMaster Companies L.P. &lt;SVM> or Rollins Inc &lt;ROL> were
  examples of companies that could be interested.
      ChemLawn, with about two mln customers, is the largest U.S.
  company involved in application of fertilizers, pesticides and
  herbicides on lawns. Waste Management is involved in removal of
  wastes.
      Schlang said ChemLawn's customer base could be valuable to
  another company that wants to capitalize on a strong
  residential and commercial distribution system.
      Both Schlang and Morbelli noted that high growth rates had
  catapulted ChemLawn's share price into the mid-30's in 1983 but
  the stock languished as the rate of growth slowed.
      Schlang said the company's profits are concentrated in the
  fourth quarter. In 1986 ChemLawn earned 1.19 dlrs per share for
  the full year, and 2.58 dlrs in the fourth quarter.
      Morbelli noted ChemLawn competes with thousands of
  individual entrepreuers who offer lawn and garden care sevice.
  

CANADA INDUSTRIAL PRICES UP 0.2 PCT IN MONTH
  Canada's industrial product price index
  rose 0.2 pct in January after falling 0.2 pct in each of the
  two previous months, Statistics Canada said.
      The rise was led by price gains for papers, pharmaceuticals
  and petroleum and coal products. Price declines were recorded
  for meat products, lumber and motor vehicles.
      On a year over year basis, the federal agency said the
  index fell 0.9 pct in January, the largest yearly decline on
  record.
  

OCCIDENTAL UNIT &lt;OXY> LIFTS LOCKOUT
  Iowa Beef Processors Inc is lifting a
  lockout at its Dakota City, Nebraska processing plant and plans
  to resume operations March 16, United Food and Commercial
  Workers Union spokesman Allen Zack said by phone from his
  Washington, D.C. headquarters.
      Iowa Beef, a susbsidiary of Occidental Petroleum Corp,
  mailed a letter to members of UFCWU Local 222 informing them a
  lockout imposed by the company on December 14 would be lifted
  and meatpackers could return to work under Iowa Beef's
  "revised, last and best final offer," according to Zack.
      The letter was signed by four managers at the Dakota City
  plant.
      Iowa Beef closed the proessing plant indefinitely in
  mid-December because, it said, it had no alternative to threats
  by meatpackers to disrupt operations.
      About 2,800 members of Local 222 are affected by the
  shutdown. A 3-1/2 year labor contract at the plant expired
  December 13.
  

CIRCON CORP &lt;CCON> 4TH QTR
  Shr loss two cts vs profit 10 cts
      Net loss 79,000 vs profit 507,000
      Revs 10.6 mln vs 2,238,000
      12 mths
      Shr profit two cts vs profit 23 cts
      Net 89,000 vs 1,130,000
      Revs 21.4 mln vs 7,766,000
  

BROWN TRANSPORT &lt;BTCU> DECLARES FIRST PAYOUT
  Brown Transport Co Inc said its board
  declared an initial quarterly dividend of four cts a share,
  payable April 10 to stockholders of record March 31.
  

WRIGHT SAYS A GAS TAX AN OPTION TO CUT DEFICIT
  House Speaker Jim Wright said a
  gasoline tax is one option to finding a way to reduce the
  deficit, but told reporters in response to a question he will
  not try to dictate a solution to the debt problem.
      Wright has made suggestions for raising taxes about 20
  billion dlrs as part of a budget plan to reduce the deficit.
  Tax proposals are being given consideration by members of the
  House Budget Committee, but the details of any tax increase
  would be made by the tax writing House ways and Means
  Committee.
  

KEY U.S. HOUSE TRADE SUBCOMMITTEE APPROVES BILL TO TOUGHEN U.S. TRADE LAWS

  KEY U.S. HOUSE TRADE SUBCOMMITTEE APPROVES BILL TO TOUGHEN U.S. TRADE LAWS
  

&lt;SUMMIT PETROLEUM CORP> SELLS SHARES
  Summit Petroleum Corp said it
  sold 11.3 mln shares, or 29.4 pct, of its common stock to
  &lt;Halbert and Associates Inc>.
      The company said the shares were previously held by
  &lt;Consolidated Energy Corp> and Harken Oil and Gas Inc &lt;HOGI>.
      In addition, David D. Halbert, president and chief
  executive officer of Halbert, an Abilene investment firm, was
  named chairman and chief executive of Summit, the company said.
     Halbert, Charles M. Bruce and James O. Burke were also named
  directors, expanding the board to five, Summit added.
      The company said Burke is president and chief executive of
  &lt;Allied Comprehensive Health Inc>, Abilene, while Bruce is a
  partner in the Washington law firm of Butler and Binion.
      Summit said it intends to actively seek acquisitions to
  increase its asset base.
  

JAPANESE CRUSHERS BUY CANADIAN RAPESEED
  Japanese crushers bought 8,000 tonnes
  of Canadian rapeseed in export business overnight for April
  shipment, trade sources said.
  

NO CLEAR EVIDENCE TRADE GAP REVERSED - VOLCKER
  Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul
  Volcker said current data does not give a clear sign that the
  deterioration in the U.S. trade balance has yet been reversed.
      "The data we have in hand do not provide clearcut evidence
  that the deterioration in the trade balance has yet been
  reversed," Volcker said in remarks prepared for delivery to a
  luncheon for community leaders here.
      However, Volcker said there are encouraging signs,
  particularly the rising volume of exports over the past year,
  achieved despite relatively slow growth abroad.
      Volcker warned it is not sustainable from an economic
  perspective to pile up foreign debt while failing to make the
  investment needed to generate growth and earn the money to
  service the debt.
      He said the process of restoring external balance to the
  U.S. economy requires dealing with the budget deficit. He said
  needed economic adjustment will require a relative shift of
  financial and real resources into internationally competitive
  industry. "More of our growth will need to be reflected in net
  exports and business investment and less in consumption,"
  Volcker said.
  

IOWA BEEF LIFTS LOCKOUT AT DAKOTA CITY
  Iowa Beef Processors Inc is lifting a
  lockout at its Dakota City, Nebraska, processing plant and
  plans to resume operations March 16, United Food and Commercial
  Workers (UFCW) Union spokesman Allen Zack said.
      Iowa Beef mailed a letter to members of UFCW Local 222
  informing them a lockout imposed by the company December 14
  would be lifted and meatpackers could return to work under Iowa
  Beef's "revised, last and best final offer," Zack said.
      Iowa Beef had closed the plant indefinitely in mid-December
  because it said it had no alternative to threats by meatpackers
  to disrupt operations.
      About 2,800 members of Local 222 are affected by the
  shutdown. A 3-1/2 year labor contract at the plant expired
  December 13.
  

N.Y. BUSINESS LOANS FALL 718 MLN DLRS IN MARCH 4 WEEK, FED SAYS

  N.Y. BUSINESS LOANS FALL 718 MLN DLRS IN MARCH 4 WEEK, FED SAYS
  

NEW YORK BANK DISCOUNT WINDOW BORROWINGS NIL IN MARCH 11 WEEK

  NEW YORK BANK DISCOUNT WINDOW BORROWINGS NIL IN MARCH 11 WEEK
  

TONY LOMA CO INC &lt;TLAM> 4TH QTR
  Shr profit nil vs loss 61 cts
      Net profit 3,000 vs loss 1,148,000
      Revs 18.4 mln vs 17.8 mln
      Year
      Shr loss 94 cts vs loss 28 cts
      Net loss 1,762,000 vs loss 524,000
      Revs 58.5 mln vs 67.3 mln
      NOTE: 1986 net includes extraordinary gain of 569,000 dlrs
  or 30 cts per share.
  

ALLIED-LYONS SEES NO CHANGE IN HIRAM WALKER STAKE
  Allied-Lyons PLC &lt;ALLD.L> and Canada's
  Reichmann brothers are working well together as partners and
  currently do not plan any change in their joint ownership of
  distiller Hiram Walker-Gooderham and Worts, Allied-Lyons
  chairman Derrick Holden-Brown said.
      Allied-Lyons got 51 pct control of Hiram Walker-Gooderham
  last year for about 600 mln U.S. dlrs, while the Reichmanns'
  &lt;Gulf Canada Corp> acquired 49 pct in an out-of-court pact
  after a hostile battle for the wine and spirits division of
  &lt;Hiram Walker Resources Ltd>.
      "We are getting along very well as partners ... I hope
  there won't be any change, but there could be," Holden-Brown
  told reporters after a speech in Toronto.
      He said Allied-Lyons has a two-year call option that could
  force Gulf Canada to sell its 49 pct stake to Allied-Lyons, and
  Gulf Canada has a two-year put option that could obligate
  Allied-Lyons to buy its 49 pct.
      "Both we and Gulf hope very much there will be no occasion
  for either the put or call to be exercised," Holden-Brown said.
      In answer to a reporter's question, Holden-Brown said it
  would be possible for Gulf Canada to sell off part of its 49
  pct in a public offering with Allied-Lyons' consent. "I don't
  think we would have any objection to it," he added.
      Allied-Lyons maintains control of Hiram Walker-Gooderham's
  board of directors and has total responsibility for its
  management. "We cannot contemplate giving up our control," he
  said.
      Holden-Brown would not disclose how big a profit
  contribution the distiller will make in Allied-Lyons' financial
  results, but he said "it will be substantial."
      "I am not able to give profit forecasts," he said.
      Holden-Brown said Allied-Lyons was able to finance the
  Hiram Walker-Gooderham acquisition with cash and borrowings,
  and has no current plans for a stock issue.
      He said the company is not currently negotiating any more
  acquisitions in Canada but has a team of officials evaluating
  possible purchases of wines, spirits, soft drinks or food
  concerns. "I don't think we shall be looking at the brewery
  scene (which is) highly concentrated already," he added.
      Holden-Brown said Allied-Lyons plans to list its shares on
  Canadian stock exchanges, possibly later this year.
  

NEW YORK BUSINESS LOANS FALL 718 MLN DLRS
  Commercial and industrial loans on the
  books of the 10 major New York banks, excluding acceptances,
  fell 718 mln dlrs to 64.87 billion in the week ended March 4,
  the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said.
      Including acceptances, loans fell 581 mln dlrs to 65.63
  billion.
      Commercial paper outstanding nationally dropped 13 mln dlrs
  to 336.02 billion.
      National business loan data are scheduled to be released on
  Friday.
  

EATON VANCE CORP &lt;EAVN> 1ST QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 53 cts vs 34 cts
      Net 2,253,742 vs 1,332,652
      Avg shrs 4,251,553 vs 3,932,064
  

ADAMS EXPRESS CO &lt;ADX> SETS REGULAR PAYOUT
  Div 12 cts vs 12 cts
      Pay April 20
      Record April 8
      NOTE: company pays dividend of 12 cts three times annually
  with a bulk payment at the end of the fiscal year to equal
  annual dividend of 50 cts.
  

CARGILL OFFICIAL DEFENDS CERTIFICATE PROGRAMS
  The use of generic in-kind commodity
  certificates has helped ease storage problems and is a
  necessary part of export promotion programs, a senior executive
  for the world's largest grain company said.
      Testifying before the House Agriculture subcommittee on
  wheat, soybeans and feedgrains, Robbin Johnson, vice president
  of Cargill, Inc., disputed claims that U.S. grain companies
  have made huge profits from certificate trading.
      "The certs program is not in any way a windfall to the
  trade," he said. Johnson said that Cargill has been dealing
  with a two pct spread in certificate transactions, and that
  this is within the normal grain marketing levels.
      Johnson recognized current concern over the cost of
  certificates as compared to cash, but said that critics need to
  look more closely at the savings caused by certs, noting for
  example that widespread use of certs in the PIK and Roll
  marketing technique last summer helped ease storage costs.
      Certificates are also an important part of any export
  promotion program, he said.
      "The more you look at ways to expand export markets, the
  more you have to look at ways to expand certs to put more grain
  into the market to meet demand," he said.
      Subcommittee chairman Dan Glickman (D-Kans.) said his
  committee would be looking at the certificate program later
  this year and studying the General Accounting Office report on
  certificate costs.
  

HOUSE SPEAKER BACKS OIL IMPORT FORECAST PLAN
  House Speaker Jim Wright endorsed a
  proposal to require the president to take action to reduce oil
  imports if they threaten to top 50 pct of U.S. consumption.
      Wright told reporters the plan by Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, a
  fellow Texas Democrat, was positive and useful. Oil imports
  peaked in 1977 at 47 pct, were short of 36 pct last year and
  this year are up over 40 pct, Bentsen said. 
      The Bentsen proposal, supported by 24 other Senators, would
  would require the president to issue annual three-year oil
  import forecasts. In any year they threatened to top 50 pct, he
  would be ordered to propose quotas or other solution.
  

U.S. BANK DISCOUNT BORROWINGS AVERAGE 148 MLN DLRS A DAY IN MARCH 11 WEEK, FED SAYS

  U.S. BANK DISCOUNT BORROWINGS AVERAGE 148 MLN DLRS A DAY IN MARCH 11 WEEK, FED SAYS
  

U.S. BANK NET FREE RESERVES 660 MLN DLRS IN TWO WEEKS TO MARCH 11, FED SAYS

  U.S. BANK NET FREE RESERVES 660 MLN DLRS IN TWO WEEKS TO MARCH 11, FED SAYS
  

U.S. M1 FALLS 600 MLN DLRS IN MARCH 2 WEEK, FEB M2 DOWN 1.6 BILLION, M3 UP 3.0 BILLION

  U.S. M1 FALLS 600 MLN DLRS IN MARCH 2 WEEK, FEB M2 DOWN 1.6 BILLION, M3 UP 3.0 BILLION
  

PRINCEVILLE &lt;PVDC> TO SELL ITS AIR OPERATION
  Princeville Development Corp and
  &lt;Aloha Inc>, parent of Aloha Airlines Inc, jointly said they
  agreed to terms for the sale of Princeville Airways Inc to
  Aloha. Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
      Under the proposed sale, the companies said Aloha would
  acquire the entire Princeville Airways commuter operation and
  access to the Princeville Airport on the island of Kauai.
      They said Princeville Airways is expected to operate as a
  subsidiary of Aloha Inc and will continue to use the
  Princeville Aiways name.
  

NEW HAMPSHIRE SAVINGS &lt;NHSB> TO BUY BANK
  New Hampshire Savings Bank Corp
  said it agreed to buy &lt;Seashore Bankshares Inc> in an exchange
  of stock.
      According to the terms of the deal, it said Seashore's
  61,000 shares will be exchanged for 9.8 mln dlrs of New
  Hampshire Savings stock.
      It said Seashore Bankshares has assets of about 46 mln
  dlrs.
  

FCOJ MOVEMENT 3,915,370 GALLONS LAST WEEK
  Florida Citrus Processors
  Association said frozen concentrate orange juice movement into
  trade channels in the week ended March 7 totalled 3,915,370
  gallons versus 3,956,126 gallons in the week ended February 28
  and 4,284,693 gallons in the corresponding year-ago period.
      There were 3,814,891 gallons of foreign imports last week
  versus 133,505 gallons the week before. Domestic imports last
  week were 306,031. Retail movement was 1,652,916 versus
  2,015,953 a year ago. Bulk movement was 1,934,494 against
  1,954,103 a year earlier.
      Current season cumulative movement was 60,480,375 gallons
  versus 59,654,702 last year. Cumulative net pack for the season
  was 80,359,978 versus 74,071,755 a year ago. Inventory was
  83,422,435 versus 81,963,040 a year ago.
  

U.S. M-1 MONEY SUPPLY FALLS 600 MLN DLRS
  U.S. M-1 money supply fell 600 mln
  dlrs to a seasonally adjusted 738.0 billion dlrs in the March 2
  week, the Federal Reserve said.
      The previous week's M-1 level was revised to 738.6 billion
  dlrs from 738.5 billion, while the four-week moving average of
  M-1 rose to 737.1 billion dlrs from 736.8 billion.
      Commenting on February growth of the broader monetary
  aggregates, the Fed said that M-2 fell 1.6 billion dlrs, while
  M-3 rose three billion. Economists polled by Reuters had
  projected a 900 mln dlr fall in M-1, a 1.8 billion dlr drop in
  M-2 and no change in M-3.
  

BOLIVIA TO OFFER TO BUY BACK BANK DEBT
  Bolivia is to make a formal offer during
  the next few months to buy back its 900 mln dlrs debt from
  commercial banks at a discount of up to 90 pct, central bank
  president Jier Nogales said.
       Nogales told Reuters in an interview the steering
  committee of Bolivia's creditor banks had agreed to consider
  the offer at a meeting in New York last month.
       He said the offer would be based on the value of Bolivian
  paper on the international secondary debt market, where it now
  trades at between 10 and 15 pct of its face value.
      Nogales said Bolivia will make a single offer to buy back
  its commercial debt and banks who accepted would be paid the
  discounted rate in full.
      Banks which declined the offer would be repaid over 20 to
  30 years at interest rates below those fixed in the
  international markets, he added.
      Bolivia has frozen payments on medium and long term loans
  to commercial banks since March, 1984, and Nogales said there
  would be no money available to restart traditional debt
  servicing to them for some time.
       Several Latin American countries have initiated schemes to
  cancel foreign debt by equity swaps or third party buy-backs,
  but Bolivia would be the first country in the region to make a
  formal offer to buy back all its commercial bank debt at
  discounted rates.
      Nogales said practical and strategic considerations would
  determine the exact timing of the offer but it would be made in
  the next few months.
       He said Bolivia would not bargain with creditor banks over
  the price to paid for the debt paper they hold, and would make
  a single non-negotiable offer.
      He said Bolivia could not even pay interest to friendly
  creditor countries, let alone commercial banks. The only
  traditional way forward was to capitalise interest, which would
  mean greater bank exposure in Bolivia and greater loss
  provisions, he added.
      "We are confident that the banks are going to be
  reasonable," Nogales said. "Now they can resolve their problems
  for once and for all."
      "The most conservative ones who want a little more will
  wait a year, but I don't know if the window of opportunity will
  be open all the time," he added.
      Discussing the status of other parts of Bolivia's four
  billion dlr foreign debt, 2.5 billion of which is owed to
  governments and the rest to international agencies, Nogales
  said negotiators had achieved considerable success in recent
  discussions with the Paris Club.
       He said Paris Club creditors had agreed to reschedule
  Bolivian debt over 10 years with five to six years grace, while
  accepting that interest would not be paid until 1989. Interest
  rates were being discussed on a bilateral basis under Paris
  Club rules, he added.
       He said some Paris Club members had agreed to disregard
  penalty interest payments and negotiations were continuing with
  Argentina and Brazil, who hold 700 mln dlrs of Bolivian debt.
      He said Bolivia was continuing to service loans from
  international agencies, and it expected to receive up to 400
  mln dlrs in disbursements this year.
      The capital flow for loans and their servicing had changed
  from a negative balance of 250 mln dlrs in 1985 to a net inflow
  of 130 mln dlrs last year, he added.
      Nogales said that Bolivia's net international reserves now
  stood at around 250 mln dlrs, compared to one mln dlrs in
  disposable funds when the government of Victor Paz Estenssoro
  took office in August, 1985.
      Nogales said inflation, which soared to over 20,000 pct a
  year in the government's first month in office, was now down to
  10 pct on an annualised basis from the last six months, and the
  plan was that it should continue at this level.
      He said the government was also expecting at least three
  pct growth in gdp this year after several years of negative
  rates.
  

U.S. MARKET LOAN NOT THAT ATTRACTIVE-BOSCHWITZ
  A marketing loan for U.S. wheat,
  feedgrains and soybeans would do nothing to help the surplus
  production situation and would be extremely costly, Sen. Rudy
  Boschwitz (R-Minn.) said.
      "I think I would not support a marketing loan now," he told
  the House agriculture subcommittee on wheat, soybeans and
  feedgrains. Boschwitz was one of the original supporters of a
  marketing loan for cotton and rice, but has since focused
  support on decoupling legislation, the Boren/Boschwitiz bill.
      A market loan for grains and soybeans would encourage more
  production, especially in high-yielding areas, would be much
  more expensive than the current cotton and rice marketing loans
  and not increase exports significantly, he said.
  

GELCO CORP 2ND QTR SHR 67 CTS VS 23 CTS

  GELCO CORP 2ND QTR SHR 67 CTS VS 23 CTS
  

AMVESTORS FINANCIAL &lt;AVFC> SETS STOCK DIVIDEND
  AmVestors Financial Corp said it
  declared a 25 pct stock dividend payable June 19 to holders of
  record June one, subject to an increase in authorized shares.
      It said shareholders will vote at the April 23 annual
  meeting to increase authorized shares to 25 mln from 10 mln.
      The company also said it plans to pay an initial quarterly
  dividend of five cts a share on the shares.
  

U.S. HOUSE PANEL APPROVES TRADE BILL
  The House Ways and Means Trade 
  Subcommittee unanimously approved a toned-down version of
  legislation designed to toughen U.S. trade laws and wedge open
  foreign markets to more U.S. goods.
      The measure now goes to the full House Ways and Means
  Committee next week, but major changes are not expected,
  congressional sources said.
      "This product could very well be toughening our trade policy
  and doing it in a manner that opens markets without this
  frightening word 'protectionism'," Ways and Means chairman Dan
  Rostenkowski, an Illinois Democrat said.
      The trade subcommittee backed away from mandating specific
  retaliation against foreign countries for unfair foreign trade
  practices as the House had approved in a trade bill last year.
      But it held over for the full Ways and Means Committee
  debate on a controversial plan by Rep. Richard Gephardt to
  mandate a reduction in trade surpluses with the U.S. by
  countries such as Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
      Gephardt, a Missouri Democrat, has not decided the exact
  form of his amendment, an aide said. Last year the House
  approved his idea to force an annual ten pct trade surplus cut
  by those countries. 
      The trade bill will be wrapped in with legislation from
  other committees dealing with relaxation of export controls,
  incentives for research, expanded worker training and education
  and other efforts to increase U.S. competitiveness.
      The comprehensive trade bill is to be considered by the
  full House in late April and then will be considered by Senate
  committees.
      It requires President Reagan to retaliate against foreign
  unfair trade practices but do not mandate quotas or tariffs and
  allow an exemption if U.S. economic security would be harmed by
  U.S. actions against other countries.
      The bill would make it easier for U.S. industries to win
  relief from surges of imports of competitive products.
      It extends until January 1993, the administration's
  authority to negotiate trade agreements as part of the new
  round of multilateral talks under the General Agreements on
  Tariffs and Trade.
      And, it includes provisions to tighten trade rules on
  copyrights, patents and telecommunications goods.
  

STANDARD LOGIC INC &lt;STDL> 1ST QTR LOSS
  Qtr ends Jan 30
      Oper shr loss 45 cts vs profit 44 cts
      Oper Net loss 225,815 vs profit 219,593
      Revs 175,247 vs 827,748
      NOTE: oper net 1987 excludes loss from discontinued
  operations of 125,047 vs loss 34,055 for prior qtr.
      excludes tax carryforward 150,000 for prior qtr.
  

INFLATION STILL A CONCERN, VOLCKER SAYS
  Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul
  Volcker said both the Fed and the financial markets remain
  concerned about the possibility of renewed inflation.
      "A possibility of renewed inflation remains of concern,
  both in the markets and within the Federal Reserve," he said in
  remarks prepared for delivery to a group of business leaders
  here.
      He said one potential channel for renewed inflationary
  pressures would be an excessive fall of the dollar in the
  exchange markets, which would push import prices up sharply.
      He said participants in financial markets and business
  remain skeptical of prospects for lasting price stability.
      "Should the skepticism about our ability to resist
  inflation be reinforced by bad policy, the consequences for
  interest rates, for exchange rates, and for the economy
  generally would clearly be undesirable...recognition of that
  danger neccesarily must weigh heavily in the formation of
  monetary policy," the Fed chairman said.
      Volcker said attempts to drive the dollar much lower would
  undermine the hard won gains against inflation and would risk
  dissipating the flow of foreign capital.
  

UNOCAL RAISES MOST CRUDE PRICES 50 CTS, TODAY, WTI AT 17.50 DLRS

  UNOCAL RAISES MOST CRUDE PRICES 50 CTS, TODAY, WTI AT 17.50 DLRS
  

STROBER ORGANIZATION INC &lt;STRB> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 22 cts vs 17 cts
      Net 1,232,000 vs 834,000
      Sales 24.1 mln vs 20.9 mln
      Avg shrs 5,609,000 vs five mln
      Year
      Shr 97 cts vs 69 cts
      Net 4,985,000 vs 3,426,000
      Sales 92.4 mln vs 77.9 mln
      Avg shrs 5,153,000 vs five mln
  

SHAWMUT CORP &lt;SHAS> SETS REGULARY DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 51 cts vs 51 cts prior
      Pay April one
      Record March 23
  

ANGLO AMERICAN &lt;AIVJ.J> YEAR TO DEC 31
  Shr 516 cts vs 347
      Final div 135 vs 125 making 190 vs 180
      Pre-tax 133 mln rand vs 137 mln
      Net 260 mln vs 172 mln
      Tax 76 mln vs 42 mln
      Att to outside shareholders 96 mln vs 53 mln
      Pref div 1 mln vs same
      Turnover 3.14 billion vs 2.56 billion
      Div pay May 8, register March 27.
      Note - Full name is Anglo American Industrial Corp Ltd.
  

LIVE CATTLE RALLY AS LOCKOUT AT MEAT PLANT ENDS
  Live cattle futures posted a robust
  rally today after a major beef packing company said it would
  end a lockout at its slaughtering plant in Dakota City, Neb.
      April delivery cattle on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
  closed at 64.45 cents a pound, up 0.83 cent, as the market
  expected demand for live animals to increase as the plant
  restarts operations.
      Iowa Beef Processors, a division of Occidental Petroleum,
  said it planned to reopen the plant, one of the largest in the
  nation, on March 16. The plant has been closed since Dec. 14,
  the day after a contract between IBP and Local 222 of the
  United Food and Commercial Workers Union expired.
      The plant employs 2,800 workers and can slaughter several
  thousand animals a day, a company spokesman said.
      The company said it locked out union workers because they
  threatened to disrupt operations. It was unclear whether union
  meatpackers would return to work. They rejected the company's
  latest contract offer March 5.
      Traders said cattle prices advanced at midsession as rumors
  circulated that the lockout was ending, and gains were further
  fueled by a noticeable increase in demand for live animals on
  cash markets in Nebraska and the Texas Panhandle.
      The rally in cattle also boosted values of live hogs and
  frozen pork bellies, which also were supported by indications
  that producers were expanding their hog herds at a slower rate
  than previously expected.
      Petroleum futures posted a modest rally on the New York
  Mercantile Exchange.
      But a report that the Soviet Union planned to reduce the
  price of its crude oil exports may pressure the market Friday,
  said Nauman Barakat, petroleum analyst in New York with Smith
  Barney, Harris Upham and Co.
      Buying by companies that deal in petroleum helped prices
  recover from early weakness, traders said.
      Gold futures rallied, partly in response to strength in the
  silver market, on the Commodity Exchange in New York. Silver
  prices rallied after a U.S. brokerage house recommended its
  customers buy the metal, traders said.
      Coffee futures drifted lower in response to a report that
  Colombia lowered the price of its exports, traders said.
      Sugar prices closed slightly higher on the Coffee, Sugar
  and Cocoa Exchange despite a large export sale by the European
  Commission on Wednesday.
      Soybeans were higher, wheat lower and corn mixed on the
  Chicago Board of Trade.
      Soybeans were boosted by expectations that the Agriculture
  Department would report a healthy signup for the Conservation
  Reserve Program, which pays farmers to leave highly erodible
  land idle instead of planting a crop, traders said.
      Concern that a strike by Brazilian seamen might interrupt
  exports of soybeans from Brazil, where the harvest is just
  beginning, also underpinned prices, they said.
      Wheat prices were pressured by selling in response to
  trends on price charts, they said.
  

PERMIAN BASIN &lt;PBT> PROVEN RESERVES FALL
  Permian Basin Royalty Trust
  said that as of December 31, 1986, its estimated proved
  reserves totaled 18.5 mln barrels of oil and 52.9 mln MCF, or
  thousand cubic feet, of gas.
      This compares with yearend 1985 proved reserves estimates
  of 26.4 mln barrels of oil and 78.6 mln MCF of gas, Permian
  said.
      Permian said December 1986 future net revenues from proved
  reserves were 335.6 mln dlrs, down from 814.2 mln dlrs in 1985.
      Permian said the present value of estimated future net
  revenues discounted at 10 pct is 165.3 mln dlrs, compared with
  374.3 mln dlrs.
      It said the downward revisions in both proved reserves and
  estimated future net revenues resulted from decreased prices for
  oil and gas.
  

VENEZUELAN PRESIDENT DEFENDS REFINANCING ACCORD
  president jaime lusinchi defended the
  20.3 billion dlr debt rescheduling accord his government
  recently signed, saying it will open new credit flows and bring
  needed foreign investment to venezuela.
      In his annual state of the nation speech, lusinchi also
  said venezuela supports other latin american debtors, despite
  having reached a rescheduling accord on its own.
      In the 90-minute speech to the congress, lusinchi summed up
  the achievements of his administration, which took office in
  february 1984. He pointed to the 3.3 pct growth in non-oil gdp
  in 1986 and to a "moderate" 12 pct inflation rate.
      Lusinchi said the 20.3 billion dlr debt rescheduling signed
  feb. 27 put an end to a process which had been 'the calvary of
  our nation over the post four years.'
      In the refinancing accord, he said, venezuela managed to
  achieve 'the most inmportant thing, which is the reopening of
  financial flows from abroad, essential for the financing of
  development and the (financing) of trade and investment.'
      Once all the details of the agreement are finalized, he
  said, venezuela will seek new financing for the imported
  components of new development projects.
      "our intention is not to continue being net exporters of
  capital, but to protect our balance of payments with a flow of
  capital towards venezuela," he said.
      Under the agreement signed february 27, venezuela extended
  payments on the debt from 12 to 14 years, while the interest
  rate was lowered from 1 y 1/8 to 7/8 of a pct over libor.
      At the same time, payments over the next three years were
  lowered from 3.450 to 1.350 billion dlrs.
      Lusinchi defended the rescheduling accord against critics
  who said it merely deferred the weight of payments to future
  governments.
  

ANGLO AMERICAN &lt;AIVJ.J> YEAR TO DEC 31
  Shr 516 cts vs 347
      Final div 135 vs 125 making 190 vs 180
      Pre-tax 133 mln rand vs 137 mln
      Net 260 mln vs 172 mln
      Tax 76 mln vs 42 mln
      Att to outside shareholders 96 mln vs 53 mln
      Pref div 1 mln vs same
      Turnover 3.14 billion vs 2.56 billion
      Div pay May 8, register March 27.
      Note - Full name is Anglo American Industrial Corp Ltd.
  

UNOCAL &lt;UCL> RAISES CRUDE OIL POSTINGS
  Unocal Corp said it raised the
  contract price it will pay for most grades of crude oil 50 cts
  a barrel, effective today.
      The increase brings Unocal's posted price for the U.S.
  benchmark grade West Texas Intermediate to 17.50 dlrs a barrel.
  It also brought the price for West Texas Sour to 17.50 dlrs a
  bbl. Light Louisiana Sweet was also raised 50 cts to 17.85
  dlrs/bbl.
      Unocal last changed its crude postings on March four, and
  brings it price in line with other major companies, which have
  been raising prices steadily in recent weeks.
      The increase also represents the latest in a series of
  increases that began with USX Corp's &lt;X> Marathon Petroleum
  Corp's notification yesterday evening that, effective today, it
  raised its crude postings 50 cts a barrel, bringing its
  contract price for WTI to 17.50 dlrs a barrel.
      Earlier today, Sun Co &lt;SUN>, Phillips Petroleum &lt;P> and
  Diamond Shamrock &lt;DIA> also said they raised their crude
  postings 50 cts a barrel, bringing their WTI contract price to
  17.50 dlrs a barrel.
      Contract prices have risen in response to higher spot
  market prices, oil traders said.
  

MEATPACKERS RESPOND TO OCCIDENTAL&lt;OXY> OFFER
  Local 222 of the United Food and
  Commercial Workers Union said it is calling a membership
  meeting, possibly Sunday, to discuss its response to a decision
  by Iowa Beef Processors Inc to lift a lockout at its Dakota
  City, Nebraska plant and resume operations.
      The UFCWU will consider all options available to it
  including a strike or returning to work under IBP's last labor
  contract proposal, a spokeswoman for Local 222 said by phone.
      About 2,800 UFCWU members have been locked out at the
  Dakota City plant since December 14.
      IBP is a subsidiary of Occidental Petroleum Corp.
  

CITGO RAISES CRUDE POSTINGS 50 CTS, TODAY, WTI TO 17.50 DLRS/BBL

  CITGO RAISES CRUDE POSTINGS 50 CTS, TODAY, WTI TO 17.50 DLRS/BBL
  

COURT LIFTS RESTRAINING ORDER ON MARK IV &lt;IV>
  Baird Corp &lt;BATM> said the
  Massachusetts State Court for Suffolk County has lifted a  
  temporary restraining order prohibiting Mark IV Industries Inc
  from further purchases of Baird stock.
      According to filings with the Securities and Exchange
  Commission, Mark IV owns at least 17.6 pct of Baird's stock and
  may attempt to acquire Baird, Baird said.
      Baird said the court also issued an order enjoining Baird
  from enforcing the Massachusetts Anti-Takeover Statute against
  Mark IV industries.
  

CJI INDUSTIRES INC &lt;CJIIA> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr profit 60 cts vs loss 55 cts
      Oper net profit 928,000 vs loss 88,000
      Revs 48.7 mln vs 39.7 mln
      Avg shrs 3.7 mln vs 1.5 mln
      Year
      Oper shr loss 1.17 dlrs vs loss 60 cts
      Oper net profit 2,537,000 vs profit 587,000
      Revs 178.8 mln vs 117.6 mln
      NOTE: Per share figures come after preferred dividends.
      Excludes fourth quarter and full year 1986 extraordinary
  gains of 29 cts and 71 cts per share, respectively.
  

COUNSEL CORP SETS THREE-FOR-TWO STOCK SPLIT
  &lt;Counsel Corp> said it plans a
  three-for-two stock split, pending shareholder approval at the
  April 28 annual meeting.
      The company said it recently reported 1986 profit of 5.9
  mln dlrs, or 1.51 dlrs a share, before extraordinary items,
  compared with 2.2 mln dlrs, or 81 cts, in 1985.
  

SOUTHLAND &lt;SLC> UNIT RAISES CRUDE POSTINGS
  Southland Corp's Citgo Petroleum Corp
  said it raised the contract price it will pay for crude oil 50
  cts a barrel, effective today.
      The increase bring's Citgo's posted price for the West
  Texas Intermediate and West Texas Sour grades to 17.50 dlrs a
  barrel. The Light Louisiana Sweet South Onshore grade was also
  raised 50 cts to 17.85 dlrs a barrel, and Light Louisiana Sweet
  North was increased to 17.75 dlrs a barrel.
      Citgo last changed its postings on March four.
  

CANNON &lt;CAN> AUDIT TO SHOW SIGNIFICANT 1986 LOSS
  The Cannon Group Inc said its
  financial statements will show substantial losses for fiscal
  1986 and "significant downward adjustments in previously
  reported stockholders' equity."
      The company also said its 1986 audit being conducted by
  &lt;Arthur Young and Co> will cover the year ended January 3,
  1987, instead of the nine-month period ended September 27, 1986
  as previously announced.
      It said it anticipates the results of the audit will be
  available in mid to late April 1987.
  

EAGER TECHNOLOGY ACQUIRES NUCLAD
  &lt;Eager Technology Inc> said it signed a
  letter of intent to acquire Nuclad Inc, a private Colorado
  corporation, and its subsidiaries.
      Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.
  

SHELL CANADA CUTS CRUDE OIL PRICES BY UP TO 1.27 CANADIAN DLRS/BBL EFFECTIVE MARCH ONE

  SHELL CANADA CUTS CRUDE OIL PRICES BY UP TO 1.27 CANADIAN DLRS/BBL EFFECTIVE MARCH ONE
  

SAN JUAN BASIN &lt;SJT> PROVEN RESERVES FALL
  The San Juan Basin Royalty
  Trust said proved reserves as of December 31 were estimated at
  283.1 thousand cubic feet of gas and 1,087,000 barrels of oil.
      In the year-ago period, it said proved reserves were
  estimated at 346.4 thousand cubic feet of gas  and 1,974,000
  barrels of oil.
      It said the present value of future net revenues discounted
  10 pct was 156.2 mln dlrs compared with 446.8 mln dlrs in the
  year-ago period.
      It also said that about 60 net infill wells are not
  economical to drill at December 31 prices.
  

INTERCONNECT OFFERS TO BUY GATES LEARJET &lt;GLJ>
  &lt;Interconnect Capital Corp>
  said it sent a letter to the board of Gates Learjet Corp,
  offering to buy the company for 7.07 dlrs a share.
      Gates Corp, which owns 64.8 pct of Gates Learjet, agreed
  earlier this week to sell its shares to a partnership formed by
  privately-held &lt;Cobey Corp> and a unit of Bear Stearns Cos Inc
  &lt;BSC> for 6.50 dlrs a share or 51 mln dlrs. The proposal is
  subject to approval by Gates Learjet's board.
      A spokesman for privately-held Interconnect said it made
  the new proposal to Gates Learjet's board, but would not say if
  it had held talks with the parent company's board.
  

SEAL &lt;SINC> ACQUIRES ADEMCO LTD
  Seal Inc said it acquired
  Ademco Ltd, a United Kingdom company which distributes mounting
  and laminating equipment and supplies, for a combination of
  cash and stock valued at 2.6 mln dlrs, based on current
  exchange rates.
      Seal said it will pay up to an additional 1.3 mln dlrs
  contingent on the market price of Seal's common on December 31,
  1988, and on certain earnings targets by the acquired business.
  

BRAZIL CANCELS OIL PURCHASE FROM SAUDI ARABIA
  Brazil's state-oil company,
  Petrobras, cancelled a 40 mln dlr crude oil purchase from Saudi
  Arabia after the Saudis refused to accept credit guarantees
  from the Bank of Brazil, a Petrobras official said.
      Export director Carlos Santana told a press conference the
  Saudis were the first suppliers of oil to impose such
  conditions after Brazil's decision to halt interest payment of
  its commercial debts last month.
      The shipment of 2.2 mln barrels represents two days of oil
  consumption in Brazil.
      But Santana said if the Saudis change their minds and
  decide to respect the terms of the contract, then Petrobras
  will lift the order to cancel the shipment.
      Santana said if the Saudis do not accept Brazil's terms by
  Monday then Petrobras will negotiate elsewhere.
      "Petrobras has been Saudi Arabia's traditional client since
  1955. If they do not accept our conditions now, it will be much
  better for us, because with the market prices more or less the
  same, buying from Iraq and China is an advantage," he said.
      Iraq and China have barter deals with Brazil, importing
  Brazilian goods in exchange for oil, but the Saudis buy nothing
  from Brazil, he said.
      Santana said despite a strike threat by oil industry
  workers and a two-week stoppage by Brazilian seamen, Petrobras
  oil stocks are "reasonably balanced." 
      Saudi Arabia is Brazil's second biggest oil supplier, with
  an average 115,000 bpd. Iraq is the main supplier with 235,000
  bpd. China comes third, with 58,000 bpd.
      "If the Saudis wish to stop our trade relationship, fine, I
  am sure that if they do, we will be getting dozens of offers
  from elsewhere," Santana added.
  

U.S. HOUSE PANEL APPROVES TRADE BILL
  The U.S. House Ways and Means Trade
  Subcommittee unanimously approved a toned-down version of
  legislation designed to toughen U.S. trade laws and wedge open
  foreign markets to more U.S. goods.
      The measure now goes to the full House Ways and Means
  Committee next week, but major changes are not expected,
  congressional sources said.
      "This product could very well be toughening our trade policy
  and doing it in a manner that opens markets without this
  frightening word 'protectionism'," Ways and Means chairman Dan
  Rostenkowski, an Illinois Democrat said.
      The trade subcommittee backed away from mandating specific
  retaliation against foreign countries for unfair foreign trade
  practices as the House had approved in a trade bill last year.
      But it held over for the full Ways and Means Committee
  debate on a controversial plan by Rep. Richard Gephardt to
  mandate a reduction in trade surpluses with the U.S. by
  countries such as Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
      Gephardt, a Missouri Democrat, has not decided the exact
  form of his amendment, an aide said. Last year the House
  approved his idea to force an annual 10 pct trade surplus cut
  by those countries.
  

NO GRAIN TO THE USSR IN LATEST WEEK -- USDA
  There were no shipments of U.S.
  grain or soybeans to the Soviet Union in the week ended March
  12, according to the U.S. Agriculture Department's latest
  Export Sales report.
       The USSR has purchased 1.0 mln tonnes of U.S. corn for
  delivery in the fourth year of the U.S.-USSR grain agreement.
       Total shipments in the third year of the U.S.-USSR grains
  agreement, which ended September 30, amounted to 152,600 tonnes
  of wheat, 6,808,100 tonnes of corn and 1,518,700 tonnes of
  soybeans.
      Shipments to the USSR in the second year of the agreeement
  amounted to 2,887,200 tonnes of wheat and 15,750,100 tonnes of
  corn.
  

U.S. SUGAR IMPORTS DOWN IN WEEK - USDA
  Sugar imports subject to the U.S.
  sugar import quota during the week ended January 9, the initial
  week of the 1987 sugar quota year, totaled 5,988 short tons
  versus 46,254 tons the previous week, the Agriculture
  Department said.
      The sugar import quota for the 1987 quota year
  (January-December) has been set at 1,001,430 short tons
  compared with 1,850,000 tons in the 1986 quota year, which was
  extended three months to December 31.
      The department said the Customs Service has reported that
  weekly and cumulative imports are reported on an actual weight
  basis and when final polarizations are received, cumulative
  import data are adjusted accordingly.
  

INDIA GETS 140 MLN DLR WORLD BANK LOAN
  The World Bank said it has approved
  a 140 mln dlr loan for India to help lessen that country's
  dependence on imported oil and spur development of its own
  petroleum resources.
      The bank said the loan will be used to boost production by
  injecting gas in the partially depleted Assam oil fields and to
  assist exploration in other areas, including drilling 10
  exploratory wells.
      The bank said the recipient of the 20-year loan will be Oil
  India Ltd (OIL), which is the smaller of two public Indian
  petroleum exploration and production companies.
  

FED DATA INDICATE NO POLICY CHANGE LIKELY
  U.S. bank reserve, monetary and
  discount window borrowings data released by the Federal Reserve
  today clearly indicate that policy is "on hold" and may not be
  changed for weeks or even months, economists said.
      "The Fed is keeping policy at dead center and it is not
  about to change policy unless something fairly dramatic occurs
  on the economy," said John Williams of Bankers Trust Co.
      "These numbers contain no hint that a policy shift is in
  prospect, nor do economic or financial developments argue for
  policy change," said William Griggs of Griggs and Santow Inc.
      Fed data released today were all in line with economists'
  expectations and similar to the numbers of recent weeks.
      The Fed said net discount window borrowings in the two
  weeks ended Wednesday averaged 191 mln dlrs, up from 381 mln
  dlrs in the February 25 statement period, but little changed
  from 160 mln dlrs in the period before that.
      It said that banks' net free reserves in the latest two
  weeks averaged 660 mln dlrs versus 675 mln dlrs previously.
      Finally, the Fed said that the M-1 money supply fell 800
  mln dlrs in February, with the broader M-2 measure down 1.6
  billion dlrs and M-3 up an even three billion dlrs.
      Analysts said that M-1 last month grew at a negative 1.3
  pct annual rate compared with minus 0.7 pct for M-2 and actual
  positive growth of 1.0 pct annualized for M-3.
      February levels of M-2 and M-3 left the aggregates 18.2 and
  20.8 billion dlrs under their respective upper growth limits
  set by the Fed for 1987. The annual growth target for both is
  5-1/2 to 8-1/2 pct. There is no M-1 target.
      "In the near term, there is absolutely no reason for the
  Fed to ease policy, even apart from the slowdown in money
  growth," said Stephen Slifer, economist at Lehman Government
  Securities Inc.
      Economists generally expect a modest pickup in monetary
  growth in March after February's anemic growth rates. However,
  they stress that money growth will not be strong enough to
  prevent the Fed from dropping interest rates further if the
  economy shows evidence of weakness.
      Commenting on February's decline in the key M-2 aggregate,
  Slifer said the main cause was a 3.2 billion dlr drop in money
  market deposits at banks. This number has risen three to four
  billion dlrs a month for a long while, he said, so February's
  weakness is not likely to persist. Slifer expects modest M-2
  and M-3 growth rates of 3-1/2 to four pct during March.
      Griggs said that M-2 and M-3 in coming months should return
  to the five to seven pct annualized growth region and so
  continue to present no problem for the Fed.
      Economists said the Fed appears to be very comfortable with
  its current policy stance and it is likely to wait for perhaps
  several more months of economic data before deciding whether or
  not to ease its grip on reserves.
      Given the economy's fragility in many sectors, the analysts
  agreed that there is almost no chance that the Fed will choose
  to raise, rather than lower, interest rates when it next
  changes policy.
      "Discount window borrowings in the past week were about as
  low as the Fed can get them, although Fed funds held above six
  pct," said Williams of Bankers Trust. Funds averaged 6.12 pct
  in the week to Wednesday, up from 6.06 pct in the prior week.
      The Fed added reserves indirectly via one billion dlrs of
  customer repurchase agreements last Friday, 2.5 billion dlrs on
  Monday and two billion dlrs on Wednesday. On Tuesday, it added
  reserves directly through two-day System repurchases.
      Williams and Griggs agreed the Fed will let the funds rate
  be largely market-driven. They said it is focusing instead on a
  borrowings target of around 300 mln dlrs.
  

COLOMBIA'S COFFEE MARKETING TO BE MORE FLEXIBLE
  Colombia intends to improve the
  marketing of its coffee with the accent on more flexibility on
  setting export registration prices, finance minister Cesar
  Gaviria said.
      Speaking to reporters after announcing a lower export
  registration price, or reintegro, of 1.10 dlr per lb ex-dock
  New York, Gaviria said export mechanisms would be more agile.
      "In the first stage, we decided not only to lower the
  reintegro but also to adopt a flexible policy of reintegro that
  will allow private exporters to participate more actively in
  Colombia's coffee export policy," he said.
      Traders said this means the export registration price will
  change more often in a truer reflection of market trends.
      Gaviria said the measures merely responded to new market
  factors since a return to a system of International Coffee
  Organisation (ICO) export quotas may not occur in the short
  term.
      ICO talks last month in London failed to break a deadlock
  over re-introduction of export quotas, suspended in February
  1986.
      Gaviria stressed that Colombia will not necessarily suffer
  from depressed prices because it can compensate lower prices
  with increased volume.
      "Colombia will continue to export its traditional amount of
  coffee, between 9.6 and 10 mln bags (of 60 kilos), and will do
  so without an agreement among producers," he said.
      He ruled out a much higher volume of exports, or up to 13.5
  mln bags as mentioned in market circles, "because the idea is
  precisely not to disrupt the market."
      Colombia exported a record 11.5 mln bags in the 1985/86
  coffee year which ended last September 30.
      Echoing Gaviria's words, Jorge Cardenas, manager of the
  national coffee growers' federation, said Colombia sought to
  adapt its coffee marketing policy to circumstances.
      "There is great expectation in the world for the policies
  that Brazil and Colombia will adopt. Ours is beginning to
  emerge and no agreement among producers is foreseeable in the
  immediate future," he told journalists.
      Trade sources in Rio today said Brazil's future export
  policy was unlikely to be revealed before the end of next week.
      Cardenas said a new ICO meeting could only take place when
  problems that hindered an agreement at the recent London talks
  have been resolved.
      Asked to comment on a Reuter report from Jakarta saying
  Indonesia hoped Colombia could use its contacts with Brazil to
  suggest a compromise on the quota issue, Cardenas said the
  Brazilian stand was quite clear.
      He said Brazil's current quota "reflects the reality of the
  market, allows for an orderly supply and satisfies demand," but
  added more clarity was needed to assess the criteria that
  determined it.
      Cardenas said lows registered immediately after the failure
  of the London talks were triggered by a widespread fear among
  dealers of an imminent price war and the belief that producers
  would go out and sell their coffee as quickly as possible,
  which did not happen.
  

INDIA GETS 140 MLN DLR WORLD BANK LOAN
  The World Bank said it approved a
  140 mln dlr loan for India to help lessen that country's
  dependence on imported oil and spur development of its own
  petroleum resources.
      The bank said the loan will be used to boost production by
  injecting gas in the partially depleted Assam oil fields and to
  assist exploration in other areas, including drilling 10
  exploratory wells.
      The bank said the recipient of the 20-year loan will be Oil
  India Ltd (OIL), which is the smaller of two public Indian
  petroleum exploration and production companies.
  

CANNON &lt;CAN> SELLS LIBRARY TO WEINTRAUB
  WEintraub Entertainment Group Inc
  said it agreed to acquire Cannon Group's Screen Entertainment
  film library.
      The library was purchased in May 1986 as part of Cannon's
  acquisition of Screen Entertainment Ltd from Bond Corp Holdings
  Ltd. The library has over 2,000 theatrical motion pictures.
      Terms call for the price to be established through an
  appraisal process beginning immediately and not to exceed 175
  mln dlrs or be below 125 mln dlrs.
  

GERBER &lt;GRB> BUYS GERBER SYSTEMS &lt;GSTI> SHARES
  Gerber Scientific Inc said
  its GST Acquisition Corp purchased 444,646 shares of its 84 pct
  owned Gerber Systems Technology pursuant to a January 15 tender
  offer.
      Following the purchase, Gerber made a capital contribution
  to GST of all the shares it owned resulting in 95.6 pct
  ownership by GST.
  

VENEZUELA TO LEND ECUADOR 50,000 BPD OF CRUDE
  Venezuela will lend Ecuador 50,000
  barrels per day of crude oil over the next few months to help
  it meet its export commitments, Energy and Mines Minister
  Arturo Hernandez Grisanti said today.
      He said that under the terms of this loan, agreed during a
  visit here this week by Ecuador's Deputy Energy Minister
  Fernando Santos Alvite, Ecuador will begin repaying the loan in
  August.
      Hernandez Grisanti said the loan will go part way to
  offsetting the loss of Ecuador's 140,000 in exports caused by
  earthquake damage to 25 miles of pipeline last week.
      Ecuador was forced to suspend exports after the pipeline
  connecting its jungle oil fields with the pacific port of Balao
  was put out of action.
      Venezuela has an output quota of 1.495 bpd, while Ecuador's
  is 210,000 bpd. Santos Alvite said Ecuador will ask OPEC to
  allow it to produce 100,000 bpd above its quota when the
  pipeline is repaired to offset present production losses.
      Hernandez Grisanti said also a first 300,000 barrels
  shipment of Venezuelan crude oil will leave for Ecuador this
  weekend to help meet domestic consumption needs.
      The oil, part of a five mln additional crude oil loan by
  Venezuela, will be processed at Guayaquil refineries.
      "If we had not supplied oil to Ecuador the life of this
  country would have ground to a halt," he said.
  

BRENCO INC &lt;BREN> DECLARES QTLY DIVIDEND
  Qtly div three cts vs three cts prior
      Pay April six
      Record March 20
  

THE ADELAIDE STEAMSHIP CO LTD &lt;ADSA.S> FIRST HALF
  First half ended December 31
      Shr 55.01 cents vs 97.76
      Int div 18 cents vs 16
      Net 75.05 mln dlrs vs 55.68 mln
      Turnover 156.94 mln vs 177.87 mln
      Other revenue 72.50 mln vs 31.18 mln.
      One-for-five rights issue at 11.50 dlrs a share
      One-for-four bonus issue on capital enlarged by rights
  issue
      Shrs 99.36 mln vs 70.94 mln.
      NOTE - Shr applies to total net 54.66 mln dlrs vs 69.48 mln
  after extraordinaries loss.
      Pre-extraordinaries net shr 75.53 cents vs 78.32
      Div pay April 30. Div and rights issue reg March 30. Bonus
  reg May 6. Net equity-accounts share of associates' earnings.
      Pre-equity pre-tax earnings 59.52 mln dlrs vs 64.13 mln.
  Pre-equity net 52.07 mln dlrs vs 43.35 mln after tax 3.45 mln
  vs 16.34 mln, minorities 4.00 mln vs 6.44 mln, interest 33.89
  mln vs 26.11 mln and depreciation 2.67 mln vs 2.72 mln but
  before net extraordinary loss 20.39 mln vs 13.79 mln.
  

BRYN MAWR BANK CORP &lt;BMTC> UPS DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 30 cts vs 30 cts prior
      Payable May one
      Record April 10
      NOTE:Bryn Mawr was reorganized as a holding company on
  January 2, 1987, resulting in each share of Bryn Mawr Trust Co
  being converted into three shares of the new holding company's
  stock. The 30 cts dividend represents a 15 pct increase over
  prior quarter.
  

PRICE &lt;PCLB> TO BUY 80 PCT OF TSS-SEEDMAN
  Price Co said it agreed to buy at
  least 81 pct of the stock of &lt;TSS-Seedman's INc> for about 50
  mln dlrs.
      The terms envision a purchase of the entire company, it
  said.
      The transaction is expected to close at the end of April.
  

MIYAZAWA SAYS EXCHANGE RATES WILL STAY STABLE
  Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa told a
  press conference he thinks exchange rates will remain stable
  due to the currency accord reached in Paris last month by six
  major industrialised nations but he did not say for how long.
      The dollar has hovered around 153 yen since the six agreed
  to cooperate to bring about currency stability.
      Asked to comment on remarks by some U.S. Officials calling
  for a further decline of the dollar, Miyazawa said only the
  U.S. President and the U.S. Treasury Secretary can make
  official statements about exchange rates.
  

TWO BRAZILIAN SHIPPING FIRMS SETTLE WITH STRIKERS
  Two small shipping companies have
  reached a pay deal with striking seamen, but union leaders said
  most of Brazil's 40,000 seamen were still on strike.
      A union spokesman in Rio de Janeiro said the seamen had
  accepted a 120 pct pay offer from the companies, Globo and
  Flumar, which have less than 200 employees each.
      The two-week strike comes as Brazil faces a debt crisis and
  is delaying exports badly needed to earn foreign exchange.
      Labour Minister Almir Pazzionotto said the government will
  not force a settlement of the strike, which was ruled illegal
  last Friday.
  

12-MAR-1987
  12-MAR-1987

ADSTEAM RIGHTS ISSUE TO RAISE 228 MLN DLRS
  The Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd &lt;ADSA.S>
  (Adsteam) said its one-for-five rights issue at 11.50 dlrs a
  share will raise 228.5 mln dlrs for general working capital and
  investment, both in Australia and overseas.
      The group announced the issue with its first half earnings
  and said in a statement that the rights issue will be followed
  by a one-for-four bonus issue.
      Adsteam's equity-accounted net earnings rose to 75.05 mln
  dlrs in the half ended December 31 from 55.68 mln a year
  earlier and interim dividend to 18 cents from 16.
      Adsteam shares eased to 14.20 dlrs from an opening 14.60
  and yesterday's close of 14.50 on the issue announcement.
      The issue will be underwritten by &lt;Morgan Grenfell
  Australia Ltd> and &lt;McCaughan Dyson Ltd> apart from the shares
  to be taken up by Adsteam's associate and largest shareholder,
  department store retailer &lt;David Jones Ltd>.
      New shares will not rank for the interim dividend but will
  rank equally thereafter.
      Adsteam said it expects to maintain an annual dividend rate
  of 36 cents on capital enlarged to about 149 mln shares by both
  issues from 99.36 mln.
      Adsteam said its diverse industrial interests generally
  performed well and its results, as the ultimate holding company
  and beneficiary, reflected this solid performance.
      David Jones, owned 49.2 pct by Adsteam, earned the largest
  associates' net of 57.38 mln dlrs in the half against 40.29 mln
  a year earlier, Adsteam's figures show.
      Wholly-owned and joint venture companies also did well
  apart from timber, building supplies and real estate, which
  returned below-budget profits due to the housing downturn.
      Adsteam said it sees 1987/88 as a year of reconstruction
  and consolidation with the capital base boosted by the issue.
  

HEARST BUYS HOUSTON CHRONICLE FOR 400 MLN DLRS
  The &lt;Hearst Corp> is buying the Houston
  Chronicle from Houston Endowment Inc for 400 mln dlrs.
      The announcement was made jointly by Frank Bennack Jr,
  president and chief executive officer of Hearst, and Richard
  Johnson, president of the Chronicle.
      The Houston Endowment is selling the paper to comply with
  federal tax laws requiring charitable institutions to divest
  themselves of profit-making subsidiaries by 1989.
      The Chronicle has a daily circulation of over 425,000 and
  is in competition with the Houston Post, owned by the &lt;Toronto
  Sun Publishing Corp>, with a circulation of about 316,000.
      The acquisition gives Hearst its biggest newspaper holding
  in Texas, where the California-based publisher already owns
  papers in San Antonio, Beaumont and Laredo.
      The chain also owns, among others, the flagship San
  Francisco Examiner, the Los Angeles Herald Examiner and the
  Seattle Post-Intelligencer.
  

IEL'S ACMEX UNIT TO BID FOR CHEETHAM
  &lt;Industrial Equity Ltd> (IEL) unit
  &lt;Acmex Holdings Ltd> said it proposed to make a formal takeover
  offer for all the issued capital of &lt;Cheetham Ltd>, a producer
  of salt, animal feed and seeds.
      Acmex said in a statement it would offer one share for
  every two Cheetham shares or 3.40 dlrs cash for each share.
      Acmex said it was presently entitled to 5.1 mln Cheetham
  shares or 16.85 pct of its 30.27 mln issued shares.
      The scrip offer values Cheetham at about 110 mln dlrs,
  based on Acmex's current price of 7.20 dlrs, and the cash offer
  at about 104 mln. Cheetham last traded at 3.10 dlrs.
  

U.S. OFFICIALS DISAGREE ON REDUCING BUDGET DEFICIT
  Senior U.S. Economic officials
  disagree on the likelihood the government can meet its budget
  deficit reduction targets.
      Beryl Sprinkel, chairman of the Council of Economic
  Advisers, reiterated the Reagan Administration's opposition to
  a tax increase and its pledge to reduce the deficit by cutting
  spending and fostering economic growth.
      By contrast, Rudolph Penner, Director of the Congressional
  Budget Office, said the budget process has broken down and the
  deficit will remain close to 200 billion dlrs for fiscal 1987.
      Sprinkel told a symposium sponsored by New York University
  that spending could be cut by avoiding decisions based on the
  desire to influence votes and by shifting the responsibility
  for local projects to state governments.
      He also suggested a line-item veto, which allows the
  President to veto parts of bill without rejecting all of it, to
  limit wasteful spending. Spending and taxing decisions should
  be linked more closely.
      Sprinkel said the Administration still looks for 2.7 pct
  growth in U.S. Real gross national product (GNP) in 1987 and
  3.5 pct in 1988.
      Asked if the latest economic reports signal this rate of
  economic growth is attainable, Sprinkel said, "It looks pretty
  good to me. We've had two very strong employment reports."
      He also said federal reserve policy is appropriate, adding,
  "It looks like they're on track."
      While further reductions are needed in the trade deficit,
  Sprinkel said the lower dollar is having an impact.
      The new 1987 tax laws will not hurt the economy and the tax
  reform act of 1986 significantly lowers tax rates and will
  greatly increase private production incentives, he said.
      "Our estimates at the Council of Economic Advisers suggest
  national net output of goods and services will permanently
  increase by approximately two pct because of the long-run
  consequences of tax reform," Sprinkel said. "In 1986, this would
  have amounted to an increase of approximately 600 dlrs in the
  income of the average American family."
      Sprinkel also argued the 1981 tax cuts were not responsible
  for the large increase in the budget deficit.
      In fiscal 1986 ending September, federal spending amounted
  to 23.8 pct of GNP, while federal receipts absorbed 18.5 pct of
  GNP, leaving a deficit of 5.3 pct, he said.
      Sprinkel said that, compared with fiscal 1978, the 1986
  federal expenditure share of GNP is 2.7 percentage points
  higher and the revenue share of GNP is virtually the same.
      "Contrary to the conventional wisdom, therefore, the 1981
  tax cut is not the root cause of the extraordinary budget
  deficits of the past few years," Sprinkel said.
      "This tax cut merely rolled back the inflation-induced tax
  increases that occurred between 1978 and 1981," he added.
      However, the Congressional Budget Office's Rudolph Penner
  argued that the tax cut in 1981 was misguided.
      "Since making the big mistake in 1981 of cutting taxes
  enormously without any plan to decrease spending by the
  Administration or Congress, indeed with increases in defence
  spending, now all the options (for reducing the budget deficit)
  are unpleasant," he said.
      Penner said the tax cut resulted from the ideological
  turmoil in the U.S. Caused by the "biggest sustained inflation
  in our nation's history," which helped foster widespread
  distrust of government.
      "The American people turned on the government with tax
  revolt at the state level and new demands on the government at
  the national level," Penner said.
      "But their dislike of taxes exceeded their general dislike
  of spending programs. Now the correction of that 1981 mistake
  demands that the system change a lot."
      Penner sees little hope the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget
  deficit reduction targets will be met and said the deficit will
  remain at roughly 200 billion dlrs this year.
      He said a budget process that sets targets arbitrarily is
  not likely to succeed.
      "I feel pretty safe in saying that any process that tries to
  dictate a numerical outcome from above is doomed to fail simply
  because there's no ... Way to enforce it," Penner said.
      Penner questioned the methods by which the 1987 budget
  deficit was cut. He said 18 to 19 billion dlrs were eliminated
  by one-time measures, such as a temporary increase in taxes
  related to tax reform and sales of government assets.
      "Another four billion dlrs was cut by what I call creative
  timing changes, like moving the military payday from the last
  day of fiscal 1987 to the first day of fiscal 1988. That saved
  more than two billion dlrs," Penner said.
  

AUSTRALIAN TERMS OF TRADE WORSEN IN LAST QUARTER
  Australia's terms of trade fell by a
  further 3.5 pct in the fourth quarter of 1986 after declining
  0.8 pct in the third quarter and 2.7 pct a year earlier, the
  Statistics Bureau said.
      It said the seasonally adjusted current account deficit of
  3.22 billion dlrs in the quarter would have dropped to 912 mln
  if not for the terms of trade decline.
      The fourth quarter decline followed a 1.1 pct fall in
  export prices and a 2.4 pct rise in import prices, it said.
      The Bureau noted Australia's terms of trade had fallen by
  19.9 pct since the fourth quarter of 1983.
  

CHINA FACES DILEMMA OVER SUGAR IMPORTS
  China has to decide if it will increase
  sugar imports this year to cover falling domestic output and
  rising demand, in view of market predictions that international
  sugar prices will remain firm this year, traders and the
  official press said.
      He Kang, Minister of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and
  Fisheries, said this week that China has adjusted the
  purchasing price for sugar cane and beet to check a drop in
  production last year but he gave no price details.
      One Japanese trader said domestic demand is rising rapidly
  because of improving living standards and rising demand for
  sweet drinks, cakes and biscuits and other sugary foods.
      "It will not be easy to cut domestic demand, even in a
  state-controlled economy. China may have to import," he said.
      Customs figures show imports fell to 1.182 mln tonnes in
  1986 from 1.909 mln in 1985 and fell to 25,165 tonnes in
  January 1987 from 54,000 in January 1986.
      The official Economic Information newspaper last month said
  production in the 1986/87 crushing season (September-April)
  will be 1.18 mln tonnes short of demand.
      The paper put 1986/87 output at 4.82 mln, down from 5.24
  mln in 1985/86, and domestic demand at about six mln tonnes.
      "In the last two years, acreage under sugar cane and beet
  has fallen, sugar mills are underutilised, output has dropped
  and cannot meet demand that is rising every day," it said.
      "The country will have to continue imports of sugar and draw
  down stocks to meet market demand," it added.
      It quoted the Ministry of Light Industry as blaming the
  drop in output on unreasonable state purchasing prices for cane
  and beet as against other crops, which has resulted in farmers
  refusing to grow them.
      The paper said in 1985 a farmer could earn up to three
  times more per hectare from pineapple and watermelon and up to
  seven times more from bananas than from sugarcane. He could
  sell grain on the free market at 560 yuan a tonne, against only
  70 yuan a tonne for sugarcane.
      Sugar mills are suffering because refined sugar prices have
  not changed for 20 years despite rising costs, it said.
      In Fujian, the cost of producing one tonne rose to 702 yuan
  in 1985 from 520.1 in 1980, cutting the mills' profit to 117
  yuan a tonne from 217.9, it added.
      The paper said unreasonable pricing resulted in 144 of the
  442 sugar mills working in the 1985/86 crushing season losing
  money. China has 521 sugar mills.
      A foreign agricultural expert forecast a drop in cane
  acreage in 1986/87 (September-August) of up to 10 pct in
  Guangdong, which produced 45 pct of China's sugar in calendar
  1985, and a smaller drop in Fujian, which produced 11 pct of
  China's sugar in calendar 1985.
      He said both provinces are more developed than other
  sugar-producing areas and more sensitive to demand from cities.
      But cane acreage in Guangxi and Yunnan, which accounted for
  28 pct of the 1985 crop, has risen by 10 to 30 pct in 1986/87,
  because cane-growing is more economic there, he said.
      He put sugar stocks at 2.333 mln tonnes in September 1986.
      A Hong Kong trader estimated stocks at more than three mln
  at end-January. "Now they are falling but (they) have not
  reached the critical level, compelling China to import quickly,"
  he said.
      "China has options not easily available in western
  countries. It controls stocks strictly and can release less
  into the consumer market if stocks fall too quickly," he said.
      The Hong Kong trader said calendar 1987 imports will be
  slightly less than those of 1986, because of firm world prices
  and serious foreign exchange constraints which, he said, are
  likely to continue until at least end-1988.
      He said nearly all cane and beet is sold to the state-owned
  mills, with a small amount sold raw to consumers.
      "Most of the mills are old and inefficient, with many of
  them using Soviet equipment imported in the 1950s," he said.
      He said demand in rural areas will in future rise an annual
  four pct, with demand in the cities rising an annual two pct.
  

JAPAN SETS 1987/88 FIRST HALF BEEF IMPORT QUOTA
  The Agriculture Ministry said it set
  Japan's beef import quota for the six months from April 1 at
  93,000 tonnes, up from 83,000 in the second half of 1986/87 and
  85,000 a year earlier.
      Under an agreement with the U.S. And Australia, Japan has
  been increasing imports by 9,000 tonnes a year from March 31,
  1985, to reach a projected 177,000 tonnes in the year to March
  31, 1988.
  

JAPAN DENIES BREAKING SEMICONDUCTOR TRADE PACT
  Japan denied breaking a pact with the
  U.S. On semiconductor trade but said prices set out in the pact
  were too high and acknowledged difficulties in implementing the
  accord.
      "We are faithfully abiding by the ... Agreement but of
  course there are some problems," a spokesman for the
  International Trade and Industry Ministry told Reuters.
      He said the high semiconductor prices recommended by the
  agreement were leaving Japanese manufacturers piling up stocks
  of unsellable products. "We are aiming to reduce production in
  Japan but of course this takes time," he said.
      The spokesman said some Japanese companies were selling
  chips in Europe and Asia below stipulated prices, but added: "It
  is only a matter of time before we solve this problem."
      The eight month old pact aims to stop Japan selling large
  quantities of chips at knock-down prices to the United States
  and other countries and to increase U.S. Semiconductor sales in
  Japan.
      The U.S. Senate Finance Committee this week called on
  President Reagan in a non-binding resolution to retaliate
  against Japan for violating the agreement.
  

JAPAN MINISTER SAYS ABOUT 170 YEN APPROPRIATE
  International Trade and Industry Minister
  Hajime Tamura told a parliamentary session Japan's small- and
  medium-sized enterprises are seriously suffering from the yen's
  rise and can only stand levels around 170 yen.
      He also said he still believes a dollar exchange rate level
  plus or minus 10 yen from 170 yen would be within levels agreed
  upon last month in Paris by six major industrial nations.
  Finance ministers of Britain, Canada, France, Japan, the U.S.
  And West Germany agreed on February 22 to cooperate in
  stabilizing exchange rates around the current levels. The
  dollar had closed here at 153.77 yen on February 20.
  

GERMAN WHOLESALE PRICES FALL 0.4 PCT IN FEBRUARY
  West German wholesale prices fell 0.4
  pct in February from January to stand 6.9 pct lower than in
  February 1986, the Federal Statistics Office said.
      In January wholesale prices rose 0.8 pct from December to
  stand 8.6 pct below their level in January 1986.
      Wholesale price declines were led by starch products, down
  13 pct, light heating oil 11 pct lower, heavy heating oil 10
  pct lower and green coffee down 6.9 pct.
      Among higher wholesale prices were those for fresh
  vegetables, up 17 pct, fresh fruit up 12 pct and eggs up 8.9
  pct, the statistics office said in a statement.
  

SWISS FEB TRADE DEFICIT 629.7 MLN FRANCS (JAN DEFICIT 209.4 MLN) - OFFICIAL

  SWISS FEB TRADE DEFICIT 629.7 MLN FRANCS (JAN DEFICIT 209.4 MLN) - OFFICIAL
  

AUSTRALIAN BEEF OUTPUT SEEN DECLINING IN 1987
  Australian beef output is forecast to
  decline to 1.34 mln tonnes carcass weight in 1987 and 1.36 mln
  in 1988 from 1.44 mln in 1986, the Australian Meat and
  Live-Stock Corp (AMLC) said.
      Exports of beef/veal are also predicted to decline to
  480,000 tonnes shipped weight in 1987 from 515,000 in 1986, and
  then rally to 490,000 in 1988, the AMLC said in a summary of
  its bi-annual meat and livestock forecasts.
      It sees cattle numbers remaining at around the 1986 level
  of 23.2 mln beasts in both years because herd rebuilding is
  expected to be slower than previously forecast.
      Beef producers are becoming more confident that higher
  returns in the market, both domestically and overseas, will
  continue, the AMLC said.
      The slow herd build-up and the forecast lower production is
  expected to bring about a slight drop in both export and
  domestic consumption this year, it said.
      The forecast does not assume a turnaround in production
  levels until late next year.
      It said the outlook for beef exports as a proportion of
  output remains much the same as last year when it was around 55
  pct of total production. In 1985 it was 52 pct.
      The increase in exports of beef as a percentage of
  production has mainly been attributed to the decline in the
  Australian dollar, the AMLC said.
      It also forecast that Australia's four major markets, the
  U.S., Japan, Canada and Taiwan, will continue to dominate the
  chilled and frozen beef export markets. They take collectively
  around 94 pct of total Australian exports.
  

CHINA'S JANUARY GRAIN EXPORTS FALL
  China's grain exports in January totaled
  386,157 tonnes, down 22.1 pct from January 1986, customs
  figures show.
      They gave no detailed breakdown.
      The official China Economic News quoted the figures as
  showing tea exports rose 9.7 pct to 8,474 tonnes during the
  month.
      Imports of wool rose 117.6 pct to 10,248 tonnes over the
  same period, the figures show.
  

SWISS FEBRUARY TRADE DEFICIT 629.7 MLN FRANCS
  Switzerland had a trade deficit of 629.7
  mln Swiss francs in February compared with a revised 209.4 mln
  deficit in January and 723.2 mln shortfall in February 1986,
  the Federal Customs Office said.
      February imports were 6.00 billion francs against exports
  of 5.37 billion.
      Imports rose in real terms by 5.1 pct against February 1986
  while exports rose by a real 4.6 pct, the office said.
      But a further improvement in the terms of trade left the
  deficit smaller than last year.
      Last February's figure had also been hit by the import of
  two passenger aircraft.
  

MASSACHUSETTS INVESTORS GROWTH STOCK FUND PAYOUT
  Qtly div from income 5.1 cts vs 3.035 dlrs in prior qtr
  including capital gains of 2.978 dlrs
      Payable March 27
      Record February 27
  

JAPAN SHIPBUILDERS SEEK CARTEL TO RESTRICT OUTPUT
  Japanese shipbuilders have applied to the
  state's Fair Trade Commission to form a cartel to restrict
  tonnage built to about half of total capacity for the year
  starting April 1, officials of the Shipbuilders Association of
  Japan said.
      Under the plan, 33 yards capable of building ships of more
  than 10,000 gross tons will curtail operations to three mln
  compensated gross registered tonnes (CGRT) a year against
  capacity of about six mln CGRT.
      The Transport Ministry estimates new orders at 3.3 mln CGRT
  in the year to March 1988 and 3.1 mln the following year.
      The industry has curtailed production due to oversupply
  nearly every year since 1977/78, under cartel or Transport
  Ministry guidelines. The latest guidelines call for a ceiling
  of four mln CGRT in the year to March 31.
      The cartels, self-imposed and self-regulated, are not
  legally binding, but industry finds it in its own interest to
  stick to them.
      The slowdown in orders has been caused by the strong yen
  and a protracted worldwide shipbuilding slump.
  

SWISS WHOLESALE PRICES FALL 0.3 PCT IN FEBRUARY
  Swiss wholesale prices fell by 0.3 pct in
  February, giving a drop of 4.3 pct from February 1986, the
  Federal Office of Industry, Trade and Labour said.
      Prices had been unchanged in January, giving an annual drop
  of 4.6 pct. They fell by 2.6 pct in the year to February 1986.
      The wholesale price index, base 1963, stood at 168.5 in
  February from 176.1 last year.
      The office said the fall was largely due to lower prices
  for energy, raw materials and semi-finished goods. Consumer
  goods prices rose slightly.
  

KUBOTA LTD &lt;KUB.T> THIRD QUARTER TO JANUARY 15
  Group shr 53 yen vs 22
      Net profit 3.58 billion vs profit 1.47 billion
      Pretax profit 4.94 billion vs loss 248 mln
      Operating profit 5.36 billion vs profit 789 mln
      Sales 127.34 billion vs 130.22 billion
      Nine months ended January 15
      Group shr 134 yen vs 119
      Net 9.10 billion vs 8.03 billion
      Pretax 19.78 billion vs 14.77 billion
      Operating 17.35 billion vs 16.00 billion
      Sales 430.06 billion vs 446.26 billion
  

JAPAN CABINET APPROVES BILL ON GOLD COIN ISSUES
  The cabinet has approved a bill making it
  easier for the government to issue commemorative coins, a
  Finance Ministry official said.
      The bill, which must still be approved by parliament, would
  take effect in April 1988. It would allow the government to
  issue 1,000, 5,000 and 10,000 yen coins without special
  legislation, although higher-valued coins would still need a
  special law, the official said. At present it can only issue
  coins of 500 yen or less.
  

SANDOZ AG &lt;SANZ.Z> YEAR 1986
  Group 1986 net profit 541 mln Swiss
  francs vs. 529 mln
      Dividend 105 francs per 250 francs nominal share vs. 100,
  21 francs per 50 franc nominal participation certificate vs 20
      Group Turnover 8.36 billion francs vs. 8.45 billion
      Cash Flow 956 mln francs vs. 941 mln
      Parent company net profit 153.8 mln francs vs. 135.3 mln
  

INDIA IN COUNTERTRADE DEAL FOR MALAYSIAN PALM OIL
  India is to partially cover the cost
  of its Malaysian palm oil imports through a countertrade deal
  involving the construction of two bridges valued at 20 mln
  dlrs, an Indian trade source told Reuters.
      He said Malaysia agreed to the oil-for-bridges deal in
  October after India said it could no longer buy some 700,000
  tonnes of palm oil a year because of its trade deficit.
      Malaysia has also agreed to barter palm oil for 30 mln dlrs
  of hydroelectric equipment and is interested in countertrading
  for Indian iron ore, wheat and other goods and services, he
  said.
  

 ALUSUISSE GROUP 1986 NET LOSS 688 MLN SWISS FRANCS (LOSS 756 MLN)

   ALUSUISSE GROUP 1986 NET LOSS 688 MLN SWISS FRANCS (LOSS 756 MLN)
  

BANK OF JAPAN CALLS FOR LONG-TERM EFFORTS ON TRADE
  The short-term effect of foreign exchange
  rate movements in correcting international trade imbalances
  appears to be waning, and long-term efforts are required to cut
  Japan's chronic dependence on external demand, the Bank of
  Japan said in a monthly report.
      Japan's trade surplus in nominal terms is likely to remain
  high in the near future, the central bank said.
      Fundamental adjustments will be needed as long as Japan
  hopes to benefit from a better international allocation of
  resources and maintain the free trade system, it added.
  

 London - Floating rate note prices open sharply lower, dealers say

   London - Floating rate note prices open sharply lower, dealers say
  

ALUSUISSE &lt;ALUZ.Z> YEAR 1986
  Net Loss 688 mln Swiss francs vs. Loss
  756 mln
      Gross sales 5.93 billion vs. 8.51 billion
      Operating income 198 mln francs vs 256 mln
      Net extraordinary charges 592 mln vs 472 mln
      Note - Company plans 50 pct capital reduction, banks to
  convert 300 mln francs of credit facilities to subordinated
  loans. No immediate plans for capital increase. Company full
  name Schweizerische Aluminium AG.
  

Opec deliberately under 15.8 mln barrel ceiling to defend price - Subroto

  Opec deliberately under 15.8 mln barrel ceiling to defend price - Subroto
  

COUNTY INCREASES TESCO STAKE IN HILLARDS
  &lt;County Ltd>, which is acting in concert
  with Tesco Plc &lt;TSCO.L> in its 151.4 mln stg for supermarket
  chain operator &lt;Hillards Plc>, has purchased 300,000 Hillards
  ordinary shares at 316p per share, a statement said.
      These purchases, together with those made by County on 10
  March, represent about 4.8 pct of Hillards issued ordinary
  share capital, it said.
      Tesco's offer, made on March 10, values each Hillards
  ordinary share at 305.5p, a 37.6 pct premium over the previous
  day's  closing price. A cash alternative of 290.55p will be
  made available.
  

&lt;PREMDOR INC> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 35 cts vs 25 cts
      Net 1,590,000 vs 1,140,000
      Revs 32.2 mln vs 23.0 mln
      YEAR
      Shr 1.16 dlrs vs 68 cts
      Net 5,300,000 vs 3,100,000
      Revs 110.0 mln vs 85.4 mln
  

S. AFRICAN PRODUCER PRICE INFLATION FALLS SHARPLY
  South African year-on-year producer
  price inflation fell to 14.9 pct in January against 16.4 pct in
  December, Central Statistics Office figures show.
      The all items index (base 1980) rose a monthly 0.8 pct in
  January to 233.9, after also rising 0.8 pct in December to
  232.1.
      A year ago the index stood at 203.6 and year-on-year
  producer price inflation at 22.2 pct.
  

SUBROTO SEES OIL MARKET CONTINUING BULLISH
  Indonesian Energy Minister Subroto said
  he sees the oil market continuing bullish, with underlying
  demand expected to rise later in the year.
      He told a press conference in Jakarta at the end of a
  two-day meeting of South-East Asian Energy Ministers that he
  saw prices stabilizing around 18 dlrs a barrel.
      "The sentiment in the market is bullish and I think it will
  continue that way as demand will go up in the third or fourth
  quarters," Subroto said.
      Asked about the prospect for oil prices, he said: "I think
  they will stabilise around 18 dlrs, although there is a little
  turbulence ..."
      "Of course the spot price will fluctuate, but the official
  price will remain at 18 dlrs," he added.
  

OPEC DEFENDING 18 DLR PRICE, SUBROTO SAYS
  Indonesian Energy Minister Subroto said
  OPEC is deliberately under its production ceiling of 15.8 mln
  barrels to defend its 18 dlr a barrel price target.
      He told reporters at an energy conference in Jakarta that
  OPEC had decided to maintain its price level of 18 dlrs.
      "We are deliberately defending the price, so OPEC production
  is less than 15.8 (mln) at the moment," he stated.
      Asked if OPEC would increase production if prices went
  above 18 dlrs a barrel, he said this would be decided at the
  next OPEC meeting in June. "We will discuss the market situation
  then," he added.
      He said a meeting of the OPEC Differentials Committee had
  been postponed because "there is no need for the meeting."
      He did not elaborate. The committee had originally been due
  to meet in Vienna this week.
  

JAPAN REJECTS U.S. OBJECTIONS TO FAIRCHILD SALE
  A Foreign Ministry official dismissed
  arguments made by senior U.S. Government officials seeking to
  block the sale of a U.S. Microchip maker to a Japanese firm.
      "They appear to be linking completely unrelated issues,"
  Shuichi Takemoto of the Foreign Ministry's North American
  Division told Reuters.
      U.S. Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige has asked the
  White House to consider blocking the sale of &lt;Fairchild
  Semiconductor Corp> to Japan's Fujitsu Ltd &lt;ITSU.T>, U.S.
  Officials said yesterday.
      Baldrige expressed concern that the sale would leave the
  U.S. Military dependent on a foreign company for vital high
  technology equipment. Pentagon officials said Defence Secretary
  Caspar Weinberger also opposes to the sale.
      U.S. Officials have also said the sale would give Fujitsu a
  powerful role in the U.S. Market for supercomputers while
  Japan's supercomputer market remains closed to U.S. Sales.
      Takemoto said national security should not be an issue
  since the planned purchase of Fairchild from its current owner,
  Schlumberger Ltd &lt;SLB>, does not include Fairchild's main
  defence-related division.
      In addition, Takemoto said tension over the supercomputer
  trade should not affect the sale as Fairchild does not make
  supercomputers.
      Analysts noted that Fairchild does make sophisticated
  microchips used in supercomputers. Fujitsu makes similar chips
  and supplies them to U.S. Supercomputer makers, they said.
      Takemoto also dismissed U.S. Fears that the proposed
  takeover would violate U.S. Antitrust law, saying "the purchase
  would not result in Fujitsu monopolising the U.S. Semiconductor
  market."
      Two separate issues appear to have come together to boost
  pressure to block the purchase, industry analysts said.
      The move is in part an attempt to force Japan to open its
  domestic market to more U.S. Supercomputer sales, they said.
      U.S. Officials have repeatedly charged that the Japanese
  public sector is closed to U.S. Supercomputer sales despite
  U.S. Firms' technological lead in the field.
      "The United States believes Japan will only react when
  bullied, and this is a bullying ploy," Salomon Brothers Asia
  analyst Carole Ryavec said.
      However, the analysts said more is at stake than
  supercomputer sales as the U.S. Fears it is losing its vital
  semiconductor industry to Japanese competitors.
      "The real issue is xenophobia in (the U.S.) Silicon Valley,"
  said Tom Murtha of brokerage James Capel and Co.
      U.S.-Japanese tension over the semiconductor trade has
  failed to subside despite recent efforts by Japan's Ministry of
  International Trade and Industry (MITI) to get Japanese firms
  to abide by a bilateral pact aimed at halting predatory pricing
  and opening Japan's market.
      A MITI official said that while Japan is faithfully abiding
  by the agreement, problems remain in halting the sale of
  microchips in Europe and Southeast Asia at prices below those
  set by the pact.
      "It is only a matter of time before we solve this problem,"
  he told Reuters.
      Despite the furore, Fujitsu will proceed with talks on the
  acquisition in line with the basic agreement reached with
  Schlumberger last year, a Fujitsu spokeswoman told Reuters.
  

BANK OF ENGLAND OFFERS EARLY HELP TO MONEY MARKET
  The Bank of England said it invited an
  early round of bill offers to help ease tight conditions in the
  money market.
      The bank estimated today's liquidity shortage at about 1.10
  billion stg.
      Bills maturing in official hands and the treasury bill
  take-up would drain 1.21 billion stg from the system while a
  rise in the note circulation and below target bankers' balances
  would take out 265 mln and 180 mln respectively, the bank said.
      Against this, exchequer transactions would add a net 535
  mln stg.
  

AMERICAN NURSERY &lt;ANSY> BUYS FLORIDA NURSERY
  American Nursery Products Inc
  said it purchased Miami-based Heinl's Nursery Inc, for
  undisclosed terms.
      Heinl's Nursery has sales of about 4.5 mln dlrs and owns
  100 acres, of which 75 are in shade houses and about 58,300
  square feet cover greenhouses, shipping and office facilities.
  

BRITISH WHEAT AREA DOWN, MINISTRY CENSUS SHOWS
  A total of 1.886 mln hectares was sown
  to wheat in Britain, excluding Northern Ireland, up to December
  1, 1986 for the 1987 crop, a Ministry of Agriculture census
  shows.
      It compares with 1.925 mln planted in the same period 1985.
      The barley area was unchanged at 952,000 ha, but oilseed
  rape increased to 393,000 from 333,000 ha.
  

Miyazawa says current dollar/yen rate not necessarily satisfactory

  Miyazawa says current dollar/yen rate not necessarily satisfactory
  

KAMPUCHEA SAYS RICE CROP IN 1986 INCREASED
  Kampuchea harvested more than two mln
  tonnes of rice paddy in 1986, up on the crops of the previous
  two years, the official SPK news agency said yesterday.
      Diplomats said estimates put the 1985 harvest at less than
  one mln tonnes, slightly up on 800,000 in 1984.
      SPK said Kampuchea planned to expand planting from 1.5 mln
  to 1.93 mln hectares and boost rice paddy output to 2.5 mln
  tonnes this calendar year.
      Two mln tonnes of paddy would produce some 1.3 mln tonnes
  of milled rice, above the 1.25 mln tonnes Kampuchea says is the
  minimum its 7.5 mln people need.
  

CHINA TRYING TO INCREASE COTTON OUTPUT, PAPER SAYS
  China's 1987 cotton output must rise
  above the 1986 level of 3.54 mln tonnes or supply will fall
  short of increasing demand, the China Daily said.
      Demand in 1986 rose 10.9 pct over 1985.
      Output in 1986 fell from 4.15 mln tonnes in 1985 and a
  record 6.2 mln in 1984, official figures show. The China Daily
  attributed the decline to several factors, including less
  favorable weather conditions and new state measures to restrict
  cotton production after the 1984 build-up of stocks.
      According to Customs figures, cotton exports rose to
  558,089 tonnes in calendar 1986 from 347,026 in 1985.
      To increase output quickly, the state will raise by 10 pct
  the price it pays for cotton produced above and beyond quota
  levels, the newspaper said. Its official purchasing agencies
  will buy cotton produced in excess of that originally
  contracted for, it added.
      The China Daily said all cotton growing areas in south
  China should be maintained, and growing in the north should be
  concentrated in Hebei, Shandong, Henan and Xinjiang.
      It called for comprehensive planning to coordinate
  production of cotton with that of grain, edible oil and other
  crops, but gave no more details.
  

MIYAZAWA SAYS PRESENT YEN NOT NECESSARILY IDEAL
  Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa told a
  parliamentary session the current dollar/yen exchange rate is
  not necessarily satisfactory for the Japanese economy.
      Miyazawa said the Paris currency accord among six major
  industrial nations last month does not necessarily mean the yen
  should stay stable around current levels in the future.
      The Paris agreement was aimed at stopping a further rapid
  fluctuation of exchange rates, he said.
      The accord stipulated that current rates reflect
  fundamentals of the six nations - Britain, Canada, France,
  Japan, the U.S. And West Germany.
  

INDIA TOOK THREE CARGOES OF RBD OLEIN AT TENDER
  The Indian State Trading Corporation
  (STC) bought three cargoes of rbd palm olein at its vegetable
  oil import tender yesterday, traders said. Late yesterday the
  market was reporting it had bought one to two cargoes.
      The business comprised two 6,000 tonne cargoes for March
  15/April 15 shipments at 355 dlrs per tonne cif, and 6,000
  tonnes for May at 358 dlrs. The first two cargoes were on a
  cash basis and the May position was transacted on a 30 pct
  counter-trade basis, traders said.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN 478 MLN STG EARLY HELP
  The Bank of England said it provided the
  market with 478 mln stg of early assistance to help ease a
  liquidity shortage it estimated at 1.10 billion stg.
      It made outright purchases of seven mln stg of band one
  bank bills at 10-3/8 pct and 30 mln stg of band two bank bills
  at 10-5/16 pct.
      In addition, it bought 294 mln stg of paper for resale to
  the market on March 30 and 147 mln stg for resale on April 8,
  in both cases at an interest rate of 10-7/16 pct.
  

JAPAN PERSONAL SAVINGS SOAR IN 1986
  Japanese personal savings grew 10.3 pct
  in 1986 from 1985 helped by a sharp increase in stock
  investments by individuals, the Bank of Japan said.
      Outstanding savings on December 31, 1986 totalled 545,303
  billion yen. Funds in investment trusts alone totalled 21,918
  billion yen, up 37.4 pct from a year earlier.
      The outstanding balance also included deposits at banks and
  post offices, up 7.4 pct to 337,867 billion yen, savings in the
  form of insurance, up 18.6 pct to 111,431 billion, corporate
  bond investments, up 7.8 pct to 46,867 billion, and investments
  in trust banks, up 4.1 pct to 27,220 billion.
  

ALUSUISSE SHARES SUSPENDED ON CAPITAL CUT NEWS
  Trading in shares of Schweizerische
  Aluminium AG, Alusuisse, &lt;ALUZ.Z> was suspended on the Zurich
  stock exchange after today's announcement by the company that
  it would cut its share capital by 50 pct, the bourse said.
      The bourse said trading would resume again on Monday.
      Alusuisse bearer shares closed at 490 francs yesterday,
  registered shares at 170 francs and the participation
  certificates at 45.50.
  

PETROBRAS CANCELS OIL PURCHASE FROM SAUDI ARABIA
  Brazil's state oil company
  Petrobras has cancelled a 40 mln dlr crude oil purchase from
  Saudi Arabia after the Saudis refused to accept credit
  guarantees from the Bank of Brazil and did not disclose
  reasons, a Petrobras official said.
      Export director Carlos Santana told reporters the Saudis
  were the first suppliers of oil to impose such conditions after
  Brazil's decision to halt interest payment of its commercial
  debts last month. The shipment of 2.2 mln barrels represents
  two days of consumption.
      He said the Saudis reported they would no longer accept
  letters of credit from the Bank of Brazil or even from Saudi
  banks and that Brazil would have to obtain credit guarantees
  from leading international banks.
      In February, Brazil had contracted to buy 125,000 bpd from
  the Saudis until June. Saudi Arabia is Brazil's second biggest
  oil supplier, with an average 115,000 bpd. Iraq is the main
  supplier with 235,000 bpd. China comes third, with 58,000 bpd.
      "If the Saudis wish to stop our trade relationship...I am
  sure that if they do, we will be getting dozens of offers from
  elsewhere," Santana added.
      Santana said if the Saudis change their minds and decide to
  respect the terms of the contract, then Petrobras will lift the
  order to cancel the shipment.
      The Saudis had put similar conditions on a previous
  shipment, he added. "We telexed them saying that if they
  insisted, we would rather cancel the contract and buy the
  product elsewhere," Santana said.
      After Petrobras threatened to cancel the contract, the
  Saudis changed their minds and decided to accept the Bank of
  Brazil's credit guarantees, he said.
  

MANNESMANN CONSIDERING MAJORITY STAKE IN FICHTEL
  A Mannesmann AG &lt;MMWG.F> spokesman
  said the company has lodged an application with the Federal
  Cartel Office for approval of a possible majority stake in car
  parts company &lt;Fichtel und Sachs AG>.
      He described the application as a precautionary move and
  said no agreement on buying a majority stake had yet been
  reached. Until now Mannesmann has said only that it wanted to
  buy a 37.5 pct stake in Fichtel from the heirs of Ernst Wilhelm
  Sachs, the grandson of the firm's founder.
      The spokesman declined to say from whom it may buy the
  other shares to create a majority stake in the firm.
      Fichtel's other principal shareholders are Commerzbank AG
  &lt;CBKG.F>, with 35.01 pct, and Salzgitter AG &lt;ISLG.F>, with
  24.98 pct. Spokesmen declined to comment directly on the
  possibility of selling Fichtel shares to Mannesmann.
      Mannesmann said in January it hoped to take a 37.5 pct
  stake in Fichtel's holding company Sachs AG in the first
  quarter.
      Last week a spokesman said Mannesmann had a letter of
  intent on the 37.5 pct stake but completion was being delayed
  by legal questions surrounding the inheritance.
  

SCHWEIZERHALLE FIRE HIT SANDOZ 1986 PROFITS
  Sandoz AG &lt;SANZ.Z> would
  have reported a percentage rise in net profits "close to double
  figures" rather than the actual two pct had it not been for
  November's warehouse fire, a senior company official said.
      The official, who declined to be identified, told Reuters
  Sandoz had made a substantial addition to reserves to cope with
  the consequences of the accident at Schweizerhalle, which
  caused severe pollution of the Rhine.
      Sandoz today reported without comment a rise in net profits
  to 541 mln francs from the previous 529 mln and a five pct
  increase in dividend to 105 francs per 250 franc nominal share.
      This year began well, with the performance in January and
  February at least equal to the same period last year, the
  official said.
      The company is expected to give fuller details of its
  results at a news conference on April 22.
      Sandoz has insisted that it is adequately insured to cover
  any liability arising from the accident.
      The official said the addition to reserves was to cover the
  "one pct" of claims somehow not covered and any voluntary
  gestures it wanted to compensate for the effects of pollution
  from the fire.
      Sandoz has not given any figure for claims, which have been
  flowing in from Switzerland and other countries bordering the
  Rhine since the accident.
      However, the official said the final figure would be "much
  less than that cited in earlier comments." He gave no further
  details.
      In line with fellow chemical giant Ciba-Geigy &lt;CIGZ.Z>,
  which reported last month, Sandoz profit and turnover were also
  hit by the falling dollar, the official said.
      Sales in local currency terms were up by 14 pct, with
  market share increases in the United States and Japan. But this
  was more than offset by a 15 pct negative foreign exchange
  effect, which produced the reported one pct drop in turnover to
  8.36 billion francs,the Sandoz official said.
      Net profit at Ciba-Geigy dropped by 21 pct to 1.16 billion
  francs, while sales fell by 12 pct to 15.95 billion francs.
      The third major Swiss chemical company, F. Hoffmann-La
  Roche and Co &lt;HOFZ.Z> has not yet reported its results.
  

ALUSUISSE SEES POSSIBLE BREAK-EVEN IN 1987
  Schweizerische Aluminimum AG &lt;ALUZ.Z>
  (Alusuisse) may be able to break even this year after cleansing
  its balance sheet for 1986, chief executive Hans Jucker said.
      "The threshold of profitability has returned to the
  foreseeable future," he said. "We expect already in 1987
  approximately to break even. That presupposes, however, that
  our industrial environment does not worsen."
      He said Alusuisse would no longer face the burden of past
  losses.
      Alusuisse made a net loss of 688 mln Swiss francs in 1986
  after a restated 756 mln loss in 1985.
      Gross sales were 5.93 billion francs after 8.51 billion and
  net turnover 5.65 billion after 8.00 billion.
      Alusuisse had originally reported a 692 mln francs loss for
  1985.
      But Jucker and Finance Director Hermann Haerri told a news
  conference the new management installed a year ago had decided
  to restate the previous five years' accounts to eliminate
  rights on Australian bauxite previously in the books as an
  asset.
      Together with other one-off charges, Alusuisse took an
  gross extraordinary charge in 1986 of 698 mln francs, up from
  472 mln in 1985.
      It also had 106 mln extraordinary income in 1986 remaining,
  after provisions, from the sale of its Maremont Corp subsidiary
  in the United States. There were no extraordinary gains in
  1985.
      Jucker said the losses, plus those carried forward from
  1985, had wiped out the company's remaining reserves and
  exceeded legally allowed levels, forcing Alusuisse to adopt a
  50 pct capital cut, to be approved by shareholders on April 22.
      Jucker said he knew shareholders would find this "radical
  elimination of the mortgages of the past" painful, but said the
  foundation had been laid for a successful new company strategy.
      Haerri said despite the losses, the company's liquidity was
  strong. Bank debt had been cut by about one-third to 2.56
  billion francs against the end-1985 level of 3.85 billion.
      Cash flow improved substantially to 323 mln francs from 111
  mln and represented 5.7 pct of turnover against a mere 1.4 pct
  in 1985.
      In addition, to reassure other creditors, Alusuisse had
  arranged with three major Swiss banks -- Union Bank of
  Switzerland &lt;SBGZ.Z>, Swiss Bank Corp &lt;SBVZ.Z> and Credit
  Suisse &lt;CRSZ.Z>, to convert 300 mln francs of credits into a
  subordinated loan.
      The main sources of losses in 1986 were book losses and not
  cash losses, Haerri said. Existing credit lines were used only
  to a small extent, and the parent company had been granted a
  new credit line of 200 mln francs from a consortium of Swiss
  banks that would cover most of the loans falling due in 1987.
      Haerri said the company had been criticized for maintaining
  bauxite rights as an asset, and so had restated the accounts.
      That left the 1985 account with a 756 mln franc loss
  instead of 692 mln, 1984 with a 68 mln profit instead of 169
  mln, 1983 with a 217 mln loss instead of 82 mln and 1982 with a
  479 mln loss instead of 179 mln.
      The new accounts show 1985 with shareholders' equity of
  1.15 billion francs instead of 1.75 billion, and similar
  alternations were made for previous years.
      After 1986 losses, shareholder's equity stood at only 895
  mln francs.
  

JAPAN CORPORATE PROFITS IN LAST 1986 QUARTER UP
  Current profits of Japan's major firms in
  the October-December quarter rose four pct from a year earlier
  to 5,654 billion yen against a 2.6 pct year-on-year rise in the
  preceding quarter, the Finance Ministry said.
      The improved earnings resulted mainly from a 22.5 pct
  profit increase in non-manufacturing industries, supported by
  an 88.7 pct rise for construction firms and a 138 pct gain in
  real estate, according to a ministry survey.
      Total sales of the 15,308 firms with capital of 10 mln yen
  or more which responded to the poll, fell one pct to 217,217
  billion yen against a 1.2 pct fall the previous quarter.
      Current profits of manufacturing industries in the fourth
  quarter dropped 13.7 pct to 2,394 billion yen against a 22.1
  pct fall in the preceding quarter, the ministry said.
      Plant and equipment investments of all firms polled fell
  3.9 pct to 8,004 billion yen, compared with a 1.4 percent fall
  the previoius quarter.
      Ministry officials said the survey showed that the Japanese
  economy is in a delicate stage in which it is hard to tell if
  economic growth has stopped deteriorating or if the economy is
  heading for a recovery.
  

U.S. LENDS SUDAN 57 MLN DLRS FOR WHEAT PURCHASES
  The U.S. Is to lend Sudan 57 mln dlrs
  to buy 309,000 tonnes of wheat and 73,000 tonnes of wheat
  flour, according to an agreement signed here.
      Under the agreement Sudan will receive 50 mln dlrs for the
  commodities and the rest for sea transportation.
      The loan is repayable in 40 years, including a 10-year
  grace period. Interest will be two pct for the grace period and
  three pct over the repayment period of 30 years.
  

ALUSUISSE PLANS FURTHER ALUMINIUM CAPACITY CUTS
  Schweizerische Aluminium AG &lt;ALUZ.Z>
  (Alusuisse) plans further drastic cuts in its aluminium
  smelting capacity and more concentration of higher value-added
  products, chief executive Hans Jucker said.
      Elaborating on plans disclosed in outline last September,
  company officials said current smelting capacity of 390,000
  tonnes a year would be cut to between 250,000 and 260,000
  tonnes by 1989 or 1990. They did not say where cuts might be
  made.
      Two years ago, before selling its Ormet Corp subsidiary in
  the United States to local management and staff, Alusuisse had
  an annual capacity of 800,000 tonnes.
  

CANADA FEBRUARY UNEMPLOYMENT FALLS TO 9.6 PCT FROM JANUARY 9.7 PCT, STATISTICS CANADA SAID

  CANADA FEBRUARY UNEMPLOYMENT FALLS TO 9.6 PCT FROM JANUARY 9.7 PCT, STATISTICS CANADA SAID
  

BRAZIL ANTI-INFLATION PLAN LIMPS TO ANNIVERSARY
  inflation
  plan, initially hailed at home and abroad as the saviour of the
  economy, is limping towards its first anniversary amid soaring
  prices, widespread shortages and a foreign payments crisis.
      Announced last February 28 the plan froze prices, fixed the
  value of the new Cruzado currency and ended widespread
  indexation of the economy in a bid to halt the country's 250
  pct inflation rate.
      But within a year the plan has all but collapsed.
      "The situation now is worse than it was. Although there was
  inflation, at least the economy worked," a leading bank
  economist said.
      The crumbling of the plan has been accompanied by a
  dramatic reversal in the foreign trade account. In 1984 and
  1985 Brazil's annual trade surpluses had been sufficient to
  cover the 12 billion dlrs needed to service its 109 billion dlr
  foreign debt.
      For the first nine months of 1986 all seemed to be on
  target for a repeat, with monthly surpluses averaging one
  billion dlrs. But as exports were diverted and imports
  increased to avoid further domestic shortages the trade surplus
  plunged to 211 mln dlrs in October and since then has averaged
  under 150 mln.
  

MFS MANAGED SECTORS TRUST DIVIDEND INCREASED
  Semi-annual div from income of 7.3 cts vs 1.0 cent in prior
  period
      Payable March 27
      Record February 27
  

CANADA FEBRUARY UNEMPLOYMENT 9.6 PCT
  Canada's February unemployment rate,
  seasonally adjusted, fell to 9.6 pct from 9.7 pct in January,
  Statistics Canada said. The rate was 9.8 pct in February last
  year.
      Seasonally adjusted employment in February was 11,777,000,
  compared with 11,747,000 in January, while unemployment slipped
  to 1,252,000 from 1,255,000.
  

MIYAZAWA SAYS PRESENT YEN NOT NECESSARILY IDEAL
  Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa told a
  parliamentary session the current dollar/yen exchange rate is
  not necessarily satisfactory for the Japanese economy.
      Miyazawa said the Paris currency accord among six major
  industrial nations last month does not necessarily mean the yen
  should stay stable around current levels in the future.
      The Paris agreement was aimed at stopping a further rapid
  fluctuation of exchange rates, he said.
      The accord stipulated that current rates reflect
  fundamentals of the six nations - Britain, Canada, France,
  Japan, the U.S. And West Germany.
  

JAPAN CABINET APPROVES BILL ON GOLD COIN ISSUES
  The cabinet has approved a bill making it
  easier for the government to issue commemorative coins, a
  Finance Ministry official said.
      The bill, which must still be approved by parliament, would
  take effect in April 1988. It would allow the government to
  issue 1,000, 5,000 and 10,000 yen coins without special
  legislation, although higher-valued coins would still need a
  special law, the official said. At present it can only issue
  coins of 500 yen or less.
  

JAPAN MINISTER SAYS ABOUT 170 YEN APPROPRIATE
  International Trade and Industry Minister
  Hajime Tamura told a parliamentary session Japan's small- and
  medium-sized enterprises are seriously suffering from the yen's
  rise and can only stand levels around 170 yen.
      He also said he still believes a dollar exchange rate level
  plus or minus 10 yen from 170 yen would be within levels agreed
  upon last month in Paris by six major industrial nations.
  Finance ministers of Britain, Canada, France, Japan, the U.S.
  And West Germany agreed on February 22 to cooperate in
  stabilizing exchange rates around the current levels. The
  dollar had closed here at 153.77 yen on February 20.
  

TWO BRAZILIAN SHIPPING FIRMS SETTLE WITH STRIKERS
  Two small shipping companies have
  reached a pay deal with striking seamen, but union leaders said
  most of Brazil's 40,000 seamen were still on strike.
      A union spokesman in Rio de Janeiro said the seamen had
  accepted a 120 pct pay offer from the companies, Globo and
  Flumar, which have less than 200 employees each.
      The two-week strike comes as Brazil faces a debt crisis and
  is delaying exports badly needed to earn foreign exchange.
      Labour Minister Almir Pazzionotto said the government will
  not force a settlement of the strike, which was ruled illegal
  last Friday.
  

MIYAZAWA SAYS EXCHANGE RATES WILL STAY STABLE
  Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa told a
  press conference he thinks exchange rates will remain stable
  due to the currency accord reached in Paris last month by six
  major industrialised nations but he did not say for how long.
      The dollar has hovered around 153 yen since the six agreed
  to cooperate to bring about currency stability.
      Asked to comment on remarks by some U.S. Officials calling
  for a further decline of the dollar, Miyazawa said only the
  U.S. President and the U.S. Treasury Secretary can make
  official statements about exchange rates.
  

SUBROTO SEES OIL MARKET CONTINUING BULLISH
  Indonesian Energy Minister Subroto said
  he sees the oil market continuing bullish, with underlying
  demand expected to rise later in the year.
      He told a press conference in Jakarta at the end of a
  two-day meeting of South-East Asian Energy Ministers that he
  saw prices stabilizing around 18 dlrs a barrel.
      "The sentiment in the market is bullish and I think it will
  continue that way as demand will go up in the third or fourth
  quarters," Subroto said.
      Asked about the prospect for oil prices, he said: "I think
  they will stabilise around 18 dlrs, although there is a little
  turbulence ..."
      "Of course the spot price will fluctuate, but the official
  price will remain at 18 dlrs," he added.
  

OPEC DEFENDING 18 DLR PRICE, SUBROTO SAYS
  Indonesian Energy Minister Subroto said
  OPEC is deliberately under its production ceiling of 15.8 mln
  barrels to defend its 18 dlr a barrel price target.
      He told reporters at an energy conference in Jakarta that
  OPEC had decided to maintain its price level of 18 dlrs.
      "We are deliberately defending the price, so OPEC production
  is less than 15.8 (mln) at the moment," he stated.
      Asked if OPEC would increase production if prices went
  above 18 dlrs a barrel, he said this would be decided at the
  next OPEC meeting in June. "We will discuss the market situation
  then," he added.
      He said a meeting of the OPEC Differentials Committee had
  been postponed because "there is no need for the meeting."
      He did not elaborate. The committee had originally been due
  to meet in Vienna this week.
  

BANK OF JAPAN CALLS FOR LONG-TERM EFFORTS ON TRADE
  The short-term effect of foreign exchange
  rate movements in correcting international trade imbalances
  appears to be waning, and long-term efforts are required to cut
  Japan's chronic dependence on external demand, the Bank of
  Japan said in a monthly report.
      Japan's trade surplus in nominal terms is likely to remain
  high in the near future, the central bank said.
      Fundamental adjustments will be needed as long as Japan
  hopes to benefit from a better international allocation of
  resources and maintain the free trade system, it added.
  

BURMESE PADDY PRODUCTION LOWER IN 1986/87
  Burma's paddy production fell to 729.4
  mln baskets in fiscal year 1986-1987 (to end March) from 737.3
  mln in 1985-1986, a cabinet report to parliament said.
      A basket is a local measure equal to 46 lbs.
      Paddy output in 1984-1985 was 699.1 mln baskets, it said.
      Burma's "Green Revolution" sparked by the introduction of
  high-yield variety paddy strains in the mid-1970s appears to
  have hit a plateau with production levelling off over the past
  two years, economists said.
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN FURTHER 168 MLN STG HELP
  The Bank of England said it provided the
  money market with a further 168 mln stg of assistance to help
  offset a shortage it now estimated at 1.05 billion stg, revised
  down from 1.10 billion.
      It bought 21 mln stg of bank bills outright, 20 mln in band
  one at 10-3/8 pct and one mln in band two at 10-5/16 pct. In
  addition, it bought 98 mln stg of bills for resale on March 30
  and 49 mln stg for resale April 8 at an interest rate of
  10-7/16 pct. All these rates are the same as for today's
  earlier help.
      So far today, the bank has provided the market with
  assistance worth 646 mln stg.
      The bank also announced the rates applicable to temporary
  lending facilities rolled over today.
      The average mid-market rate for lending rolled over for one
  week is 10-15/16 pct and for two weeks 10-5/8 pct.
  

AEP INDUSTRIES INC &lt;AEPI> 1ST QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 19 cts vs 32 cts
      Net 586,000 vs 802,000
      Sales 14.2 mln vs 15.1 mln
      Avg shrs 3,006,372 vs 2,506,250
  

MULTI-STEP TO SELL LADDER UNIT, CANCEL SHARES
  &lt;Multi-Step Products Inc>, earlier
  reporting an initial six month loss, said it agreed to sell
  wholly owned Multi-Step Manufacturing Inc for 100,000 dlrs
  cash, subject to shareholder and regulatory approval.
      Multi-Step also said it will pay 900,000 dlrs to cancel
  711,192 of its own shares, which will be acquired from Michael
  Penhale and his benficiaries. Penhale will control and manage
  Multi-Step Manufacturing, following the transactions.
      Multi-Step had a 739,146 dlr loss for the six months ended
  December 31. The company received its initial public listing in
  December.
      The company said its ladder-making unit has been losing
  300,000 dlrs quarterly.
      The sale, expected to close in April, also calls for
  retirement of the unit's 400,000 dlr bank debt, Multi-Step
  said. The unit also has agreed to pay a debt of 400,000 dlrs to
  Tarxien Company Ltd, which is 40 pct owned by Multi-Step.
      Multi-Step previously said it agreed to acquire the
  remaining 60 pct of Tarxien it does not already own.
  

D.H. HOLMES CO LTD &lt;HLME> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 39 cts vs 1.34 dlrs
      Net 1,392,000 vs 4,686,000
      Sales 81.9 mln vs 81.7 mln
      Year
      Shr 10 cts vs 97 cts
      Net 355,000 vs 3,375,000
      Sales 270.4 mln vs 272.8 mln
      NOTE: Share adjusted for three pct stock dividend in
  January 1987.
      Pretax net profits 3,052,000 dlrs vs 4,498,000 dlrs in
  quarter and loss 572,000 dlrs vs profit 2,922,000 dlrs in year.
      Latest year net includes pretax gains of 166,000 dlrs in
  quarter and 4,420,000 dlrs in year from pension plan
  reversions.
      Prior year net includes gain 1,549,000 dlrs on sale of
  property.
  

FIRST BOSTON &lt;FBC> STARTS ALLEGHENY &lt;AG> BID
  First Boston Inc said it has started
  its previously-announced tender offer for all common shares,
  2.19 dlr cumulative preference shares and 11.25 dlr convertible
  preferred shares of Allegheny International Inc at 24.60 dlrs,
  20.00 dlrs and 87.50 dlrs respectively.
      In a newspaper advertisement, the company said the offer
  and withdrawal rioghts will expire April Nine unless extended.
  The offer is conditioned on receipt of at least a majority of
  Allegheny voting power on a fully diluted basis and on receipt
  of at least two thirds each of the preference and preferred
  shares.
      A merger approved by the Allegheny board in which remaining
  common, preference and preferred shares would be acquired at
  the tender prices is to follow the offer.
      Receipt of the minimum amounts under the offer would give
  First Boston sufficient voting power to assure approval of the
  merger without the affirmative vote of any other shareholder,
  the company said.
  

COURT PUTS INJUNCTION ON DUTCH PORT REDUNDANCIES
  Employers in Rotterdam port's
  strike-hit general cargo sector have been served with an
  injunction until May 7 preventing them from continuing with
  plans for 350 redundancies this year, an employers'
  organisation spokesman said.
      An Amsterdam court yesterday ruled there had been a legal
  fault in the employers' redundancy procedure.
      The employers' spokesman said they were likely to restart
  the redundancy procedure afresh next week in an attempt to
  pre-empt the May 7 final court ruling.
      Port and transport union representative Paul Rosenmuller
  described the court ruling as a victory for the union, but
  added there was still a long way to go before the dispute that
  has hit the general cargo sector for the past eight weeks was
  resolved.
      Rosenmuller said there would be a meeting of the sector's
  4,000 workers this afternoon to decide on further action in the
  campaign of lightning strikes that began on January 19 in
  protest at planned redundancies of 800, starting with 350 this
  year.
      The employers said there were no immediate plans for
  meetings with the union either on the proposed redundancies or
  on a new work practice agreement in the sector.
      Meanwhile, discussions on a new work agreement in the
  port's grain sector, due to resume next week, are stalemated,
  although agreement could be close in the coal and ore sector,
  the employers' spokesman added.
  

STRIKE TO CLOSE NEW ZEALAND PORTS ON MONDAY
  Harbour workers said they will
  strike for 24 hours on Monday, effectively closing all New
  Zealand's ports.
      The strike is over deadlocked wage negotiations.
      A Harbour Employees Workers' Union spokesman told reporters
  there will be no ship movements in and out of ports from
  midnight on Sunday (1200 hrs GMT March 15).
      There will be no loading or unloading involving harbour
  board workers and the Cook Strait ferries, which provide a
  vital link between New Zealand's North and South Islands, will
  not run, he added.
  

ESSELTE BUSINESS &lt;ESB> UNIT BUYS ANTONSON UNIT
  Esselte Business Systems Inc's
  Esselte Meto division said it has acquired the Antonson America
  Co, a subsidiary of &lt;Antonson Machines AB>, of Sweden.
      Esselte said the Antonson unit, based in LaPorte, Indiana,
  manufactures scales and label printers. The company said the
  purchase is part of a plan to increase the range of retail
  electronic scales being offered by Esselte in the U.S.
      It said the acquisition will enble Esselte to increase its
  distribution base in its effort to grow in the U.S.
  

TWO BRAZILIAN SHIPPING FIRMS SETTLE WITH STRIKERS
  Two small shipping companies reached
  a pay deal with striking seamen late yesterday, but union
  leaders said most of Brazil's 40,000 seamen were still on
  strike.
      A union spokesman in Rio de Janeiro said the seamen had
  accepted a 120 pct pay raise offer from the companies, Globo
  and Flumar, which have less than 200 employees each.
      The two-week strike comes as Brazil faces a debt crisis and
  is delaying exports badly needed to earn foreign exchange.
      Labour Minister Almir Pazzionotto said the government will
  not force a settlement of the strike, which was ruled illegal
  last Friday.
  

PORTUGUESE FEBRUARY CONSUMER PRICES RISE ONE PCT
  Portugal's consumer prices rose one pct
  last month after a 1.2 pct increase in January and a 1.3 pct
  rise in February 1986, the National Statistics Institute said.
      The consumer price index (base 1976) rose to 761.3 from
  753.7 in January and compared with 695.4 in February 1986.
      This gave a year-on-year February inflation rate of 9.5 pct
  against 9.8 pct in January and 12.6 pct in February 1986.
      Measured as an annual average rate, inflation in February
  was 11.1 pct compared with 11.4 pct in January.  The government
  forecasts annual average inflation of about eight pct this
  year.
  

WEATHER CLOSES ALEXANDRIA PORT, SUMED OIL TERMINAL
  Strong winds and high seas
  forced the closure of Egypt's main port of Alexandria and a
  nearby oil terminal, port officials said.
      Tanker loading at the Suez-Mediterranean Arab Petroleum
  Pipelines Co in Sedi Kerir, southwest of here, stopped and
  officials said five tankers were at anchorage awaiting improved
  weather.
  

U.S. PRODUCER PRICES ROSE 0.1 PCT IN FEB AFTER 0.6 PCT JAN RISE

  U.S. PRODUCER PRICES ROSE 0.1 PCT IN FEB AFTER 0.6 PCT JAN RISE
  

U.S. PRODUCER PRICES RISE 0.1 PCT IN FEBRUARY
  The U.S. Producer Price Index for
  finished goods rose 0.1 pct on a seasonally adjusted basis in
  February, the Labor Department said.
      The increase came after a 0.6 pct increase in producer
  prices in January.
      Higher energy prices were primarily responsible for the
  increase in February, though they rose at a slower pace than
  they had in January, the department said.
      The finished goods index was up 0.1 pct from its February,
  1986 level.
      Before seasonal adjustment, the index for finished goods
  stood at 292.3 over its 1967 base of 100.
      Among finished goods, the index for energy products rose
  four pct in February after a 9.8 pct increase in January. But
  price increases slowed sharply for gasoline and home heating
  oil, the department said.
      There were some price declines, including a 3.4 pct fall
  for passenger cars and 1.3 pct for light trucks from January
  levels. This reflected expanded factory-financed rebates and
  discount loan programs, the department said.
      Before seasonal adjustment, the index for finished goods
  stood at 292.3 over its 1967 base of 100.
      Among finished goods, the index for energy products rose
  four pct in February after a 9.8 pct increase in January. But
  price increases slowed sharply for gasoline and home heating
  oil, the department said.
      There were some price declines, including a 3.4 pct fall
  for passenger cars and 1.3 pct for light trucks from January
  levels. This reflected expanded factory-financed rebates and
  discount loan programs, the department said.
      The index for consumer foods fell 0.5 pct after a 1.8
  pct drop in January as vegetables, pork and coffee cost less.
  The index for intermediate goods rose 0.5 pct following a sharp
  0.9 pct rise in January.
      The department said that energy prices again were the main
  reason, with the index for intermediate energy up 2.7 pct.
      Gasoline and diesel fuel prices were about five pct higher,
  half the 10 pct jump recorded in January.
      The durable manufacturing materials index edged down 0.1
  pct last month after jumping 1.0 pct in January as prices for
  steel, precious metals and copper stabilized.
      The department said lead and zinc prices fell, while
  hardwood lumber and cement cost more. The crude materials index
  rose 1.8 pct in February after a 2.9 pct rise in January. Crude
  energy materials were up 2.6 pct, much less than the 10 pct
  rise in January. Crude petroleum prices rose 4.4 pct last month
  after a sharp 19.7 pct rise in January.
      Price rises accellerated for logs and timber and tobacco,
  but fell for cotton, metal ores and copper and aluminum scrap.
      Among finished goods, gasoline rose 5.5 pct after a 15.7
  pct January increase, and fuel oil was up three pct in February
  after an 18.0 pct increase in January.
  

FIRST FARWEST CORP &lt;FFWS> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Shr loss 4.22 dlrs vs profit nil
      Net loss 5,568,000 vs profit 11,000
      Revs 42.2 mln vs 37.5 mln
      Year
      Shr loss 3.74 dlrs vs profit 1.02 dlrs
      Net loss 4,898,000 vs profit 1,384,000
      Revs 139.0 mln vs 132.7 mln
      NOTE: 1986 net both periods includes 1,603,000 dlr loss
  from discontinued operations due to settlement of lawsuit and
  redemption of preferred.
  

HEMOTEC INC &lt;HEMO> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr one ct vs two cts
      Net 22,000 vs 58,000
      Sales 951,000 vs 901,000
      Year
      Shr four cts vs 12 cts
      Net 88,000 vs 293,000
      Sales 4,014,000 vs 3,533,000
      NOTE: Net includes tax credits of 46,000 dlrs vs 84,000
  dlrs in quarter and credit 19,000 dlrs vs provision 37,000 dlrs
  in year.
  

SERVICE CONTROL BIDS FOR AMERICAN SERVICE
  &lt;Service Control Corp> said it has
  started a tender offer for all shares of &lt;American Service
  Corp> at 37 dlrs each.
      In a newspaper advertisement, the company said the offer
  and withdrawal rights expire April Nine unless extended.  The
  American Service board has approved the offer, which is to be
  followed by a merger at the same price.
      Service Control said the offer is conditioned on receipt of
  at least 534,806 shares.  It said holders of 534,819 shares
  have agreed to tender their shares under the offer and have
  granted Service Control an option to buy them at 37 dlrs each.
  

FED EXPECTED TO ADD TEMPORARY RESERVES
  The Federal Reserve is expected to
  enter the U.S. Government securities market to add temporary
  reserves, economists said.
      They expect it to supply the reserves indirectly by
  arranging a fairly large round, two billion dlrs or more, of
  customer repurchase agreements. The Fed may add the reserves
  directly instead via System repurchases.
      Federal funds, which averaged 6.02 pct on Friday, opened at
  6-1/8 pct and traded between there and 6-1/16 pct. Funds are
  under upward pressure from settlement of recently sold two-year
  notes and from a Treasury tax and loan call on banks.
  

DREYER'S GRAND &lt;DRYR> RESTATES 4RTH QUARTER LOSS
  Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream said
  it has restated its previously-reported fourth quarter loss to
  904,000 dlrs or 13 cts per share because it has now decided to
  take a charge of about 700,000 dlrs to provide for losses of
  Midwest Distributing Co, which was acquired December 30.
      Dreyer's said the restatement reduces net income for the
  full year to 5,914,000 dlrs or 80 cts per share.
      The company said the restatement does not indicate any
  change in its thinking on the benefits of the acquisition or
  future prospects in Midwest Distributing's markets.
      Dreyer's Grand previously reported 1986 earnings of
  6,614,000 dlrs or 90 cts per share, down from 7,960,000 dlrs or
  1.08 dlrs a share.  For the first nine months of the year, it
  had earned 6,818,000 dlrs or 92 cts per share, up from
  6,354,000 dlrs or 86 cts a share a year before.
  

&lt;TURBO RESOURCES LTD> YEAR NET
  Oper shr nine cts vs three cts
      Oper shr diluted eight cts vs three cts
      Oper net 15 mln vs five mln
      Revs 518 mln vs 622 mln
      NOTE: Oper net excludes extraordinary income of seven mln
  dlrs vs four mln on tax loss carryforward, offset by writedowns
  of three mln dlrs vs eight mln on U.S. oil and gas properties
  and other assets.
  

VW HAS NO COMMENT ON SEAT LOSS REPORTS
  A Volkswagen AG
  &lt;VOWG.F> spokesman said the group had no immediate comment on
  reports of greater than expected losses at its Spanish
  subsidiary Sociedad Espanola de Automoviles de Turismo (SEAT).
      German newspapers reported that Werner Schmidt, SEAT
  supervisory board chairman, had told journalists that SEAT
  losses for 1986 were around 27 billion pesetas, or about 386
  mln marks, almost double original expectations.
      According to the Boersen-Zeitung newspaper, Schmidt said VW
  would invest 42 billion pesetas in SEAT this year and in the
  years to 1995 would spend 462 billion on its new Spanish unit.
  

BENEFICIAL CORP TO SELL WESTERN NATIONAL LIFE FOR 275 MLN DLRS

  BENEFICIAL CORP TO SELL WESTERN NATIONAL LIFE FOR 275 MLN DLRS
  

GENERAL MILLS INC 3RD QTR SHR 64 CTS VS 52 CTS

  GENERAL MILLS INC 3RD QTR SHR 64 CTS VS 52 CTS
  

CAESARS WORLD INC SAID BOARD REJECTS MARTIN SOSNOFF TENDER

  CAESARS WORLD INC SAID BOARD REJECTS MARTIN SOSNOFF TENDER
  

 Top discount rate at U.K. Bill tender falls to 9.3657 pct

   Top discount rate at U.K. Bill tender falls to 9.3657 pct
  

&lt;MDI MOBILE DATA INTERNATIONAL INC> YEAR NET
  Oper shr 63 cts vs 47 cts
      Oper shr diluted 56 cts vs 38 cts
      Oper net 3,284,955 vs 2,176,925
      Revs 31.6 mln vs 23.0 mln
      NOTE: Current oper net excludes writedown of 344,039 dlrs,
  or seven cts a share, on unidentified investment.
  

UK MONEY MARKET DEFICIT REVISED TO ONE BILLION STG
  The Bank of England said it has revised
  its estimate of today's shortfall to one billion stg, before
  taking account of 646 mln stg morning assistance.
  

OUTOKUMPU TO CLOSE NICKEL REFINERY DURING SUMMER
  The Finnish metal and mining group
  Outokumpu Oy said it will close its nickel refinery at
  Harjavalta in central Finland for six weeks in July and August
  this year due to current low prices on the nickel market.
      "We consider nickel prices as bad at the moment, although
  they have been rising slightly since January," refinery sales
  manager Pekka Purra said.
      He said the closure will mean a drop in production of 3,000
  tonnes in 1987 from last year's output of 17,800 tonnes. The
  closure was also a move to cut labour costs as no extra staff
  have to be employed during holidays to keep the plant open.
  

U.S. FEB INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION ROSE 0.5 PCT AFTER REVISED 0.1 PCT JAN GAIN

  U.S. FEB INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION ROSE 0.5 PCT AFTER REVISED 0.1 PCT JAN GAIN
  

U.S. FEB INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION ROSE 0.5 PCT
  U.S. industrial production rose 0.5
  pct in February after a revised 0.1 pct increase in January,
  the Federal Reserve Board said.
      The Fed previously said industrial production rose 0.4 pct
  in January.
      The Fed said the February gain was dominated by a sharp
  rise in motor vehicle production, which boosted output of both
  consumer goods and business equipment. Industrial production
  stood at 127.3 pct of the 1977 average in February and was up
  1.7 pct from a year ago, the Fed said.
      The Fed also revised the December industrial production
  figure to a gain of 0.5 pct from 0.3 pct originally reported.
      Manufacturing output rose 0.5 pct in February after a 0.1
  pct increase in January and included gains of 0.8 pct in
  durables and 0.1 pct in non-durables, the Fed said.
      Manufacturing was 2.4 pct above the year ago level.
      Production of auto assemblies rose to an annual rate of 8.3
  mln units last month from a January rate of 7.5 mln units.
      Output of consumer goods rose 0.6 pct after falling 0.3 pct
  in January and output of consumer durables was up 2.1 pct in
  February after falling by 2.0 pct in January.
      Business equipment production rose 1.0 pct in February,
  reflecting more output of autos and trucks for business use and
  a recovery from strikes in farm equipment industries, the Fed
  said.
      Mining output rose 0.1 pct after a 1.6 pct increase in
  January, but was still six pct lower than a year ago.
      Utilities output rose 0.7 pct in February after a 1.2 pct
  rise in January.
      Output of defense and space equipment was up 0.4 pct, the
  same as in January, and 6.2 pct higher than a year ago.
      Output of construction supplies rose 0.2 pct in February
  after a 1.5 pct January rise.
      Materials output increased by 0.2 pct last month, the
  fourth consecutive monthly increase after declining throughout
  much of 1986. The recent strength in materials has been
  concentrated in textiles, paper and chemicals, the Fed said.
      Output of home goods was up 0.3 pct in February and the Fed
  said production of items like appliances and furniture
  continued strong last month.
  

CAESARS WORLD &lt;CAW> REJECTS SOSNOFF'S OFFER
  Caesars World Inc said its board
  unanimously rejected a 28 dlr a share takeover offer by New
  York investor Martin T. Sosnoff.
      Caesars said Sosnoff's offer to by all its outstanding
  shares of common stock was inadequate and not in the best
  interests of its shareholders.
      The company recommended that shareholders reject Sosnoff's
  offer, made through his &lt;MTS Acquisition Corp>, and not tender
  any of their shares.
      Caesars said it will explore a variety of alternative
  transactions but did not elaborate.
      Caesars, in a brief statement, did not say whether it would
  seek to buy back its shares held by Sosnoff.
      A Caesars spokesman said the company would not comment
  further on its decision.
      On Wednesday, Sosnoff told the Securities and Exchange
  Commission that he controls 13.6 pct of the company's stock.
      Sosnoff also informed the SEC that Caesars had offered to
  buyout his holdings several times during the past year.
      No one from the Sosnoff organization was immediately
  available for comment.
      Caesars said its financial advisor, Drexel Burnham Lambert
  Inc, had determined that Sosnoff's offer was financially
  inadequate for shareholders other than Sosnoff.
      The company said other factors it considered in rejecting
  the offer were its financial condition, future prospects,
  current market conditions and the numerous conditions on which
  Sosnoff's bid was conditioned.
      Caesars' stock opened up 1/8 point at 28-1/8. That is 1/8
  point above Sosnoff's offer price.
  

ESSELTE AB &lt;ESB.ST> 1986 RESULTS
  Group profit after net interest items
  742 mln crowns vs 741 mln.
      Sales 11.25 billion crowns vs 10.22 billion.
      Estimated profit per share 10 crowns vs 9.20.
      Proposed dividend four crowns vs 3.38.
  

CONSECO &lt;CNC> TO BUY BENEFICIAL &lt;BNL> UNIT
  Conseco Inc said it has signed a
  definitive agreement to acquire Western National Life Insurance
  Co from Beneficial Corp for 275 mln dlrs in cash.
      Western National had assets of 1.9 billion dlrs at the end
  of 1986 and 1986 premium and investment revenues.  Western
  issues structured settlement annuities for the settlement of
  personal injury and damage claims and sells tax-sheltered
  annuities.
      The acquisition is subject to regulatory approval.
      Conseco said the acquisition would raise its assets to 2.7
  billion dlrs and annual revenues to about 800 mln dlrs.
      Beneficial had previously announced plans to leave the
  insurance business.  On March Three, it said it agreed in
  principle to sell its American Centennial Insurance Co,
  Beneficial International Insurance Co, Consolidated MArine and
  General Insurance Co Ltd, Consolidated Life Assurance Co Ltd,
  Wesco Insurance Co and Service General Insurance Co
  subsidiaries to a management-led group for 98 mln dlrs in notes
  mostly contingent on performance of the units and 10 mln dlrs
  in cash.
      Conseco had 1986 operating earnings of 4,968,000 dlrs on
  revenues of 84.9 mln dlrs.
  

GREAT AMERICAN BANCORP &lt;GRTB> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr profit seven cts vs loss 24 cts
      Net profit 151,000 vs loss 523,000
      12 mths
      Shrs loss 1.70 dlrs vs loss 44 cts
      Net loss 3,670,000 vs loss 947,000
      Assets 99.7 mln vs 102.6 mln
      Deposits 91.1 mln vs 90.6 mln
      Loans 44.3 mln vs 51.7 mln
  

KONINKLIJKE NEDERLANDSE PAPIERFABRIEKEN &lt;KNPN.AS>
  Net 1986 profit 132.6 mln guilders vs 117.3 mln
      Turnover 1.6 billion guilders vs same
      Earnings per share 16.00 guilders vs 15.80 on capital
  expanded by 11 pct to 8.21 mln outstanding shares.
      Proposed dividend per share 5.50 guilders vs 5.00
      Note - Full company name is Koninklijke Nederlandse
  Papierfabrieken NV.
  

GENERAL MILLS INC &lt;GIS> 3RD QTR FEB 22 NET
  Shr 64 cts vs 52 cts
      Net 56,900,000 vs 46,400,000
      Sales 1.31 billion vs 1.13 billion
      Avg shrs 88.2 mln vs 89.3 mln
      Nine mths
      Shr 2.09 dlrs vs 1.59 dlrs
      Net 185,900,000 vs 141,300,000
      Sales 3.84 billion vs 3.36 billion
      Avg shrs 88.9 mln vs 89.1 mln
      NOTE: 1986 period ended February 23
      Prior year amounts restated to reflect discontinued
  furniture operations
      Earnings include gains from discontinued operations of 1.5
  mln dlrs, or two cts a share in the 1986 quarter and gains of
  8.5 mln dlrs, or 10 cts a share in the fiscal 1987 nine months
  vs 3.0 mln dlrs, or four cts a share a year earlier
  

UNOFFICIAL STRIKE HITS ROTTERDAM GRAIN SECTOR
  About 220 men in Rotterdam port's
  grain sector stopped work this afternoon in an unofficial
  protest at the slow progress of negotiations over a new work
  practice agreement, a spokesman for the port and transport
  union FNV said.
      Negotiations between the union and employers, which are due
  to resume early next week, are currently stalemated with the
  union refusing to accept sweeping changes in working hours and
  practices in return for a 1.5 pct pay increase.
      The FNV spokesman said the action did not yet have official
  backing, but added that next week matters might be different.
  

NOVELL &lt;NOVL> SETS PAYMENT DATE FOR STOCK SPLIT
  Novell Inc said the dividend to
  effect its previously announced two-for-one stock split will be
  distributed April 13.
      As stated at the time of the original announcement, the
  company said the payment will be made to holders of record
  March 31.
  

FOUR SEASONS BUYING MARRIOTT &lt;MHS> HOTEL
  &lt;Four Seasons Hotels Inc> and VMS Realty
  Partners said they agreed to acquire the Santa Barbara Biltmore
  Hotel in California from Marriott Corp, for undisclosed terms.
      Closing was expected by March 31, they added.
      The companies said they would jointly own the hotel and
  rename it the Four Seasons Biltmore at Santa Barbara. They said
  they would spend more than 13 mln U.S. dlrs "to enhance the
  Biltmore's position as one of the finest resort hotels in North
  America." Chicago-based VMS Realty is a real estate and
  development firm.
  

NORTEK INC &lt;NTK> SETS QUARTERLIES
  Qtly div common 2-1/2 cts vs 2-1/2 cts prior
      Qtly div special common one ct vs one ct
      Pay May Eight
      Record April Three
  

DUTCH PORT UNION CALLS OFF GENERAL CARGO STRIKES
  Dutch port and transport union, FNV,
  has called off the strikes against planned redundancies that
  have hit Rotterdam port's general cargo sector for the past
  eight weeks, strike leader Paul Rosenmuller told a mass
  meeting.
      The decision followed yesterday's ruling by an Amsterdam
  court preventing the sector's employers continuing with current
  plans for 350 redundancies this year until the court sits again
  on May 7, Rosenmuller told a meeting of the general cargo
  sector's 4,000 workers today.
      The court ruled the employers had made a mistake in the
  complicated legal procedure for obtaining official permission
  for the redundancies, and therefore could not proceed.
      "There is no need to continue the strikes for the moment now
  the immediate pressure of redundancies has been lifted,"
  Rosenmuller said.
      But he added that the strikes, which began on January 19 in
  protest against plans for 800 redundancies by 1990, could
  resume at any time before May 7 if the employers made any moves
  to re-apply for permission for the redundancies.
      SVZ labour relations manager Gerrard Zeebregts said they
  would be meeting their lawyers today with a view to re-applying
  for this permission next week in the hope of gaining approval
  for the redundancies within a month.
  

NOVA AN ALBERTA CORP 4TH QTR SHR LOSS 15 CTS VS LOSS 1.09 DLRS

  NOVA AN ALBERTA CORP 4TH QTR SHR LOSS 15 CTS VS LOSS 1.09 DLRS
  

U.K. MONEY MARKET GIVEN FURTHER 195 MLN STG HELP
  The Bank of England said it provided the
  money market with a further 195 mln stg assistance during the
  afternoon.
      This brings total help today to 841 mln stg compared with a
  liquidity shortage it has estimated at a revised one billion
  stg.
      The Bank bought 176 mln stg of band two bank bills outright
  at 10-5/16 pct and 13 mln stg of band one bank bills at 10-3/8
  pct. In addition, it bought four mln stg of bills for resale to
  the market on March 30 and two mln stg for resale on April 8,
  at a common interest rate of 10-7/16 pct.
  

UGANDA RE-ROUTES COFFEE EXPORTS THROUGH KISUMU
  Long delays at the railway crossing on
  the Kenyan border have led Uganda to re-route its coffee
  exports through a ferry link with the Kenyan port of Kisumu
  across Lake Victoria, Ugandan officials based in Kenya said.
      Uganda has a direct rail link with the Kenyan port of
  Mombasa through which it conducts 70 pct of its external trade
  but there is a chronic shortage of railway wagons, they said.
      Customs at Kisumu take less than a day compared with two to
  three at the Malaba rail border crossing, a Ugandan Railways
  official said. "Malaba is now handling only 10 pct of the trade
  and all the coffee and oil goes through Kisumu," he said.
      However, an accident recently damaged the wagon ferry which
  plies between Kisumu and the Ugandan port of Jinja, causing
  bottlenecks on the lake route too.
      Sources at the Coffee Marketing Board in Kampala reported
  delays in coffee export shipments last January due to
  congestion on the lake ferries.
      Coffee accounts for about 95 pct of Uganda's export
  earnings and last November President Yoweri Museveni ordered
  all coffee shipments to be carried by rail in order to avoid
  the higher costs of road haulage.
  

NORWAY'S WHOLESALE PRICES RISE 0.5 PCT IN FEBRUARY
  Norway's wholesale price index (base 1981)
  rose 0.5 pct in February to 136.0 after a 1.7 pct rise in
  January to 135.0, the Central Bureau of Statistics said.
      The year on year increase for February was 7.9 pct compared
  with 5.7 pct in January and 2.2 pct in February 1986, it added.
  

HEALTHCO INTERNATIONAL INC &lt;HLCO> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr 51 cts vs 43 cts
      Oper shr diluted 47 cts vs 43 cts
      Oper net 3,182,000 vs 2,462,000
      Revs 101.7 mln vs 87.0 mln
      Avg shrs 6,246,664 vs 5,671,607
      Avg shrs diluted 7,501,209 vs 5,671,607
      Year
      Oper shr 1.84 dlrs vs 1.48 dlrs
      Oper shr diluted 1.76 dlrs vs 1.48 dlrs
      Oper net 11.5 mln vs 8,312,000
      Revs 349.2 mln vs 307.0 mln
      Avg shrs 6,238,720 vs 5,616,019
      Avg shrs diluted 6,969,389 vs 5,616,019
      NOTE: 1986 net both periods excludes charge 1,205,000 dlrs
  from distribution system restructuring costs.
      1986 year net excludes 440,000 dlr debt retirement gain and
  gain 12.8 mln dlrs from sale of HPSC Inc &lt;HPSC> stock.
      1986 net both periods includes charge 768,000 dlrs from
  reversal of investment tax credits.
  

WILFRED AMERICAN EDUCATIONAL CORP &lt;WAE> 4TH QTR
  Shr two cts vs 36 cts
      Net 182,000 vs 3,433,000
      Revs 20.1 mln vs 21.4 mln
      Year
      Shr 71 cts vs 98 cts
      Net 6,706,000 vs 9,275,000
      Revs 85.7 mln vs 75.4 mln
      NOTE: 1985 net both periods includes gain 743,000 dlrs from
  cancellation of debt.
      1986 quarter net includes reversal of 216,000 dlrs in
  investment tax credits.
  

AL LABORATORIES INC &lt;BMD> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 10 cts vs 14 cts
      Net 913,000 vs 1,273,000
      Revs 37.7 mln vs 24.7 mln
      12 mths
      Shr 61 cts vs 60 cts
      Net 5,529,000 vs 5,448,000
      Revs 123.6 mln vs 96.8 mln
      NOTE: net for qtr and yr 1986 and 1985 adjusted to reflect
  retroactive effect of three-for-two stock splits distributed to
  shareholders in July 1986 and August 1985.
      1986 net includes results of operations of Parmed
  Pharmaceuticals Inc, acquired May 29, 1986.
  

NU-MED INC &lt;NUMS> 3RD QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr 26 cts vs 10 cts
      Net 2,867,000 vs 1,208,000
      Revs 100.0 mln vs 85.0 mln
      Avg shrs 10.4 mln vs 9,791,671
      Nine mths
      Shr 57 cts vs 34 cts
      Net 6,327,000 vs 3,951,000
      Revs 284.4 mln vs 225.4 mln
      Avg shrs 10.1 mln vs 9,831,097
      Current year net both periods includes gain 1,755,000 dlrs
  from change inestimation of useful lives used in depreciation
  of property and equipment.
  

ALUSUISSE PLANS 50 PCT CAPITAL CUT
  Schweizerische Aluminium AG, Alusuisse,
  plans to reduce share and participation certificate capital by
  50 pct to cover losses in 1986 and those carried forward from
  the previous year, chief executive Hans Jucker said.
      Jucker told a news conference that the greatest drain on
  its financial resources had been stopped, but after
  extraordinary charges the net loss of 688 mln francs in 1986
  was only slightly under the 756 mln loss of the previous year.
      The losses in 1986 and those carried over from 1985 made it
  necessary to reduce capital by 50 pct, he said.
      However, Jucker said the company improved liquidity through
  a recovery in cash flow and conversion of 300 mln Swiss francs
  of credit into a subordinated loan.
      Trading in Alusuisse shares was suspended on the Zurich
  stock exchange after today's announcement by the company that
  it would cut its share capital by 50 pct, the bourse said.
  Trading would resume again on Monday.
  

DAVIS WATER &lt;DWWS> RELEASES PRE-SPLIT EARNINGS
  Davis Water and Waste
  Industries Inc said it has restated its earnings on a pre-
  stock split basis for fiscal 1987's third quarter and nine
  months ended January 31, which were reported March 10 on a post
  four-for-three stock split basis.
      The company said its earnings per share for the third
  quarter on a pre-split basis, converts to 16 cts from 12 cts
  post-split, versus three cts pre-split from two cts post-split
  for fiscal 1986's third quarter.
      For the nine months, Davis said, earnings per share would
  convert to 77 cts and 44 cts for fiscal 1987 and 1986
  respectively, from 58 cts and 33 cts, respectively.
  

&lt;NOVA AN ALBERTA CORP> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Shr loss 15 cts vs loss 1.09 dlrs
      Net loss 19.3 mln vs loss 139.6 mln
      Revs 611.7 mln vs 868.6 mln
      Year
      Shr profit 12 cts vs loss 1.31 dlrs
      Net profit 16.1 mln vs loss 167.9 mln
      Revs 2.68 billion vs 3.35 billion
      Avg shrs 134.7 mln vs 128.1 mln
  

ELDER-BEERMAN &lt;ELDR> GETS OFFER OF 30 DLRS/SHARE
  Elder-Beerman Stores Corp said
  owners of about 70 pct of its stock have offered to take the
  company private by offerring 30 dlrs per share for the
  remaining 30 pct of its stock.
      The company said the proposal will be considered at a
  regularly scheduled board meeting on March 17.
      It said the offer was made by members of the Beerman family
  holding about 70 pct of the company's stock, Chairman Max
  Gutmann, and certain members of the board.
  

N.Z. OFFICIAL FOREIGN RESERVES FALL IN JANUARY
  New Zealand's official foreign
  reserves fell to 7.15 billion N.Z. Dlrs in January from 7.20
  billion dlrs in December and compared with 3.03 billion a year
  ago period, the Reserve Bank said in its weekly statistical
  bulletin.
  

STONE &lt;STO> SPLITS STOCK, RAISES PAYOUT
  Stone Container Corp said it is
  splitting its common stock 2-for-1 and increasing its dividend
  33-1/3 pct.
      The dividend of 20 cts a share, an increase of five cts
  over the prior 15 cts a share on pre-split shares, is payable
  June 12 to holders of record May 22.
      The stock split also is payable June 12 to holders of
  record May 22.
  

ECHLIN INC &lt;ECH> DIVIDEND INCREASED 12 PCT
  Qtly div 14 cts vs 12.5 cts in prior qtr
      Payable April 18
      Record April two
  

NATIONAL ENTERTAINMENT CORP &lt;NENT> 3RD QTR NET
  Jan 31 end
      Shr six cts vs eight cts
      Net 177,000 vs 252,000
      Revs 3,209,000 vs 1,070,000
      Nine mths
      Shr 12 cts vs eight cts
      Net 365,000 vs 247,000
      Revs 7,156,000 vs 2,960,000
      NOTE: Prior year net both periods includes 91,000 dlr tax
  credit.
  

NATIONAL ENTERTAINMENT &lt;NENT> REVERSE SPLIT SET
  National Entertainment Corp
  said shareholdersapproved a one-for-25 reverse stock split and
  a name change to Major Video Corp, both effective March 16.
      It said its new ticker symbol will be &lt;MAJV>.
      The company also said it expects to add nine company-owned
  and franchised Major Video stores in the next 60 days.  It now
  operates 64.
  

&lt;PEMBINA RESOURCES LTD> YEAR NET
  Shr 48 cts vs 81 cts
      Net 3,986,000 vs 6,760,000
      Revs 77.3 mln vs 40.5 mln
  

COMPUTER MEMORIES &lt;CMIN> SETS FILM FIRM MERGER
  Computer Memories Inc, which ended
  its disk drive operations in June 1986, agreed to acquire
  &lt;Hemdale Film Corp> in a transaction which will give Hemdale's
  owner control of the resulting company.
      Computer Memories' principal asset is about 29.4 mln dlrs
  in cash and cash equivalents. It has agreed to exchange newly
  issued shares equaling 80 pct of the aggregate issued to
  acquire Hemdale. That company's owner, John Daly, would then
  become chief executive officer of the combined company which
  would be renamed Hemdale Film Corp.
      Computer Memories said the proposed transaction is subject
  to the results of certain corporate reviews and approval of its
  shareholders, who will hold a special meeting as soon as
  practicable.
      The company said it has 11,109,190 shares outstanding, of
  which about 1,734,000 are held by Intel Corp &lt;INTC>. It is
  anticipated the FIntel shares will be purchased for 2.75 dlrs a
  share in connection with the merger with Hemdale, Computer
  Memories said.
  

KLM SEEKS STAKE IN BRITISH COURIER SERVICE
  KLM Royal Dutch Airlines &lt;KLM.AS>
  said it is negotiating for a minority stake in a British and
  Commonwealth Shipping Plc &lt;BCOM.L> courier service in a
  transaction which might include a convertible loan issue.
      KLM, already active in the fast growing door-to-door
  delivery market through a 50-pct stake in a Dutch courier
  service, is seeking to buy one-third of &lt;IML Air Services Group
  Ltd> from British and Commonwealth.
      The two companies agreed earlier this month for KLM to take
  a 15-pct stake in British and Commonwealth commuter airline Air
  U.K. Ltd in a deal worth around two mln stg.
  

ECONOMIC SPOTLIGHT - EMS MARKS EIGHTH BIRTHDAY
  The European Monetary System marks its
  eighth anniversary still vulnerable to turmoil in world money
  markets despite creating an island of currency rate stability
  in Europe, economists say. But many economists say the system,
  which holds eight European Community currencies within narrow
  fluctuation bands, remains in its infancy.
      Its new currency, the European Currency Unit (Ecu), has
  been a runaway success with investors and borrowers alike
  seeking an alternative to the volatile dollar.
      And on Wednesday, the long term vision of the Ecu as
  Europe's common currency took a step nearer to becoming reality
  when Belgium minted the world's first Ecu coin.
      But economists say members such as West Germany have so far
  blocked a second stage of development envisaged by the system's
  founding fathers, ex-West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and
  former French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing.
      Under this phase, originally due to have started two years
  after the EMS was set up, decision-making was to have been
  transferred from national governments and central banks to an
  autonomous European Monetary Fund.
     But members have jealously guarded their sovereignty in
  economic and monetary matters. "The basic problem of the EMS is
  that governments are not prepared to make the quantum leap to a
  situation where certain decisions are taken in common," said one
  economist who has closely watched the system's development.
      The result is that the EC is often divided over policy on
  third currencies, accentuating what the economists say is the
  system's greatest weakness, its vulnerability to a weak dollar.
      Over the past 18 months, as the U.S. Dollar plunged and
  investors moved into strong currencies, the resulting sharp
  rise of the West German mark severely strained the system. MORE
      As the mark soared against the dollar, it also rose against
  EMS currencies less favoured by international investors. And as
  West Germany last year refused to give in pressure from several
  EC partners and the United States to cut interest rates to slow
  the mark's rise, the EMS had to be realigned twice to ease
  financial and trade strains within the community.
      Two months ago the mark and the Dutch guilder were revalued
  by three pct and the Belgian and Luxembourg francs by two pct
  against other currencies in the system -- the French franc,
  Italian lira, the Irish punt and Danish crown.
     Another frustration has been Britain's failure to lend the
  EMS political support by keeping the pound, still a major world
  currency, outside the system.
      No change in the British government's attitude is expected
  before the country's next general elections, due by mid-1988.
      Meanwhile, the system's last realignment, the 11th since it
  was set up, prompted European finance ministers to ask the EC's
  highly-secretive Monetary Committee and Committee of Central
  Bank Governors to come up with suggestions for reinforcing it.
      Their ideas are due to be unveiled when finance ministers
  hold an informal meeting in Belgium early next month.
      But economists said the proposals are unlikely to involve
  more than tinkering with technical details. They are sceptical
  about the chances for any fundamental change.
      "Technical measures won't be enough to protect the EMS
  against external factors such as dollar weakness. For that we
  must take the step forward to the institutional level," said Leo
  de Corel of Kredietbank's economic research department.
      Economists say the system's fortunes now will depend
  largely on the success of an agreement last month among major
  industrial nations to stabilise exchange rates. If the dollar
  resumes its slide the EMS could be in for more turbulence, they
  predict.
  

GENERAL MILLS&lt;GIS> SEES STRONG 4TH QTR RESULTS
  General Mills Inc, reporting
  stronger results for the third quarter ended February 22, said
  it expects the momentum to continue in the fourth quarter.
      The company said it expects to report "strong earnings per
  share growth and a record return on equity in fiscal 1987." It
  said this should be achieved despite expected non-operating
  charges in the final quarter.
      General Mills said these charges will likely offset
  non-operating gains, which included six cts a share in the
  first half.
      General Mills said at the end of the third quarter, its
  return on average equity was 31.6 pct.
      It said major factors contributing to the third quarter
  improvement were an 11 pct gain in unit volume by Consumer
  Foods, continuing good profit growth at Red Lobster USA and
  strong performance in Specialty Retailing.
      The company reported quarterly earnings of 56.9 mln dlrs,
  or 64 cts a share, up from 46.4 mln dlrs, or 52 cts a share a
  year ago. Sales rose to 1.31 billion dlrs from 1.13 billion
  dlrs. Year-ago data reflect a two-for-one common stock split.
  

PACKAGING SYSTEMS &lt;PAKS> TO BUY LABEL FIRM
  Packaging Systems Corp said
  it agreed to acquire &lt;Walter-Richter Labels Inc>, a privately
  held maker of woven labels based in Paterson, N.J.
      Terms of the acquisition, which is expected to be completed
  within 60 days, were not disclosed.
  

MANUFACTURED HOMES INC &lt;MNH> YEAR NET
  Shr 53 cts vs 85 cts
      Net 2,033,425 vs 3,718,325
      Revs 120.6 mln vs 79.5 mln
      NOTE: 1986 net includes 3,300,000 dlr provision for credit
  loss.
      1985 net includes charge 504,571 dlrs from cumulative
  effect of accounting change.
  

HAITI ANNOUNCES FIND OF ORE-RICH GOLD FIELD
  The  Ministry of Mines
  has announced the discovery of a major gold field in Grand Bois
  in Haiti's mineral-rich North.
      At a press conference yesterday, a Ministry spokesman
  reported the deposit contained an estimated 44 mln tons of ore,
  with each ton capable of containing 7,666 grams of gold. The
  spokesman gave no estimate of what he thought the find,
  discovered on Wednesday, was worth.
      However, mining could only begin after foreign partners
  invest eight mln dlrs needed for technical equipment, the
  spokesman said.
      The Haitian government has never before operated a gold
  mine, but the United Nations has recently completed a three
  year feasibility study which lists Grand Bois and Morne Bossa
  as sites of important gold deposits.
      In 1971, the Sedren copper mine in Gonaives, operated by a
  Canadian firm, closed down after years of mining a concentrate
  containing gold as well as copper.
      "The new Grand Bois mine represents large amounts of money,"
  said a former official of Sedren Mine.
      "But like everything else there's a catch. The gold has to
  be extracted, and first someone has to come up with the money
  to finance the operation," the official, who asked not to be
  named, told Reuters.
  

HOLIDAY CORP &lt;HIA>, COMSAT &lt;CQ> CLOSE SALE
  Holiday Corp and Communications
  Satellite Corp said they closed the previously announced sale
  to Comsat of Holiday's 50 pct interest in Hi-Net
  Communications, their joint venture that provides in-room video
  entertainment to hotels by satellite.
      Under terms of the deal, Comsat paid Holiday 25 mln dlrs in
  cash and assumed half of the venture's 50 mln dlrs of
  outstanding debt, the company's said.
      Hi-Net, they added, will continue to provide programming to
  Holiday's hotels.
  

CONSUMERS FINANCIAL CORP &lt;CFIN> 1986 NET
  Shr 61 cts vs 42 cts
      Net 6,247,000 vs 5,587,000
      Rev 65.4 mln vs 53.6 mln
      NOTE: 1986 net includes investment gains of 25 cts a share,
  versus six cts a share for 1985, and extraordinary gain of
  seven cts a share.
  

CHICAGO RIVET AND MACHINE CO &lt;CVR> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 21 cts vs 60 cts
      Net 156,576 vs 443,404
      Sales 5,309,519 vs 5,381,264
      Year
      Shr 1.06 dlrs vs 1.55 dlrs
      Net 788,220 vs 1,151,330
      Sales 22.3 mln vs 23.6 mln
  

FILTERTEK INC &lt;FTK> SETS QUARTERLY
  Qtly div 11 cts vs 11 cts prior
      Pay May 15
      Record May One
  

UK MONEY MARKET GIVEN LATE HELP OF 185 MLN STG
  The Bank of England said it gave the
  money market late, unspecified assistance of around 185 mln
  stg.
      This takes the total liquidity injected into the system by
  the bank today to 1.026 billion stg compared with a shortage it
  estimated at around one billion stg.
      Overnight interbank sterling dipped to 10 nine pct after
  the bank's announcement compared with levels around 10-1/2 pct
  shortly before and 11-1/4 11 pct initially today, dealers said.
  

NEW RUBBER PACT APPEARS IN THE BALANCE
  Negotiations on a new International
  Natural Rubber Agreement, INRA, are approaching the
  make-or-break point and prospects for a future pact appear to
  be in the balance, delegates said.
      Manaspas Xuto of Thailand, chairman of the INRA
  renegotiation conference, is holding consultations with a small
  group of producers and consumers to try to resolve major
  outstanding issues. When the talks began on Monday Xuto said
  those issues should be settled by the end of the first week to
  allow time to draft an agreement during the second week.
      The talks are due to last until March 20.
      Xuto said, "There is nothing concrete yet, but the
  atmosphere is good." The discussions are expected to continue
  late into the night, and Xuto said he may hold weekend
  meetings.
      Delegates said negotiations now focus on the degree to
  which price adjustments should be automatic.
      At present, if the market price has been above or below the
  reference price (set at 201.66 Malaysian/Singapore cents a kilo
  in the current agreement) for six months, the reference price
  is revised by five pct or by an amount decided by the
  International Natural Rubber Organisation council.
      Consumers are asking that, in these circumstances, the
  adjustment be automatic at five pct or more.
      Producers want the council to have the last word and have
  resisted reducing its role in the price adjustment procedure.
      Delegates said there seems to be optimism about settling
  another issue -- that of the floor price.
      It now appears that consumers may consider dropping their
  insistence of a downward adjustment of the floor price, called
  the "lower indicative price," under certain circumstances.
      This means that any possible compromise would centre on the
  reference price, and the "may buy" (or "may sell") and "must buy" or
  "must sell" levels, without changing the "lower indicative price"
  -- which is set at 150 Malaysian/Singapore cents in the current
  pact.
      Delegates said that in exchange for consumer flexibility on
  the floor price question, producers may consider agreeing to
  another consumer proposal for more frequent price reviews -- at
  12 month intervals instead of 18 at present.
  

SOVIETS RUMORED TO HAVE BOUGHT MORE U.S. CORN
  The Soviet Union is rumored
  this morning to have bought up to 1.5 mln tonnes of U.S. corn,
  export trade sources said.
      The amount was not confirmed, but the talk was widespread
  through the trade. Gulf cash barge basis levels jumped two to
  three cents this morning on the rumors, which were expected to
  boost futures prices on today's open.
      The Soviet Union recently bought over 1.0 mln tonnes of
  U.S. corn, ostensibly as a conciliatory gesture ahead of trade
  talks with U.S. agriculture officials.
      Purchases rumored today were seen as a positive factor in
  light of a Soviet trade official's statement that the previous
  purchase had satisfied near-term needs.
  

TRANSACT INT'L INC &lt;TACT> 3RD QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr one ct vs three cts
      Net 66,922 vs 194,531
      Rev 4.2 mln vs 5.7 mln
      Nine months
      Shr two cts vs four cts
      Net 93,802 vs 260,702
      Rev 10.1 mln vs 13.2 mln
      NOTE: Nine months 1987 period includes gain of 196,043 dlrs
  from sale of Meston Lake Resources shares and a credit of
  127,000 dlrs from a favroable settlement of s state income tax
  assessment. 1986 nine months period includes gain of 160,431
  dlrs, or two cts a share, from sale of Ferrotherm Co.
  

FRANCE REPAYS SOME OF CURRENCY INTERVENTION DEBT
  France today repaid 21.95 billion francs
  of short-term currency intervention debt to the European
  Monetary Cooperation Fund, EMCF, the Finance Ministry said.
      It said the debt was part of a 33.90 billion franc
  liability incurred through the activation of EMCF swap
  facilities to defend the franc before the January 11 European
  Monetary System realignment.
      The realignment, following several weeks of speculative
  pressure, produced a three pct revaluation of the West German
  mark and the Dutch guilder against the French franc and a two
  pct revaluation of the Belgian franc.
  

S-K-I LTD &lt;SKII> 2ND QTR JAN 25 NET
  Shr 81 cts vs 57 cts
      Net 3,660,273 vs 2,437,914
      Rev 28.5 mln vs 23.1 mln
      Six months
      Shr 29 cts vs 12 cts
      Net 1,325,755 vs 483,559
      Rev 31.7 mln vs 26.4 mln
  

SHELL CANADA RAISES CRUDE PRICES BY 64 CANADIAN CTS/BBL TODAY AT EDMONTON

  SHELL CANADA RAISES CRUDE PRICES BY 64 CANADIAN CTS/BBL TODAY AT EDMONTON
  

13-MAR-1987
  13-MAR-1987

HAITI ALLOWS IMPORTATION OF BANNED BLACK PIGS
  Haiti's agriculture minister
  yesterday announced his department will permit the importation
  of 730 black Creole pigs, which had been banned from the island
  nation since 1983.
      Between 1981 and 1983, a team of Canadian veterinarians
  funded by the United States, Canada, Mexico and Costa Rica
  supervised the slaughter of all Haiti's 1,200,000 pigs under a
  program to eradicate African swine flu.
      Today's announcement that Catholic Relief Services
  (CARITAS) can import 730 Jamaican pigs comes after months of
  protests by farmers who had owned 90 pct of the slaughtered
  pigs.
  

GERMAN BANK SEES GOOD SOVIET TRADE PROSPECTS
  Soviet-West German trade is expected
  to develop favourably due to Moscow's increasing openness to
  East-West economic relations, Dresdner Bank AG's Moscow
  representative Michael Stein said.
      He told a bank presentation the Soviet Union was last year
  hit by the fall in world oil prices, which cut export revenue
  from oil-related products and natural gas, and its overseas
  buying power was also adversely affected by the lower dollar.
     Dresdner Bank economist Alfred Apholte said the Soviet
  Union's large currency and gold reserves had softened the
  impact of the dollar weakening and oil price drop.
  

KAPOK CORP &lt;KPK> YEAR SEPT 30 LOSS
  Shr loss 20 cts vs profit 96 cts
      Net loss 499,000 vs profit 2,369,000
      Revs 11.5 mln vs 10.3 mln
      NOTE: Prior year net includes gain on sale of property of
  4,557,000 dlrs.
  

NATIONAL PIZZA CO &lt;PIZA> TO ACQUIRE RESTAURANTS
  National Pizza Co said it reached an
  agreement in principle to buy seven Straw Hat pizza restaurants
  and certain related real estate for approximately three mln
  dlrs in cash.
      The acquisitions will be converted to Pizza Hut
  restaurants, said National Pizza, and are expected to generate
  annual sales of approximately eight mln dlrs.
      When the sale is complete, it will bring to 24 the number
  of restaurants operated by National Pizza, the company said.
  

CITICORP SAYS PLACING BRAZIL LOANS ON CASH BASIS COULD CUT 1ST QTR NET BY 50 MLN DLRS

  CITICORP SAYS PLACING BRAZIL LOANS ON CASH BASIS COULD CUT 1ST QTR NET BY 50 MLN DLRS
  

SINGAPORE TO SPEND 1.2 BILLION DLRS ON PORTS
  The Port of Singapore Authority (PSA)
  will spend 1.2 billion dlrs to develop port facilities and
  cargo-handling equipment over the next five years,
  Communications Minister Yeo Ning Hong told parliament.
      Yeo said the improvements were needed to cope with an
  expected growth of ship tonnage and cargo handled by the port,
  but gave no further details.
      The PSA handled 529 mln gross-registered tonnes of cargo in
  1985, according to the latest available statistics from the
  port authority.
  

ORS SEEKS CANADIAN FUNDS FOR HEAVY OIL TEST
  &lt;ORS Corp> said &lt;Dominion
  Securities (Alberta) Inc> has been appointed to offer common
  shares in a new Canadaina company being organized to exploit
  heavy oil production opportunities in Canada and Western
  Europe.
      ORS said the offer for private sale of the stock being made
  on a best efforts basis is designed to raise five mln Canadian
  dlrs which the new company will invest in properties and
  projects using the Electromagnetic Well Stimulation Process
  developed by IIT Research Institute under sponsorship of ORS.
  

CHRYSLER &lt;C> UNIT BUYS BENEFICIAL &lt;BNL> UNIT
  Chrysler Corp said its Chrysler
  First Inc acquired a major portion of the commercial lending
  portfolio of Beneficial Business Credit Corp, a subsidiary of
  Beneficial Corp.
      It said the acquisition involves about 84 mln dlrs of net
  receivables.
      Chrysler First, a subsidiary of Chrysler Financial Corp,
  had receivables of 4.3 billion dlrs at the end of 1986.
  

CARGILL U.K. STRIKE TALKS POSTPONED
  Talks due today between management and
  unions to try to end the strike at Cargill U.K. Ltd's Seaforth
  oilseed crushing plant have been rescheduled for Thursday, a
  company spokesman said.
      Oilseed processing at the plant has been halted since
  December 19 when mill workers walked out in protest at new
  contract manning levels.
  

PETROBRAS ASKS ARMY TO WITHDRAW TROOPS
  Brazil's state-oil company
  Petrobras has asked the Army to withdraw the troops which were
  occupying its oil installations since Tuesday, Petrobras said
  in a statement.
      The statement said the request for the withdrawal of the
  troops was made because of the calmness reigning in all of its
  refineries.
      "The request was also due to the end of the seamen's strike
  and the willingness of the oil industry workers to sit again by
  the negotiating table," the statement said.
      Even though the Petrobras statement said the seamen's
  strike was over, a union spokesman said only two small shipping
  companies had reached a pay agreement. The overwhelming
  majority of Brazil's seamen remained on strike.
      The statement said a meeting between Petrobras and oil
  industry leaders was set for next Wednesday in Rio, with the
  presence of Labour Minister Almir Pazzionotto as a mediator.
      Petrobras said the request for the withdrawal of the troops
  was made at 1100 local hours (1400 GMT), but a company
  spokesman said he did not know if the troops had already been
  removed.
  

AMAX &lt;AMX> IN GOLD, SILVER FIND
  AMAX Incx said it has identified
  additional gold and silver ore reserves at its AMAX Sleeper
  Mine near Winnemucca, Nev..
      It said as a result of recent drilling, reserves at thhe
  mine are now estimated at 2,470,000 short tons of ore grading
  0.24 ounce of gold and 0.50 ounce of silver per ton that is
  treatable by conventional milling techniques.
      AMAX said additional reserves amenable to heap leaching are
  estimated at 38.3 mln tons averaging 0.025 ounce gold and 0.24
  ounce silver per ton.  Further drilling is being conducted, it
  said.
  

ITALIAN INTERBANK RATE RISES IN FEBRUARY
  Italy's average interbank rate
  rose to a provisional 12.18 pct in February from 12.05 pct in
  January, figures from the Bank of Italy show.
      Weighted average rate on bank lending was a provisional
  13.78 pct in February compared with 13.83 in January, while
  average weighted rate paid on deposits eased a provisional 7.49
  pct from 7.66 pct.
      Italy today announced that its official discount rate would
  be cut to 11.5 pct from 12 pct effective tomorrow.
  

YEUTTER SAYS DLR LEVEL BASED ON ECONOMIC POLICY
  U.S. Trade Representative Clayton
  Yeutter said that whether the exchange rate of the dollar would
  fall or rise in the coming decade would depend on nations'
  financial, monetary and tax policies.
      But, he said, in a speech and remarks to the Heritage
  Foundation, that in the end "the marketplace will ultimately
  rule the day."
      Asked about the future of the dollar, he said that whether
  or not it would rise or fall depended on economic policies and
  coooperation among trading nations.
      Yeutter said "if nations do the right kinds of things in
  financial, monetary and tax policies, then a lesser burden of
  adjustment is placed on exchange rates, and one could envision
  a situation of the major trading nations moving back far closer
  to what most of us would consider equilibrium and exchange
  rates becoming relatively stable."
      But he said, on the other hand, that if nations did not
  exhibit greater self discipline and international cooperation,
  "It is simply inevitable that the exchange rates will make that
  adjustment."
  

PAINT COMPANY HAS METEX&lt;MTX> STAKE, MAY BUY MORE
  Metropolitan Consolidated Industries
  Inc, a New York paint company, said it has acquired 278,709
  shares of Metex Corp, or 21.2 pct of the total, and left open
  the possibility that it might acquire more through a merger.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Metropolitan said it bought the Metex stock as an investment.
      It also said it may buy additional shares, or sell some or
  all of its current stake. If it buys more shares, Metropolitan
  said it would consider doing so in the open market, in private
  deals, or through an exchange offer, tender offer or merger.
      Metropolitan said it may acquire an option on or may buy
  some or all of the Metex shares owned by William Hack, a Metex
  director, who, together with this wife, holds 149,750 of the
  company's common shares, or 11.4 pct of the total.
      Metropolitan said it already has an option to buy another
  42,750 Metex common shares at 11.25 dlrs each. The option is
  not exercisable until April 12, 1988, it said.
      If Metropolitan were to exercise the option and acquire all
  of Hack's stake, it would have 471,208 Metex common shares, or
  35.9 pct of the total. Metropolitan's SEC filing was
  made as a shareholder group with Hack.
      Metropolitan, which said it spent 3.1 mln dlrs to acquire
  its Metex stake, listed its recent stock purchases as 54,993
  common shares on March 67 at 10 dlrs each and 83,916 shares on
  March 11 at 11.25 dlrs.
  

BPI SYSTEMS &lt;BPII> IN TALKS TO SELL COMPANY
  BPI Systems Inc said it is
  holding discussions that could lead to the sale of all its
  outstanding shares for about 12 mln dlrs.
      BPI president and chief executive officer David R. Fernald
  declined to identify the other party involved in the talks.
      For the nine months ended December 31, BPI lost 1,286,000
  dlrs on sales of 6,452,000 dlrs.
  

BALLY MANUFACTURING SAID IT IS CONSIDERING SALE OF SIX FLAGS THEME PARKS

  BALLY MANUFACTURING SAID IT IS CONSIDERING SALE OF SIX FLAGS THEME PARKS
  

STUDY GROUP URGES INCREASED U.S. OIL RESERVES
  A study group said the United States
  should increase its strategic petroleum reserve to one mln
  barrels as one way to deal with the present and future impact
  of low oil prices on the domestic oil industry.
      U.S. policy now is to raise the strategic reserve to 750
  mln barrels, from its present 500 mln, to help protect the
  economy from an overseas embargo or a sharp price rise.
      The Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies, a private
  group, also called for new research for oil exploration and
  development techniques.
      It predicted prices would remain at about 15-18 dlrs a
  barrel for several years and then rise to the mid 20s, with
  imports at about 30 pct of U.S. consumption.
      It said instead that such moves as increasing oil reserves
  and more exploration and development research would help to
  guard against or mitigate the risks of increased imports.
  

TELEMEDIA TO BUY HARROWSMITH, EQUINOX MAGAZINES
  (Telemedia Inc) said its (Telemedia
  Publishing Inc) subsidiary agreed to buy privately-owned
  Harrowsmith and Equinox magazines for an undisclosed amount of
  cash.
      Telemedia said the acquisition is expected to have a small
  positive impact on short-term earnings.
      Harrowsmith, an alternative life-style magazine, is
  Canada's seventh-largest paid circulation English-language
  magazine while Equinox is the country's eighth largest. Each
  has a circulation of about 160,000 copies.
       The magazine group had revenues of eight mln dlrs last
  year and employs 50 people, Telemedia said.             
      Telemedia said it will also acquire a 10 pct interest in
  the company which recently launched the U.S. edition of
  Harrowsmith.
      The magazine's U.S. editiion, begun last year, now has a
  paid circulation of 180,000, the company said.
      It said a final deal is expected in mid-April.
      Telemedia said the magazines' founder has agreed to
  continue to provide editorial and publishing direction for the
  magazines.
  

DIVI HOTELS NV &lt;DVH> 3RD QTR NET
  Shr profit 36 cts vs profit 14 cts
      Net profit 1,162,000 vs profit 464,000
      Revs 16.6 mln vs 11.3 mln
      Nine mths
      Shr loss 89 cts vs loss 79 cts
      Net loss 2,988,000 vs loss 2,673,000
      Revs 35.1 mln vs 25.1 mln
      NOTE: Nine months fiscal 1987 includes extraordinary gain
  of 16 cts per share.
  

BALLY &lt;BLY> CONSIDERING SALE OF SIX FLAGS
  Bally Manufacturing Corp said it is
  considering the sale of its Six Flag theme amusement park unit
  and would use the proceeds to pay off debt.
      In addition to the possible sale of the amusement parks,
  Bally plans to sell a minority stake in its health club chain
  to the public. The company will register a proposed offering
  with the Securities and Exchange Commission for 20 to 30 pct of
  the health clubs soon, spokesman William Peltier told Reuters.
      "Selling Six Flags is definitely under consideration,"
  Peltier said in response to an inquiry. He said the company
  would use much of the income from the amusement park chain,
  were it to be sold, to repay debt.
      Six Flags might sell for as much as 300 mln dlrs, analysts
  said. The health club chain, the nation's largest, is valued at
  350 to 375 mln dlrs, they said.
      Bally reportedly already has been approached about Six
  Flags by several prospective buyers.
      The company needs the cash to begin paying back a 1.6 mln
  dlrs mountain of debt.
      Bally recently completed a 439 mln dlrs acquisition of the
  Golden Nugget casino hotel in Atlantic City from Golden Nugget
  Inc &lt;GNG.N>.
      The purchase pushed its long-term debt to 1.6 billion dlrs,
  or almost 2.7 times its equity of 600 mln dlrs.
      Bally's 325-unit health and tennis clubs had revenues in
  1986 of more than 450 mln dlrs, or about 28 pct of Bally's
  total revenues of 1.64 billion dlrs.
      Bally acquired Six Flags for 147.4 mln dlrs in January 1982
  from Penn Central Corp. Bally bought the Great America theme
  park in Gurnee, Ill., in May 1984 for 113.2 mln dlrs from
  Marriott Corp &lt;mhs>.
      In 1986 the parks had pretax operating profit of 48.6 mln
  dlrs on revenues of 369.4 mln dlrs.
      The clubs and equipment unit combined to post operating
  profit of 60.4 mln dlrs on revenues of 475.6 mln dlrs in 1986,
  of which 456.2 mln came from the clubs.
      The company earlier this month said it will take a charge
  to earnings in the first quarter of 17.3 mln dlrs as a result
  of its deal to buy back 2.6 mln of its common shares from real
  estate developer Donald Trump.
      Under a February 21 deal, Bally agreed to buy the 2.6 mln
  of the 3.06 mln shares held by Trump at 24 dlrs a share, or
  62.4 mln dlrs, plus 6.2 mln dlrs related expenses in exchange
  for Trump not seeking control of the company for 10 years.
      The deal also requires Bally to buy Trump's remaining
  shares for 33 dlrs a share if the stock price does not reach
  that level by February 21, 1988.
  

FRANKLIN RESOURCES &lt;BEN> SAYS NET MAY DOUBLE
  Franklin Resources Inc said
  it believes earnings could double this year as compared to a
  year ago when the company reported income of 32 mln dlrs on 143
  mln dlrs in revenues.
      Franklin Resources is a financial services company. Its
  fiscal year ends September 30.
  

CUBA SUGAR CROP SEEN AT LEAST SAME AS LAST YEAR
  Cuban sugar export figures for January
  suggest that this year's crop may be at least as large as last
  year's 7.35 mln tonnes, according to sugar analysts.
      Exports in January totalled 733,000 tonnes raw value, up
  from 725,000 a year earlier, according to figures received by
  the International Sugar Organization.
      January is the first major export month and the figures
  thus give a good indication of the current crop, they said.
  Fourth quarter exports fell to 622,000 tonnes from 909,000
  tonnes a year earlier, but this was because Cuba was destocking
  at the end of 1985, they added.
      Trade house C Czarnikow recently estimated production this
  year at 7.50 mln tonnes.
      Cuban sugar production in the third quarter of 1986 was
  12,000 tonnes, giving a final 1985/86 crop total of 7.35 mln
  tonnes, compared with a 1984/85 crop of 8.10 mln tonnes.
      There is normally no third quarter production in Cuba, but
  a hurricane meant that last year's crop was extended.
      Exports to the USSR were substantially down in January at
  362,000 tonnes from 489,000 in January 1986, but other Comecon
  countries received 210,000 tonnes, against 80,000 tonnes in the
  same month last year, figures received by the ISO show.
      Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland and Romania all took
  substantially more Cuban sugar.
      Cuba's November 1986 exports totalled 158,000 tonnes,
  compared with 190,000 tonnes in 1985, and December's total was
  237,000 tonnes, down from 518,000 tonnes the year before.
  Calendar year exports for 1986 were also lower at 6.69 mln
  tonnes against 7.21 mln in 1985 -- the lowest level since
  1980's 6.19 mln tonnes, the figures show.
  

AGENCY REPORTS 39 SHIPS WAITING AT PANAMA CANAL
  The Panama Canal Commission, a U.S.
  government agency, said in its daily operations report that
  there was a backlog of 39 ships waiting to enter the canal
  early today. Over the next two days it expects --              
               2/26  2/27
                         Due: 27    35
        Scheduled to Transit: 35    41
             End-Day Backlog: 31    25
      Average waiting time tomorrow --
           Super Tankers  Regular Vessels
   North End:  13 hrs      15 hrs
   South End:   4 hrs      26 hrs
  

K-TRON INTERNATIONAL INC &lt;KTII> 4TH QTR NET
  Oper shr profit 36 cts vs loss 1.48 dlrs
      Oper net profit 1,353,000 vs loss 5,551,000
      Revs 11.3 mln vs 8,142,000
      Year
      Oper shr profit 31 cts vs loss 1.58 dlrs
      Oper net profit 1,165,000 vs loss 5,919,000
      Revs 38.0 mln vs 31.6 mln
      NOTE: Net includes pretax unusual gain 64,000 dlrs vs loss
  4,744,000 dlrs in quarter and losses 3,0077,000 dlrs vs
  4,744,000 dlrs in year.  1986 items include settlement of
  patent suit and provision for investment writeoff and 1985 item
  provision for loss on sale of scale business.
      1986 net both periods excludes 400,000 dlr tax credit.
  

HELMERICH AND PAYNE INC &lt;HP> INCREASES DIV
  Qtly div 10 cts vs nine cts
      Payable June one
      Record May 15
  

HOLLY CORP &lt;HOC> 2ND QTR JAN 31 LOSS
  Shr loss 45 cts vs profit 20 cts
      Net loss 1,841,000 vs profit 983,000
      Revs 56.2 mln vs 102.9 mln
      Six mths
      Shr loss 13 cts vs profit 80 cts
      Net loss 534,000 vs profit 4.4 mln
      Revs 121.4 mln vs 209.3 mln
      NOTE: Six months fiscal 1987 includes loss of 17 cts per
  share from discontinued operations.
      Per share figures also reflect partial three-for-one stock
  split effected December 1985.
  

WHITE HOUSE SAYS TRADE BILL GENERALLY GOOD
  White House spokesman Marlin
  Fitzwater said the administration had some disagreements with
  the trade bill that cleared a House subcommittee yesterday but
  generally felt good about the bill.
      "Generally we feel very good about the bipartisan
  consideration of the trade legislation. I think we are
  progressing very well," he told reporters.
      "There are wide areas of agreement. There are some areas of
  disagreement," he said.                 
  

SUNTER ACQUISITION BEGINS TENDER FOR ALLEGHENY INTERNATIONAL INC

  SUNTER ACQUISITION BEGINS TENDER FOR ALLEGHENY INTERNATIONAL INC
  

U.S. CONSERVATION SIGNUP SEEN 10 TO 12 MLN ACRES
  Grain traders and analysts look for a
  10 to 12 mln acre sign-up in the USDA's conservation reserve
  program, scheduled to be announced after 1400 CST today.
      The USDA probably will accept about 80 to 90 pct of the
  acres submitted, they said.
      Total enrollment in the first three years of the program is
  only 8.9 mln acres, so the sharp increase expected this year
  has underpinned new crop corn futures all week.
      However, some analysts said a 10 to 12 mln acre sign-up may
  end up being negative to new crop corn prices, citing trade
  talk earlier this year that 14 to 15 mln acres may be submitted
  by farmers. Also, acres set-aside under the conservation
  program are by definition poor yielding, so the impact on total
  corn production will be minimal, they added.
  

IRISH OIL CONCERN BOOSTS CENERGY &lt;CRG> STAKE
  Bryson Oil and Gas plc, a Belfast,
  Northern Ireland, oil company which has said it is considering
  seeking control of Cenergy Corp, said it raised its stake in
  the company to 1,281,887 shares, or 13.2 pct of the total.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Bryson said it bought 440,000 Cenergy common shares on March 10
  at eight dlrs each. Previously it had held 841,887 shares, or
  8.5 pct.
      Bryson has request detailed shareholder information from
  Cenergy in case it decided to communicate with shareholders.
  But it said Cenergy has made legal challenges to the request.
  

SUNTER BEGINS TENDER FOR ALLEGHENY &lt;AG>
  Allegheny International Inc said  
  Sunter Acquisititon Corp, formed by First Boston Inc, began a
  cash tender offer in accordance with their previously announced
  merger agreement for all the outsanding shares of Allegheny's
  common stock, 2.19 dlr cumulative preference stock and 11.25
  dlrs convertible preferred stock.
      The offer expires April 9, unless extended.
      Under terms of the agreement, tendering shareholders will
  receive 24.60 dlrs per common share, 20 dlrs per preference
  share and 87.50 dlrs per preferred share.
      Allegheny said the offer is conditioned upon the valid 
  tender of stock representing a majority of the voting power and
  at least two-thirds of outstanding shares of preference stock
  and preferred stock.
      The merger agreement was announced earlier this week.
  

&lt;TRANSIT FINANCIAL HOLDINGS INC> 4TH QTR NET
  Shr 35 cts vs 13 cts
      Net 531,840 vs 188,362
      Revs not given
      Year
      Shr 83 cts vs 41 cts
      Net 1,249,000 vs 620,000
      Revs 10,800,000 vs 5,600,000
  

SPORTING LIFE INC &lt;SPLF> 2ND QTR JAN 31 NET
  Oper shr loss six cts vs profit four cts
      Oper net loss 58,388 vs profit 34,101
      Revs 2,419,203 vs 2,145,967
      1st half
      Oper shr profit six cts vs profit 18 cts
      Oper net profit 61,763 vs profit 172,166
      Revs 5,731,582 vs 4,458,040
      NOTE: Prior year net excludes extraordinary credits of
  4,500 dlrs in quarter and 46,000 dlrs in half.
      Current quarter net includes 47,470 dlr tax credit.
  

INVESTMENT FIRMS CUT CYCLOPS &lt;CYL> STAKE
  A group of affiliated New York
  investment firms said they lowered their stake in Cyclops Corp
  to 200,500 shares, or 5.0 pct of the total outstanding, from
  260,500 shares, or 6.4 pct.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  the group, led by Mutual Shares Corp, said it sold 60,000
  Cyclops common shares since February 26.
  

&lt;ARGYLL ENERGY CORP> YEAR LOSS
  Shr loss 1.41 dlrs vs profit 27 cts
      Net loss 8,225,052 vs profit 1,566,936
      Revs 4,028,231 vs 6,725,462
      Note: 1986 shr and net after 6,606,646 dlr writedown on
  property and other assets
  

TRANSIT FINANCIAL SEES 1987 SHARE PROFIT RISE
  &lt;Transit Financial Holdings Inc>,
  earlier reporting higher fourth quarter and full year earnings,
  said it expects 1987 share profit to increase to 1.27 dlrs from
  83 cts in 1986.
      The company said the 1987 share forecast is based on 2.5
  mln shares outstanding, after a one mln common share issue on
  December 30, 1986. Its 1986 and 1985 earnings were based on 1.5
  mln shares outstanding.
      The company earlier reported 1986 profit rose to 1,249,000
  dlrs or 83 cts a shares from year-earlier 620,000 dlrs or 41
  cts a share.
  

SAN PAOLO DI TORINO CUTS PRIME RATE TO 12.50 PCT FROM 13.00 PCT - OFFICIAL

  SAN PAOLO DI TORINO CUTS PRIME RATE TO 12.50 PCT FROM 13.00 PCT - OFFICIAL
  

CANADIAN MONEY SUPPLY M-1 RISES 592 MLN DLRS IN WEEK, BANK OF CANADA SAID

  CANADIAN MONEY SUPPLY M-1 RISES 592 MLN DLRS IN WEEK, BANK OF CANADA SAID
  

HOLLY CORP &lt;HOC> 2ND QTR JAN 31 LOSS
  Shr loss 45 cts vs profit 20 cts
      Net loss 1,841,000 vs profit 983,000
      Revs 56.2 mln vs 102.9 mln
      Avg shrs 4,127,000 vs 4,835,000
      1st half
      Oper shr four cts vs 80 cts
      Oper net 172,000 vs 4,359,000
      Revs 121.4 mln vs 209.3 mln
      Avg shrs 4,127,000 vs 5,439,000
      NOTE: Current half net excludes 706,000 dlr loss from
  discontinued oil and natural gas operations.
      Share adjusted for three-for-one stock split and
  recapitalization in December 1985.
      Prior year net both periods includes pretax charge of
  2,300,000 dlrs from recapitalization costs.
  

CYCLOPS &lt;CYL> WILL NOT GIVE DATA TO GROUP
  Cyclops Corp said its board rejected
  a request by Cyacq Corp, an investor group, for more non-public
  information about Cyclops, a maker of specialty steels and an
  electronics retailer.
      Cyclops cited its agreement to be acquired by Britain's
  Dixons Group PLC for 90.25 dlrs a share under a tender offer
  that expires midnight March 17.
      Cyacq, comprising Audio/Video Affiliates Inc, Citicorp
  Capital Investors Ltd and other investors, yesterday said it
  would increase its tender offer for Cyclops to 92.50 dlrs a
  share from 80 dlrs, subject to certain conditions.
      The conditions were that Cyclops provide Cyacq with
  non-public data given to Dixons and that Cyacq be satisfied
  with financial projections made by Dixons in its offer.
      Cyclops also said its board determined that Cyacq's
  announcement was not an offer. "Cyacq's press release does not
  amend Cyacq's outstanding tender offer which remains at 80 dlrs
  per share and it does not state that Cyacq has financing
  commitments necessary to carry out its original offer or any
  increased offer that it may make," Cyclops said in a statement.
      Its agreements with Dixons are binding and Dixons indicated
  it will not rescind or waive any provisions of the pacts,
  Cyclops said.
      The company also said it was advised that Dixons'
  shareholders approved the merger, satisfying that condition of
  the agreement.
  

SAN JUAN RACING ASSOCIATION INC &lt;SJR> 3RD QTR
  Shr 22 cts vs 22 cts
      Net 915,911 vs 970,141
      Revs 8.0 mln vs 8.0 mln
      Nine months
      Shr 69 cts vs 56 cts
      Net 3.0 mln vs 2.4 mln
      Revs 23.5 mln vs 22.1 mln
      NOTE:1987 3rd qtr and nine months include extraordainry
  gain of 341,145 dlrs and 480,412 dlrs, respectively, on sale of
  land.
  

EDELMAN CUTS LUCKY STORES &lt;LKS> STAKE TO 4.8 PCT
  A group led by New York investor
  Asher Edelman said he lowered its stake in Lucky Stores Inc
  &lt;LKS> to 1,827,734 shares, or 4.8 pct of the total outstanding
  common stock, from 1,930,734 shares, or 5.1 pct.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  the Edelman group said it sold 103,000 Lucky Stores common
  shares on March 9 and 10 at prices ranging from 28.625 to
  30.375 dlrs a share.
      So long as Edelman's stake is below five pct he is not
  required to report his dealings in Lucky Stores stock.
  

CANADIAN MONEY SUPPLY RISES IN WEEK
  Canadian narrowly-defined money supply
  M-1 rose 592 mln dlrs to 33.36 billion dlrs in week ended March
  4, Bank of Canada said.
      M-1-A, which is M-1 plus daily interest chequable and
  non-personal deposits, rose 778 mln dlrs to 75.95 billion dlrs
  and M-2, which is M-1-A plus other notice and personal
  fixed-term deposit rose 1.09 billion dlrs to 177.95 billion
  dlrs.
      M-3, which is non-personal fixed term deposits and foreign
  currency deposits of residents booked at chartered banks in
  Canada, rose 1.13 billion dlrs to 217.28 billion dlrs.         
      Chartered bank general loans outstanding rose 500 mln dlrs
  to 125.54 billion dlrs.
      Canadian liquid plus short term assets fell 244 mln dlrs to
  35.12 billion dlrs and total Canadian dollar major assets of
  the chartered banks rose 257 mln dlrs to 221.53 billion dlrs.
      Chartered bank net foreign currency assets rose 782 mln
  dlrs to minus 876 mln dlrs.            
      Notes in circulation totalled 16.28 billion dlrs, up 45 mln
  dlrs from the week before.
      Government cash balances rose 1.37 billion dlrs to 5.68
  billion dlrs in week ended March 11.
      Government securities outstanding fell three mln dlrs to
  224.08 billion dlrs in week ended March 11, treasury bills rose
  600 mln dlrs to 75.15 billion dlrs and Canada Savings Bonds
  fell 294 mln dlrs to 44.05 billion dlrs.           
  

USSR HEAVY BUYERS OF YUGOSLAV CORN-U.S. REPORT
  The Soviet Union has been a heavy
  buyer of Yugoslav corn since October, purchasing close to 1.5
  mln tonnes in the 1986/87 marketing year, according to a report
  from the U.S. agriculture counselor in Belgrade.
      Approximately 1.5 mln tonnes of Yugoslav corn have already
  been committed to foreign buyers for 1986/87, with most of this
  sold to the Soviet Union, the Yugoslav Grain Association
  reported to the U.S. official.
      In a report dated March 10, the official said that about
  800,000 tonnes of the corn has been delivered, with the balance
  of 700,000 tonnes to be shipped between now and June.
      An additional 500,000 tonnes of corn can be shipped from
  July-September, the grain associaiton said, so total Yugoslav
  corn exports could reach 2.0 mln tonnes, the counselor said.
      Heavier than normal monthly shipping rates for Yugoslav
  corn exports are due to the increased use of river barges for
  exporting corn to the Soviet Union, the counselor said.
      Monthly corn shipments out of Yugoslavia have averaged
  around 160,000 tonnes since October 1, higher than earlier
  estimates of 150,000, the official said.
      The Soviet Union has taken an increased share of Yugoslav
  corn sales during this marketing year, he said.
  

PRESIDENTIAL REALTY CORP &lt;PDO> ANNUAL NET
  Shr 1.65 dlrs vs 1.50 dlrs
      Net 5,370,000 vs 4,901,000
      Rev 8.4 mln vs 7.8 mln
      NOTE: 1986 net gain from property investments 717,000 dlrs,
  or 22 cts per share, vs 721,000 dlrs, or 22 cts per share.
  

U.S. MAKES CONCILIATORY MOVE AT RUBBER PACT TALKS
  The U.S. Has dropped its insistence that
  the floor price in a new International Natural Rubber
  Agreement, INRA, be revised downward under certain
  circumstances, conference sources said.
      The surprise conciliatory move by the U.S. Meets one of the
  producers' main concerns -- that the floor price, or "lower
  indicative price," remain unchanged, they said.
      It is not clear, however, whether all consuming countries
  will follow suit, as a number of them, in particular Britain,
  West Germany and Belgium, appeared to have strong reservations,
  the sources added.
      The group of consumers has been seeking an adjustment of
  the "lower indicative price" (set at 150 Malaysian/Singapore
  cents a kilo in the present pact) if the buffer stock,
  currently 360,000 tonnes, rises to 450,000 tonnes.
      The sources said the question of to what extent price
  adjustments should be automatic remains a problem.
      Conference chairman Manaspas Xuto of Thailand has been
  holding consultations with producers and consumers throughout
  the day.
      The consumers' group is now holding a separate meeting
  ahead of further consultations within the "president's group"
  tonight.
  

FED SEEN CONTENT WITH U.S. FEBRUARY ECONOMY
  U.S. February reports reflecting slim
  gains in industrial output and moderating inflation pressures
  reinforced expectations that the Federal Reserve will continue
  to follow a stable course of monetary policy, economists said.
      "If you're the Fed, there's no reason to do anything," said
  Steve Slifer of Lehman Government Securities Inc.
      "There are hints that GNP is picking up. On the inflation
  front, all is well," he said. "Money supply is well under
  control. It's an absolutely ideal situation."
      February U.S. industrial production rose 0.5 pct, slightly
  less than the 0.7 pct gain the financial markets had expected.
  This compared with a slim 0.1 pct rise in January's production
  number, previously reported as a 0.4 pct increase.
      The February U.S. producer price index gained only 0.1 pct,
  less than a 0.3-0.4 pct expected rise. This followed a 0.6 pct
  rise in the PPI in January.
      "The Fed is going to look at this positively," said Allan
  Leslie of Discount Corporation. "Certainly inflation is not as
  bad as what Volcker (Fed Chairman) has said lately. Industrial
  production growth is along the lines of what the Fed wants."
      The energy products component of PPI rose 4.0 pct in
  February, after a 9.8 pct increase in January.
      "This shows that the impact of energy prices on inflation
  is behind us in terms of the move from 15 dlrs to 18 dlrs per
  barrel," said Maria Ramirez of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. "The
  trend is still 3.5 pct in the first half of the year."
      In 1986, declining energy prices contributed to a 2.5 pct
  decline in the PPI.
      Economists said that a rise in energy prices was expected,
  but a sharp drop in auto prices was not. Passenger car prices
  fell 3.4 pct and light truck prices dropped 1.3 pct.
      Yesterday, Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker said that
  a possibility of renewed inflation remains a concern in both
  the financial markets and the Federal Reserve.
      "The Fed may be lowering its own inflation expectations
  today," said Robert Brusca of Nikko Securities International.
      While low inflation permits the Fed to maintain an easier
  monetary policy, Brusca said if import prices do not rise this
  could necessitate a weaker dollar.
      "The outlook for the dollar is still up in the air," he
  said. "We need inflation for U.S. producers to compete with
  foreign producers."
      Brusca said prices of electronic equipment dropped 0.8 pct
  in February's PPI. With many electronic goods produced
  overseas, this may show that foreign producers are not raising
  prices which bodes ill for U.S. competitiveness, he said.
      If further dollar declines are needed, this could diminish
  overseas investment in U.S. debt, Brusca added, which might
  necessitate higher interest rates and lower bond prices.
      By contrast, Slifer said imported goods prices rose 11.8
  pct from first quarter 1985 to first quarter 1986 reflecting to
  a large degree a 22 pct drop in the trade-weighted real value
  of the dollar from February 1985 to February 1987.
      Slifer said import prices may rise further as
  manufacturers' contracts put in place before the dollar dropped
  to current levels expire, and new contracts are made that
  reflect a weaker dollar.
      David Wyss of Data Resources Inc noted that imported
  manufactured goods prices rose 8.5 pct at an annual rate in the
  second half of 1986, which has contributed to rising U.S.
  industrial output.
      "It's the other side of the lower dollar," Wyss said.
  "Producers are beginning to find themselves more competitive
  and they are increasing output."
      Wyss said that the latest data point to an average
  industrial production gain of 0.3-0.4 pct in the first quarter.
  "It's an encouraging sign that the manufacturing sector is
  beginning to revive."
      But Stephen Roach of Morgan Stanley and Co Inc was not 
  convinced that the February reports portend economic gains. He
  said much of the strength came from factors that do not point
  to a sustained rise in industrial output.
      Roach pointed out that stikers returning to work in farm
  equipment industries helped account for a one pct rise in
  February business equipment production.
      Utilities output rose 0.7 pct in February after gaining 1.2
  pct in January, but Roach said it shows mostly that more energy
  was produced, not that manufacturing activity gained.
      Finally, he pointed out that auto production accounted for
  half of the industrial production gain as production of auto
  assemblies rose to 8.3 million units at an annual rate from 7.5
  million units.
      "In the first quarter, it looks like automakers are
  producing at an 8.5 mln unit annual rate, but selling at
  roughly a seven mln unit rate," Roach said. "The disparity
  between output and sales is showing up in inventories."
      Economists pointed to sharp rise in January U.S. business
  inventories as a sign that production may be outstripping
  demand in the first quarter of 1987.
      January business inventories rose 0.9 pct, the largest gain
  since July 1979 when inventories rose 1.7 pct, the Commerce
  Department said. Business sales dropped 4.5 pct in January, the
  largest monthly sales drop on record.
      Nonetheless, economists do not expect the Fed to react to
  month-to-month changes. "The Fed has been standing pat for the
  last seven months," Ramirez said. "They will continue to stand
  pat for at least the next couple of months."
  

MOBIL &lt;MOB> CAPITAL EXPENDITURES LOWER IN 1987
  Mobil Corp chairman Allen E. Murray
  said in the annual report issued today that the company's total
  1987 capital expenditures would be lower than the three
  billion dlrs spent in 1986.
      "Overall capital and exploration expenditures will fall
  slightly below the level for 1986 although we'll be ready to
  increase spending whenever the outlook becomes more promising,"
  Murray said.
      Mobil data in the annual report shows capital expenditures
  have been cut every year since 1984's 3.6 billion dlrs to 3.5
  billion dlrs in 1985.
      Murray told shareholders that despite the cuts "the company
  has promising acreage to explore as well as major oil and gas
  reserves to develop in the U.S., Canada, Europe, Africa and
  Indonesia.
      Over the past two weeks Mobil has announced restructuring
  of its domestic exploration and development organization and
  this week a restructuring of its oil services units, which
  support the new affiliate.
      "Mobil's chairman has explained this change by saying we
  need a leaner organization to get more efficient usage from our
  assets," said John Lord, a Mobil Corp spokesman.
      Murray said in announcing the first reorganization, which
  will combine its current three exploration and producing
  affiliates into one organization, Mobil Exploration and
  Production U.S. Inc, that it is more effective than the present
  organization and will improve the company's upstream
  competitive position.
      Yesterday the company said that it will restructure its
  Mobil Exploration and Producing Services Inc, MEPSI, to enhance
  the development and transfer of technology supporting critical
  areas of exploration, drilling, resevoir management and
  computer systems.
      Earnings from Mobil's upstream operations in 1986 were 827
  mln dlrs, down 54 pct from the previous year's 1.8 billion dlrs
  in earnings.
      Mobil's strategy in the exploration and production sector
  will be to give most attention to exploration possibilities
  with the greatest long term potential, the company said.
      In its annual report, Mobil said that this will include
  greater emphasis on "frontier plays that, although riskier, fit
  our strengths of technology and size...This probably also means
  a shift toward emphasis in the foreign area since selective
  overseas exploration offers greater potential."
  

INTERCONNECT PREFERS FRIENDLY GATES &lt;GLJ> OFFER
  &lt;Interconnect Capital> said it
  seeks to acquire Gates Learjet Corp on friendly terms.
      Late yesterday the company said it has offered 7.07 dlrs
  per share for all Gates Learjet shares.
      Interconnect Capital said it intends to purchase the &lt;Gates
  Corp> loan to Gates Learjet for 13 mln dlrs should its bid be
  successful.
      Interconnect Capital is controlled by &lt;Interconnect Inc>.
      Gates Corp owns 64.8 pct of Gates Learjet.
  

BRAZILIAN TROOPS TO LEAVE OIL REFINERIES
  Brazil's labour troubles eased a
  little today as the authorities announced they were withdrawing
  troops from the country's main oil installations occupied three
  days ago.
      The troops went in at the request of the state-oil company
  Petrobras because of the threat of a strike by 55,000 oil
  industry employees.
      Petrobras said in a statement today it had requested the
  withdrawal of the troops. The situation in the refineries was
  calm, it said, and the employees had indicated their
  willingness to negotiate a pay deal.
      A national seamen's strike, however, continued and marines
  remained in the country's main ports. The marines were
  despatched to the ports after the seamen's strike, now two
  weeks old, was ruled illegal last Friday.
      A spokesman at the national strike headquarters in Rio de
  Janeiro said today a total of l63 ships were strike-bound, 135
  in Brazil and 28 in foreign ports.
      Yesterday two small companies specialised in the transport
  of chemicals, Global and Flumar, struck a pay accord with their
  seamen who have secured a 120 pct increase.
      Brazilian newspapers today hailed these agreements as a
  sign that the national strike could soon come to an end.
      Both companies employ fewer than 200 seamen and union
  leaders said the vast majority of Brazil's 40,000 seamen were
  still on strike.
      The threat of a stoppage by oil industry employees appeared
  today to be receding. Petrobras said in its statement that the
  company would meet union leaders for pay talks in Rio de
  Janeiro next Wednesday.
      Labour Minister Almir Pazzionotto would act as a mediator.
      Besides industrial troubles, there has also been
  considerable unrest this week in the agricultural sector.
      On Tuesday hundreds of thousands of farmers held rallies
  throughout the country to protest against high interest rates.
      Television reports showed some of these protests still
  continuing today, with farmers blockading banks with their
  vehicles in several towns in the states of Sao Paulo and
  Parana.
      The strikes in Brazil come as the government is trying to
  extricate itself from a serious debt crisis brought on by a
  deterioration in its trade balance.
      On February 20 President Jose Sarney announced that Brazil
  was suspending interest payments on 68 billion dlrs of debt to
  private banks.
      Because of the seamen strike exports are being delayed and
  the country is losing badly needed foreign exchange.
  

INFINITE GRAPHICS INC &lt;INFG> 3RD QTR JAN 31 NET
  Shr profit two cts vs loss 11 cts
      Net profit 31,734 vs loss 190,677
      Sales 1,325,978 vs 1,029,921
      Nine Mths
      Shr profit eight cts vs loss 53 cts
      Net profit 142,200 vs loss 939,435
      Sales 4,066,777 vs 2,793,479
  

MINDSCAPE BUYS HARCOURT BRACE &lt;HBJ> UNIT
  (Mindscsape Inc) said it
  agreed to buy the educational software unit of Holt, Rinehart
  and Winston Inc, a subsidiary of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc,
  for undisclosed terms.
      Sales of the division, which had been purchased by Holt,
  Rinehart from CBS, peaked at about 10 mln dlrs in 1985,
  Mindscape said.
  

HEALTH-MOR INC &lt;HMI> SETS DIVIDEND
  Qtly dividend 17 cts vs 17 cts
      Pay April 10
      Record March 26
  

CAESARS WORLD SAYS IT CONSIDERS RESTRUCTURING AND SALE TO OTHER COMPANY

  CAESARS WORLD SAYS IT CONSIDERS RESTRUCTURING AND SALE TO OTHER COMPANY
  

REDSTONE DETAILS SWEETENED VIACOM &lt;VIA> OFFER
  Investor Sumner Redstone, who leads
  one of the two groups vying for control of Viacom International
  Inc, offered to sweeten his bid for the company by 1.50 dlrs a
  share cash and 1.50 dlrs in securities.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Redstone, who controls Dedham, Mass.,-based National Amusements
  Inc, a theater chain operator, offered to raise the cash
  portion of its Viacom offer to 42 dlrs a share from 40.50 dlrs.
      Redstone also raised the face value of the preferred stock
  he is offering to 7.50 dlrs from six dlrs.
      The Redstone offer, which is being made through Arsenal
  Holdings Inc, a National Amusements subsidiary set up for that
  purpose, which also give Viacom shareholders one-fifth of a
  share of Arsenal common stock after the takeover.
      Viacom said earlier today it received revised takeover bids
  from Redstone and MCV Holdings Inc, a group led by Viacom
  management which is competing with Redstone for control of the
  company and already has a formal merger agreement with Viacom.
      The company did not disclose the details of the revised
  offers, but said a special committee of its board would review
  them later today.
      The Redstone group, which has a 19.5 pct stake in Viacom,
  and the management group, which has a 5.4 pct stake, have both
  agreed not to buy more shares of the company until a merger is
  completed, unless the purchases are part of a tender offer for
  at least half of the outstanding stock.
      The two rivals also signed confidentiality agreements,
  which give them access to Viacom's financial records provided
  they keep the information secret.
      In his SEC filing, Redstone, who estimated his cost of
  completing the takeover at 2.95 billion dlrs, said Bank of
  America is confident it can raise 2.275 billion dlrs.
      Besides the financing it would raise through a bank
  syndicate, Bank of America has also agreed to provide a
  separate 25 mln dlr for the limited purpose of partial
  financing and has committed to provide another 592 mln dlrs,
  Redstone said.
      Merrill Lynch, Pierce Fenner and Smith Inc has increased
  its underwriting commitment to 175 mln dlrs of subordinated
  financing debt for the Viacom takeover, from the 150 mln dlrs
  it agreed to underwrite earlier, Redstone said.
      Redstone said his group would contribute more than 475 mln
  dlrs in equity toward the takeover.
      The Redstone equity contribution to the takeover would
  consist of all of his group's 6,881,800 Viacom common shares
  and at least 118 mln dlrs cash, he said.
      The new offer, the second sweetened deal Redstone has
  proposed in his month-long bidding war with management, also
  contains newly drawn up proposed merger documents, he said.
      Last week, the management group submitted what it called
  its last offer for the company, valued at 3.1 mln dlrs and
  consisting of 38.50 dlrs a share cash, preferred stock valued
  at eight dlrs a share and equity in the new company. Redstone's
  previous offer had been valued at 3.2 billion dlrs.
  

FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC 4TH QTR OPER SHR LOSS 44 CTS VS LOSS EIGHT CTS

  FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC 4TH QTR OPER SHR LOSS 44 CTS VS LOSS EIGHT CTS
  

MOBIL &lt;MOB> ADDS NATURAL GAS RESERVES IN 1986
  Mobil Corp increased net proven
  reserves of natural gas liquids in 1986 from the previous year
  according to data in its 1986 annual report.
      The report states that total net proved reserves at year's
  end stood at 2.5 billion barrels, an increase of 94 mln barrels
  or four pct above the previous year and detailed data show that
  the gains resulted from an increase in net proved reserves of
  natural gas liquids.
      Mobil said gains were in Indonesia where a sixth production
  facility began operation in October with a capacity to
  manufacture 1.7 mln tonnes of liquified natural gas.
      The company also said that new capacity brought onstream
  last year replaced 120 pct of Mobil's production, which
  declined by about four pct in 1986 from the previous year.
      Detailed data on reserves shows that U.S. net proved
  reserves of crude oil fell to 837 mln barrels from 853 mln
  barrels in 1985, natural gas liquid reserves were also lower in
  1986 from the previous year.
      Net proved crude oil reserves also fell in Canada to 224
  mln barrels and in Europe to 403 mln barrels from the previous
  year's level of 231 mln barrels and 439 mln barrels,
  respectively.
  

ARCO SELLS TWO AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH OPERATIONS
  Atlantic Richfield Co said it sold
  its Plan Cell Research Institute unit and its Arco Seed Co
  operations in two transactions for undisclosed prices.
      The company said it sold Dublin, Calif.-based Plant Cell
  Research to Montedision SpA of Milan, Italy, and ARCO Seed Co
  to U.F. Genetics of Hollister, Calif.
      Atlantic Richfield said the divestitures are in line with
  its policy of focusing resources on oil, gas, chemical and coal
  operations.
  

CAESARS WORLD &lt;CAW> SAYS IT MULLS RESTRUCTURING
  Caesars World Inc, in rejecting a 28
  dlr a share takeover bid by New York investor Martin Sosnoff,
  said it is considering alternatives that include a
  restructuring of the company and the sale to someone else.
      In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
  Caesars World said its board decided at a special meeting
  yesterday to "explore and investigate" several alternatives in
  an effort to thwart Sosnoff's takeover attempt.
   More
  

LOW SUGAR PRICES MAY ATTRACT SOVIET/CHINESE
  Any further decline in raw sugar prices
  is likely to attract buying from the Soviet Union and China,
  Woodhouse, Drake and Carey said in their latest weekly market
  report.
      Present lower terminal values may be a reflection of the
  lack of renewed prompt offtake, particularly from these two
  large consumers, the report said.
      The week has seen good demand for Thai raws, particulary
  for October/December shipment, which has traded above twenty
  points premium to the October New York delivery, it said.
  

MONTEDISON CONCLUDES TALKS WITH ANTIBIOTICOS
  Montedison Spa &lt;MONI.MI> said it has
  concluded its negotiations with Spanish pharmaceuticals company
  &lt;Antibioticos SA>.
      A company spokesman told Reuters "We have concluded the
  talks and we are now awaiting authorization from Spanish
  authorities." He declined to comment further.
      Earlier today the Italian company postponed a scheduled
  press conference on its talks with Antibioticos. An Italian
  press report today said Montedison has agreed to acquire
  Antibioticos for 500 billion lire.
  

CHEMLAWN &lt;CHEM> SEEKS BIDS BY MARCH 18
  ChemLawn corp said it has asked
  potential purchasers of the company to submit their proposals
  by 1700 EST on March 18.
      ChemLawn said if Waste Management Inc &lt;WMX> intends to
  participate in the bidding process, it will have to submit a
  confidentiality agreement to Chemlawn financial advisor Smith
  Barney, Harris Upham and Co Inc.
      Waste Management has a 27 dlr per share tender offer for
  Chemlawn underway that Chemlawn has already rejected as
  inadequate.
      Chemlawn has already said it is holding talks with various
  parties on the sale of the company and said it has informed all
  potential purchasers that they mnust sign confidentiality
  agreemnents to receive confidential information on Chemlawn.
      ChemLawn said if Waste Management were to sign such an
  agreement, ChemLawn would supply it with the same information
  being supplied to other potential purchasers. But it said it
  will not make an exception for Waste Management which would
  give that company an advantage in the bidding process.
  

GTS CORP &lt;GTSC> 4TH QTR DEC 31 LOSS
  Shr loss 48 cts vs loss 10 cts
      Net loss 1,234,000 vs loss 259,000
      Revs 715,000 vs 1,941,000
      Year
      Shr loss 1.26 dlrs vs loss 34 cts
      Net loss 3,229,000 vs loss 870,000
      Revs 3,001,000 vs 9,767,000
      NOTE: 1986 net both periods includes 672,300 dlr writedown
  of value of seismic laboratory and 165,000 dlr increase in
  reserve for doubtful accounts.
  

FAIRCHILD INDUSTRIES INC &lt;FEN> 4TH QTR LOSS
  Oper shr loss 44 cts vs oper loss eight cts
      Oper net loss 3,158,000 vs profit 2,035,000
      Rev 166.0 mln vs 162.3 mln
      Year
      Oper shr loss 34 cts vs loss 93 cts
      Oper net profit 7,599,000 vs loss 283,000
      Rev 643.3 mln vs 576.3 mln
      NOTE: Per share results after provision for pfd dividends.
      Fourth qtr earnings exclude loss from discontinued
  operations of 67.6 mln dlrs, or 4.72 dlrs a share, and a loss
  of 25.8 mln dlrs, or 1.81 dlrs a share, from tax reverse,
  versus a gain from discontinued operations of 1.8 mln dlrs, or
  14 cts a share, in 1985's 4th qtr.
       1986 oper earnings excludes loss from discontinued
  operations of 62.5 mln dlrs, or 4.41 dlrs a share, versus a
  loss of 166.8 mln dlrs, or 12.24 dlrs a share, in 1985.
  

SMARTNAMES TO BUY AMERICAN INFORMATION NETWORK
  SmartNames Inc said it reached
  an agreement in principle to buy American Information Network.
      Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
      The company said the purchase of American will allow it to
  meet the needs of a broader range of direct mail industry
  customers.
  

UTILICORP &lt;UCU> COMPLETES ACQUISITION
  UtiliCorp United Inc said it
  completed the acquisition of West Virginia Power from Dominion
  Resources for about 21 mln dlrs.
      The sale was approved by the West Virginia Public Service
  Commission in January and became effective March one. West
  Virginia's management will continue to be responsible for
  operating the utility, it said.
  

ARCO &lt;ACR> SELLS TWO OPERATIONS
  Atlantic Richfield Co said it sold
  its Plan Cell Research Institute unit and its Arco Seed Co
  operations in two transactions for undisclosed prices.
      The company said it sold Dublin, Calif.-based Plant Cell
  Research to &lt;Montedision SpA> of Milan, Italy and ARCO Seed Co
  to U.F. Genetics of Hollister, Calif.
      Atlantic Richfield said the divestitures are in line with
  its policy of focusing resources on oil, gas, chemical and coal
  operations.
  

ECUADOR BEGINS WORK ON OIL PIPELINE TO COLOMBIA
  Construction workers today began building
  a 26 km (16 mile) pipeline to link Ecuador's jungle oilfields
  to a pipeline in Colombia through which Ecuadorean crude could
  be pumped to the Pacific Coast, Ecuadorean energy minsitry
  officials said.
      They said it would take about two months and at least 15
  mln dlrs to build the pipeline from Lago Agrio in Ecuador to
  Puerto Colon, Colombia for connection to the Colombian
  pipeline, which goes to the port of Tumaco on Colombia's
  Pacific Ocean coast.
      The Lago Agrio to Puerto Colon pipeline is designed to
  transport between 30,000 to 50,000 barrels of day (bpd) of
  Ecuadorean crude to the Colombian pipeline, they said.
      The Colombian pipeline to Tumaco has ample room for
  Ecuadorean crude, they said. It is currently transporting about
  17,000 bpd out of its 100,000 bpd capacity, an Ecuadorean
  energy ministry official said.
      The Ecuadorean crude reaching Tumaco will be shipped by
  boat to Ecuador for refining into oil products to meet domestic
  demand.
      The completion of the pipeline would allow Ecuador to
  resume some of production, paralysed since March six by an 
  earthquake the night before.
      The tremor ruptured the country's main pipeline from jungle
  oilfields to the Ecuadorean port of Balao, on the Pacific
  Ocean.
      Ecuador was pumping about 260,000 bpd before the
  earthquake. It would take about five months to repair the
  pipeline to Balao, government officials said.
      Ecuador estimates that it will cost between 145 to 150 mln
  dlrs to repair oil installations damaged by the earthquake,
  energy ministry Javier Espinosa said.
  

DUTCH TRADE FULLY IN BALANCE BUT DOWN IN JANUARY
  The Netherlands recorded a flat trade
  balance in January, with both exports and imports totaling 14.2
  billion guilders, a modestly lower compared with December but
  sharply down from January last year, an Economics Ministry
  spokesman said, quoting official statistics.
      January 1986 exports compared with a December figure of
  15.0 billion guilders and were 25 pct below last year's level
  of 18.9 billion.
      January 1986 imports compared with 15.3 billion guilders in
  December and fell 18 pct from 17.4 billion in January last
  year.
  

NUMEROUS FACTORS SAID POINT TO USSR CORN BUYING
  A greater than anticipated need,
  competitive prices and political motivations could be sparking
  Soviet interest in U.S. corn, industry and government officials
  said.
      As rumors circulated through grain markets today that the
  Soviet Union has purchased an additional 1.5 mln tonnes of U.S.
  corn, industry and government sources noted a number of factors
  that make Soviet buying of U.S. corn likely.
      First, there are supply concerns. Some trade sources said
  recent speculation has been that last year's Soviet grain crop
  be revised to only 190 mln tonnes, rather than the 210 mln
  announced, therby increasing the Soviet need for grain.
      A drop in Argentine corn crop prospects could also affect
  Soviet corn buying, an Agriculture Department source said.
      Dry weather in Argentina -- a major corn supplier to the
  USSR -- and reported crop problems prompted USDA to lower its
  Argentine 1986/87 corn crop estimate this week to 11.0 mln
  tonnes, down from 11.5 mln. Argentina corn exports were also
  cut by 500,000 tonnes to 6.8 mln tonnes.
      Argentina has already committed four mln tonnes of this
  year's corn for export, a USDA official said, with two mln
  tonnes of that booked for April-June delivery to the USSR.
      "Significant downside potential" still exists for the
  Argentine crop, the official said, which will decrease the
  amount of additional corn that country can sell to Moscow.
      "If the Soviet needs are greater than we have been
  thinking, then they might need more than what Argentina can
  provide during the April to June period," he said.
      Current competitive prices for U.S. corn have also sparked
  Soviet buying.
      U.S. corn was reported to be selling on the world market
  earlier this week for around 71 dlrs per tonne, Argentine corn
  for 67 dlrs -- a very competitive price spread, U.S. and Soviet
  sources said.
      "This price difference makes American corn competitive,"
  Albert Melnikov, commercial counselor for the Soviet Union,
  told Reuters.
      Impending crop problems in Argentina will likely cause
  those prices to rise, and with the recently strong U.S. corn
  futures prices, the Soviets might feel corn prices have
  bottomed and that this is a good time to buy, sources said.
      Finally, some industry sources said that by buying the
  minimum amount of corn guaranteed under the U.S./USSR grains
  agreement (four mln tonnes), the Soviet Union may be hoping to
  convince the USDA to offer Moscow a subsidy on wheat.
      In an inteview with Reuters this week, USDA secretary
  Richard Lyng said that no decision had been made on a wheat
  subsidy offer, but that such an offer had not been ruled out.
  

DESOTO INC &lt;DSO> REGULAR DIVIDEND SET
  Qtly div 35 cts vs 35 cts previously
      Pay April 17
      Record March 31
  

METHODE ELECTRONICS INC &lt;METHB> REGULAR PAYOUT
  Qtly div Class B 1-1/2 cts vs 1-1/2 cts prior
      Class A two cts vs two cts prior
      Pay April 30
      Record April 15
  

BRAZIL INDUSTRIAL GROWTH RATE SLOWED IN JANUARY
  The growth rate of Brazilian
  industrial output slowed in January to 6.09 pct above the same
  1986 month after rising 6.71 pct in December, Brazilian
  Geography and Statistics Institute figures show.
      The result is in line with the declining trend in the
  growth rate since October, the Institute said.
      In the 12 months to end-January industrial production was
  10.48 pct above the 12 months to end-January last year while in
  calendar 1986 output was 10.89 pct above 1985.
      The biggest output rises in the 12 months to end-January
  were 23.68 pct in pharmaceuticals and 22.12 pct in machinery.
  

GENERAL CINEMA CORP &lt;GCN> COMMON STOCK DIVIDEND
  Qtly div 15 cts vs 15 cts prior
      Pay April 30
      Recrod April nine
  

STEPHAN CO &lt;FTC> YEAR NET
  Shr 25 cts vs 18 cts
      Net 109,131 vs 75,793
      Revs 1,811,636 vs 1,280,618
  


CHAPTER I--A SUSPICIOUS JEWELER


"Well, Tom Swift, I don't believe you will make any mistake if you buy
that diamond," said the jeweler to a young man who was inspecting a tray
of pins, set with the sparkling stones. "It is of the first water, and
without a flaw."

"It certainly seems so, Mr. Track. I don't know much about diamonds, and
I'm depending on you. But this one looks to be all right."

"Is it for yourself, Tom?"

"Er--no--that is, not exactly," and Tom Swift, the young inventor of
airships and submarines, blushed slightly.

"Ah, I see. It's for your housekeeper, Mrs. Baggert. Well, I think she
would like a pin of this sort. True, it's rather expensive, but--"

"No, it isn't for Mrs. Baggert, Mr. Track," and Tom seemed a bit
embarrassed.

"No? Well, then, Tom--of course it's none of my affair, except to
sell you a good stone, But if this brooch is for a young lady, I can't
recommend anything nicer. Do you think you will take this; or do you
prefer to look at some others?"

"Oh, I think this will do, Mr. Track. I guess I'll take--"

Tom's words were interrupted by a sudden action on the part of the
jeweler. Mr. Track ran from behind the showcase and hastened toward the
front door.

"Did you see him, Tom?" he cried. "I wonder which way he went?"

"Who?" asked the lad, following the shopkeeper.

"That man. He's been walking up and down in front of my place for the
last ten minutes--ever since you've been in here, in fact, and I don't
like his looks."

"What did he do?"

"Nothing much, except to stare in here as if he was sizing my place up."

"Sizing it up?"

"Yes. Getting the lay of the land, so he or some confederate could
commit a robbery, maybe."

"A robbery? Do you think that man was a thief?"

"I don't know that he was, Tom, and yet a jeweler has to be always
on the watch, and that isn't a joke, either, Tom Swift. Swindlers and
thieves are always on the alert for a chance to rob a jewelry store, and
they work many games."

"I didn't notice any particular man looking in here," said Tom, who
still held the diamond brooch in his hand.

"Well I did," went on the jeweler. "I happened to glance out of the
window when you were looking at the pins, and I saw his eyes staring in
here in a suspicious manner. He may have a confederate with him, and,
when you're gone, one may come in, and pretend to want to look at some
diamonds. Then, when I'm showing him some, the other man will enter,
engage my attention, and the first man will slip out with a diamond ring
or pin. It's often done."

"You seem to have it all worked out, Mr. Track," observed the lad, with
a smile. "How do you know but what I'm in with a gang of thieves, and
that I'm only pretending to want to buy a diamond pin?"

"Oh, I guess I haven't known you, Tom Swift, ever since you were
big enough to toddle, not to be sure about what you're up to. But I
certainly didn't like the looks of that man. However, let's forget about
him. He seems to have gone down the street, and, after all, perhaps I
was mistaken. Just wait until I show you a few more styles before you
decide. The young lady may like one of these," and the jeweler went to
another showcase and took out some more trays of brooches.

"What makes you think she's a young lady, Mr. Track?" asked the lad.

"Oh, it's easy guessing, Tom. We jewelers are good readers of character.
I can size up a young fellow coming in here to buy an engagement or a
wedding ring, as soon as he enters the door. I suppose you'll soon be
in the market for one of those, Tom, if all the reports I hear about you
are true--you and a certain Mary Nestor."

"I--er--I think I don't care for any of these pins," spoke Tom, quickly,
with a blush. "I like the first lot best. I think I'll take the one I
had in my hand when that man alarmed you. Ha! That's odd! What did I do
with it?"

Tom looked about on the showcase, and glanced down on the floor. He had
mislaid the brooch, but the jeweler, with a laugh, lifted it out of a
tray a moment later.

"I saw you lay it down," he said. "We jewelers have to be on the watch.
Here it is. I'll just put it in a box, and--"

With an exclamation, Mr. Track gave a hasty glance toward his big show
window. Tom looked up, and saw a man's face peering in. At the sight of
it, he, too, uttered a cry of surprise.

The next instant the man outside knocked on the glass, apparently with
a piece of metal, making a sharp sound. As soon as he heard it, the
jeweler once more sprang from behind the showcase, and leaped for the
door crying:

"There's the thief! He's trying to cut a hole through my show window and
reach in and get something! It's an old trick. I'll get the police! Tom,
you stay here on guard!" and before the lad could utter a protest, the
jeweler had opened the door, and was speeding down the street in the
gathering darkness.

Tom stared about him in some bewilderment. He was left alone in charge
of a very valuable stock of jewelry, the owner of which was racing after
a supposed thief, crying:

"Police! Help! Thieves! Stop him, somebody!"

"This is a queer go," mused Tom. "I wonder who that man was? He looked
like somebody I know, and yet I can't seem to place his face. I
wonder if he was trying to rob the place? Maybe there's another one--a
confederate--around here."

This thought rather alarmed Tom, so he went to the door, and looked up
and down the street. He could see no suspicious characters, but in the
direction in which the jeweler was running there was a little throng of
people, following Mr. Track after the man who had knocked on the window.

"I wish I was there, instead of here," mused the lad. "Still I can't
leave, or a thief might come in. Perhaps that was the game, and one of
the gang is hanging around, hoping the store will be deserted, so he can
enter and take what he likes."

Tom had read of such cases, and he at once resolved that he would not
only remain in the jewelry shop, but that he would lock the door, which
he at once proceeded to do. Then he breathed easier.

The town of Shopton, in the outskirts of which Tom lived with his
father, and where the scene above narrated took place, was none too well
lighted at night, and the lad had his doubts about the jeweler catching
the oddly-acting man, especially as the latter had a good start.

"But some one may head him off," reasoned Tom. "Though if they do catch
him, I don't see what they can prove against him. Hello, here I am
carrying this diamond pin around. I might lose it. Guess I'll put it
back on the tray."

He replaced in the proper receptacle one of the pins he had been
examining when the excitement occurred.

"I wonder if Mary will like that?" he said, softly. "I hope she does.
Perhaps it would be better if she could come here herself and pick out
one--"

Tom's musing was suddenly interrupted by a sharp tattoo on the glass
door of the jewelry shop. With a start, he looked up, to see staring in
on him the face of the man who had been there before--the man of whom
the jeweler was even then in chase.

"Why--why----" stammered Tom.

The man knocked again.

"Tom--Tom Swift!" he called. "Don't you know me?"

"Know you--you?" repeated the lad.

"Yes--don't you remember Earthquake Island--how we were nearly killed
there--don't you remember Mr. Jenks?"

"Mr. Jenks?"

Tom was so startled that he could only repeat words after the strange
man, who was talking to him from outside the glass door.

"Yes, Mr. Jenks," was the reply. "Mr. Barcoe Jenks, who makes diamonds.
I saw you in the store about to buy a diamond--I wanted to tell you not
to--I'll give you a better diamond than you can buy--I just arrived in
this place--I must have a private talk with you--Come out--I'll share a
wonderful secret with you."

A flood of memory came to Tom. He did recall the very strange man who
walked around Earthquake Island--where Tom and some friends had been
marooned recently--walked about with a pocketful of what he said were
diamonds. Now Barcoe Jenks was here.

"I must see you privately, Tom Swift," went on Mr. Jenks, as he once
more tapped on the glass. "Don't waste money buying diamonds, when you
and I can make better ones. Where can I have a talk with you? I--" Mr.
Jenks suddenly looked down the dimly-lighted street. "They're coming
back!" he cried. "I don't want to be seen. I'll call at your house later
to-night--be on the watch for me--until then--good-by!"

He waved his hand, and was gone in an instant. Tom stood staring at the
glass door. He hardly knew whether to believe it or not--perhaps it was
all a dream.

He pinched himself to make sure that he was awake. Very substantial
flesh met his thumb and finger, and he felt the pain.

"I'm awake all right," he murmured. "But Barcoe Jenks here--and still
talking that nonsense about his manufactured diamonds. I think he must
be crazy. I wonder--"

Once more the lad's musing was interrupted. He heard a murmur of excited
voices outside the store, on the street. Then the door of the jewelry
shop was tried. Mr. Track's face was pressed against the glass.

"Open the door! Let me in, Tom!" he called. "I've caught the thief," and
as the lad unlocked the portal he saw that the jeweler held by the arm
a ragged lad. "Ah; you scoundrel! I've caught you!" cried the diamond
merchant, shaking the small chap, while Tom looked on, more mystified
than ever.




CHAPTER II--A MIDNIGHT VISIT


While Mr. Track, the jeweler, and several citizens, attracted by the
chase after the supposed thief, are crowded into the store, anxious to
hear explanations of the strange affair, I will take the opportunity to
tell you something of Tom Swift, the lad who is to figure in this story.

Many of you have already made his acquaintance, when he has been
speeding about in his airship or fast electric runabout, and to others
we will state that our hero first made his bow to the public in the
book called "Tom Swift and His Motor-Cycle," the initial volume of this
series.

In that story there was related how Tom made the acquaintance of an
odd individual, named Mr. Wakefield Damon, who was continually blessing
himself, some part of his anatomy, or his possessions. Mr. Damon was
riding a motor-cycle, and it started to climb a tree, to his pain and
fright. Afterward Tom purchased the machine, and had many adventures
on it, including a chase after a gang of men who had stolen a valuable
patent model belonging to Mr. Swift.

Mr. Swift and his son were both inventors. They lived together in a
fine house in the suburbs of Shopton, New York, and with them dwelt Mrs.
Baggert, the housekeeper (for Tom's mother was dead), and also Garret
Jackson, an expert engineer, who aided the young inventor and his father
in perfecting many machines.

There was also another semi-member of the household, to wit, Eradicate
Sampson, an eccentric colored man, who owned a mule called Boomerang.
Eradicate did odd jobs around the place, and the mule assisted his
owner--that is when the mule felt like it.

In the second volume of the series, entitled "Tom Swift and His
Motor-Boat," there was related the incidents following a pursuit after
a gang of unprincipled men, who sought to get possession of some of Mr.
Swift's patents, and it was while in this boat that Tom, his father, and
a friend, Ned Newton, rescued from Lake Carlopa a Mr. John Sharp, who
fell from his burning balloon. Mr. Sharp was a skilled aeronaut, and
after his recovery he joined Tom in building a big airship, called the
Red Cloud. Tom's adventures in this craft are set down in detail in the
third volume of the series, called "Tom Swift and His Airship." Not only
did he and Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon make a great trip, but they captured
some bank robbers, and incidentally cleared themselves from the
imputation of having looted the vault of seventy-five thousand dollars,
which charge was fostered by a certain Mr. Foger, and his son Andy, who
was Tom's enemy.

Not satisfied with having conquered the air, Tom and his father set
to work to gain a victory over the ocean. They built a boat that could
navigate under water, and, in the fourth book of the series, called "Tom
Swift and His Submarine Boat," you will find an account of how they went
under the ocean to secure a sunken treasure, and the fight they had with
their enemies who sought to get it away from them. They went through
many perils, not the least of which was capture by a foreign warship.

In the fifth book, entitled "Tom Swift and His Electric Runabout," there
was told the story of a wonderfully speedy electric automobile the young
inventor constructed, and how he made a great race in it, and saved from
ruin a bank, in which his father and Mr. Damon were interested.

Tom's ability as an inventor had, by this time, become well known. One
day, as related in a volume called "Tom Swift and His Wireless Message,"
he received a letter from a Mr. Hosmer Fenwick, of Philadelphia, asking
his aid in perfecting an airship which the resident of the Quaker
City had built, but which would not work. In his small monoplane, the
Butterfly, Tom and Mr. Damon went to Philadelphia, as Mr. Damon was
acquainted with Mr. Fenwick.

Tom carefully inspected the Whizzer which was the name of Mr. Fenwick's
airship, and, after some difficulties, succeeded in getting the electric
craft in shape to make a flight.

Tom, Mr. Damon and Mr. Fenwick started to make a trip to Cape May in the
Whizzer, but were caught in a terrific storm, and blown out to sea.
The wind became a hurricane, the airship was disabled, and wrecked in
mid-air. When it fell to earth it landed on one of the small West Indian
islands, but what was the terror of the three castaways to find that the
island was subject to earthquake shocks.

But the earth-tremors were not the only surprise in store for Tom and
his two friends, On the island they found five men and two ladies, who,
by strange chance, had been stranded there when the yacht Resolute,
owned by Mr. George Hosbrook, was wrecked in the same storm that
disabled the airship. Mr. Hosbrook, a millionaire, was taking a party of
friends to the West Indies.

When the castaways (among whom were Mr. and Mrs. Amos Nestor, parents
of Mary Nestor, a girl of whom Tom was very fond) found that there was
danger of the island being destroyed in an earthquake, they were in
despair. There seemed no way of being rescued, as the island was out of
the line of regular ship travel.

Tom, however, was resourceful. With the electrical apparatus from the
wrecked airship, he built a wireless plant, and sent messages for help,
broadcast over the ocean.

They were finally heard, and answered, by an operator on board the
steamer Camberanian, which came on under forced draught, and rescued
Tom and his friends. It was only just in time, for, no sooner had
they gotten aboard the steamer in lifeboats, than the whole island was
destroyed by an earthquake shock.

But Tom, the parents of Mary Nestor, Mr. Damon, Mr. Fenwick, and all the
others, got safely home. Among the survivors from the yacht Resolute
was a Mr. Barcoe Jenks, who now, most unexpectedly, had confronted Tom
through the glass window of the jewelry store. Mr. Jenks was a peculiar
man. Tom discovered this on Earthquake Island. Mr. Jenks carried with
him some stones which he said were diamonds. He asserted that he had
made them, but Tom did not know whether or not to believe this.

When it seemed that the castaways would not be saved Mr. Jenks offered
Tom a large sum in these same diamonds for some plan whereby he might
escape the earthquakes. Mr. Jenks said there was a certain secret in
connection with the manufactured diamonds that he had to solve--that he
had been defrauded of his rights--and that a certain Phantom Mountain
figured in it. But Tom, at that time, paid little attention to Mr.
Jenks' talk. The time was to come, however, when he would attach much
importance to it.

When this story opens, Tom was more interested in Mr. Barcoe Jenks than
in any one else, and was wondering what he wanted to see him about. The
young inventor could not quite understand how Mr. Track, the jeweler,
could come back with a lad he suspected of being a thief, when the
person who had acted so suspiciously, and who had knocked on the glass,
was the queer man, Mr. Jenks.

"Yes, Tom I caught him," the jeweler went on. "I chased after him, and
nabbed him. It was hard work, too, for I'm not a good runner. Now, you
little rascal, tell me why you tried to rob my store?" and the diamond
merchant shook the lad roughly.

"I--I didn't try to rob your store," was the timid answer.

"Well, perhaps you didn't, exactly, but your confederates did. Why did
you rap on the glass, and why were you staring in so intently?"

"I wasn't lookin' in."

"Well, if it wasn't you, it was some one just like you. But why did you
run when I raced down the street?"

"I--I don't know," and the lad began to snivel. "I--I jest ran--that's
all--'cause I see everybody else runnin', an' I thought there was a
fire."

"Ha! That's a likely story! You ran because you are guilty! I'm going to
hand you over to the police."

"Did he get anything, Mr. Track?" asked one of the men who had joined
the jeweler in the chase.

"No, I can't say that he did. He didn't get a chance. Tom Swift was
in here at the time. But this fellow was only waiting for a chance to
steal, or else to aid his confederates."

"But, if he didn't take anything, I don't see how you can have him
arrested," went on the man.

"On suspicion; that's how!" asserted Mr. Track. "Will some one get me a
constable?"

"I wouldn't call a constable," said Tom, quietly.

"Why not?"

"Because that isn't the person who looked in your window."

"How do you know, Tom?"

"Because that person came back while you were out. I saw him."

"You saw him? Did he try to steal any of my diamonds, Tom?"

"No, I guess he doesn't need any."

"Why not?" There was wonder in the jeweler's tone.

"Why, he claims he can make all he wants."

"Make diamonds?"

"So he says."

"Why, he must be crazy!" and Mr. Track laughed.

"Perhaps he is," admitted Tom, "I'm only telling you what he says. He's
the person who acted so suspiciously. He came back here, I'm telling
you, while you were running down the street, and spoke to me."

"Oh, then you know him?" The jeweler's voice was suspicious.

"I didn't at first," admitted Tom. "But when he said he was Mr.
Barcoe Jenks, I remembered that I had met him when I was cast away on
Earthquake Island."

"And he says he can make diamonds?" asked Mr. Track.

"What did he want of you?" and the jeweler looked at Tom, quizzically.

"He wanted to have a talk with me," replied the lad, "and when he saw
me in your store, he tried to attract my attention by knocking on the
glass."

"That's a queer way to do," declared Mr. Track. "What did he want?"

"I don't know exactly," answered Tom, not caring to go into details just
then. "But I'm sure, Mr. Track, that you've got the wrong person there.
That lad never looked in the window, nor knocked on the glass."

"That's right--I didn't," asserted the captive.

The jeweler looked doubtful.

"Why did you run?" he asked.

"I told you, I thought there was a fire."

"That's right, I don't believe he's the fellow you want," put in another
man. "I was standing on the corner, near White's grocery store, and
I noticed this lad. That was before I heard you yelling, and saw you
coming, and then I joined in the chase. I guess the man you were after
got away, Track."

"He did," asserted Tom. "He came back here, a little while ago, and he
ran away just now, as he heard you coming."

"Where did he go?" asked the jeweler, eagerly.

"I don't know," answered Tom. "Only you've got the wrong lad here."

"Well, perhaps I have," admitted the diamond merchant. "You can go,
youngster, but next time, don't run if you're not guilty."

"I thought there was a fire," repeated the lad, as he hurriedly slipped
through the crowd in the store, and disappeared down the dark street.

"Well, I guess the excitement's all over, and, anyhow, you weren't
robbed, Track," said a stout man, as he left the store. The others soon
followed, and Tom and the jeweler were once more alone in the shop.

"Can you tell me something about this man, Tom?" asked Mr. Track,
eagerly. "So he really makes diamonds. Who is he?"

"I'd rather not tell--just now," replied the young inventor. "I don't
take much stock in him, myself. I think he's visionary. He may think he
has made diamonds, and he may have made some stones that look like them.
I'm very skeptical."

"If you could bring me some, Tom, I could soon tell whether they were
real or not. Can you?"

The lad shook his head.

"I don't expect to see Mr. Jenks again," he said. "He talked
rather wildly about waiting to meet me, but that man is odd--crazy,
perhaps--and I don't imagine I'll see him. He's harmless, but he's
eccentric. Well, there was quite some excitement for a time."

"I should say there was. I thought it was a plan to rob me," and the
jeweler began putting away the diamond pins. In fact, the excitement
so filled the minds of himself and Tom that neither of them thought any
more of the object of the lad's visit, and the young inventor departed
without purchasing the pin he had come after.

It was not until he was out on the street, walking toward his home, that
the matter came back to his mind.

"I declare!" he exclaimed. "I didn't get that pin for Mary, after all!
Well, never mind, I have a week until her birthday, and I can get it
to-morrow."

He walked rapidly toward home, for the weather looked threatening, and
Tom had no umbrella. He was musing on the happenings of the evening when
he reached his house. His father was out, as was Garret Jackson, the
engineer; and Mrs. Baggert, the housekeeper, was entertaining a lady in
the sitting-room, so, as Tom was rather tired, he went directly to his
own room, and, a little later got into bed.

It was shortly after midnight when he was awakened by hearing a rattling
on the window of his room. The reason he was able to fix the time
so accurately was because as soon as he awakened he pressed a little
electric button, and it illuminated the face of a small clock on his
bureau. The hands pointed to five minutes past twelve.

"Humph! That sounds like hail!" exclaimed Tom, as he arose, and looked
out of the casement. "I wonder if any of the skylights of the airship
shed are open? There might be some damage. Guess I'd better go out and
take a look."

He had mentally reasoned this far before he had looked out, and when
he saw that the moon was brightly shining in a clear sky, he was a bit
surprised.

"Why--that wasn't hail," he murmured. "It isn't even raining. I wonder
what it was?"

He was answered a moment later, for a shower of fine gravel from the
walk flew up and clattered against the glass. With a start, Tom looked
down, and saw a dark figure standing under an apple tree.

"Hello! Who's there?" called the lad, after he had raised the sash.

"It's I--Mr. Jenks," was the surprising answer.

"Mr. Jenks?" repeated Tom.

"Yes--Barcoe Jenks, of Earthquake Island."

"You here? What do you want?"

"Can you come down?"

"What for?"

"Tom Swift, I've something very important to tell you," was the answer
in a low voice, yet which carried to Tom's ears perfectly. "Do you want
to make a fortune for yourself--and for me?"

"How?" Tom was beginning to think more and more that Mr. Jenks was
crazy.

"How? By helping me to discover the secret of Phantom Mountain, where
the diamonds are made! Will you?"

"Wait a minute--I'll come down," answered Tom, and he began to grope for
his clothes in the dim light of the little electric lamp.

What was the secret of Phantom Mountain? What did Mr. Jenks really want?
Could he make diamonds? Tom asked himself these questions as he hastily
dressed to go down to his midnight visitor.




CHAPTER III--A STRANGE STORY


"Well, Mr. Jenks," began Tom, when he had descended to the garden, and
greeted the man who had acted so strangely on Earthquake Island, "this
is rather an odd time for a visit."

"I realize that, Tom Swift," was the answer, and the lad noticed that
the man spoke much more calmly than he had that evening at the jewelry
shop. "I realize that, but I have to be cautious in my movements."

"Why?"

"Because there are enemies on my track. If they thought I was seeking
aid to discover the secret of Phantom Mountain, my life might pay the
forfeit."

"Are you in earnest, Mr. Jenks?"

"I certainly am, and, while I must apologize for awakening you at this
unseemly hour, and for the mysterious nature of my visit, if you will
let me tell my story, you will see the need of secrecy."

"Oh, I don't mind being awakened," answered Tom, good-naturedly, "but
I will be frank with you, Mr. Jenks. I hardly can believe what you have
stated to me several times--that you know how diamonds can be made."

"I can prove it to you," was the quiet answer.

"Yes, I know. For centuries men have tried to discover the secret of
transmuting base metals into gold, and how to make diamonds by chemical
means. But they have all been failures."

"All except this process--the process used at Phantom Mountain,"
insisted the queer man. "Do you want to hear my story?"

"I have no objections."

"Then let me warn you," went on Mr. Jenks, "that if you do hear it, you
will be so fascinated by it that I am sure you will want to cast your
lot in with mine, and aid me to get my rights, and solve the mystery.
And I also want to warn you that if you do, there is a certain amount of
danger connected with it."

"I'm used to danger," answered Tom, quietly. "Let me hear your story.
But first explain how you came to come here, and why you acted so
strangely at the jewelry store."

"Willingly. I tried to attract your attention at the store, because I
saw that you were going to buy a diamond, and I didn't want you to."

"Why not?"

"Because I want to present you with a beautiful stone, that will answer
your purpose as well or better, than any one you could buy. That will
prove my story better than any amount of words or argument. But I could
not attract your attention without also attracting that of the jeweler.
He became suspicious, gave chase, and I thought it best to vanish. I
hope no one was made to suffer for what may have been my imprudence."

"No, the lad whom Mr. Track caught was let go. But how did you happen to
come to Shopton?"

"To see you. I got your address from the owner of the yacht Resolute. I
knew that if there was one person who could aid me to recover my rights,
it would be you, Tom Swift. Will you help me? Will you come with me to
discover the secret of Phantom Mountain? If we go, it will have to be in
an airship, for in no other way, I think, can we come upon the place, as
it is closely guarded. Will you come? I will pay you well."

"Perhaps I had better hear your story," said the young inventor. "But
first let me suggest that we move farther away from the house. My
father, or Mr. Jackson, or the housekeeper, may hear us talking, and it
may disturb them. Come with me to my private shop," and Tom led the way
to a small building where he did experimental work. He unlocked the door
with a key he carried, turned on the lights, which were run by a storage
battery, and motioned Mr. Jenks to a seat.

"Now I'll hear your story," said Tom.

"I'll make it as short as possible," went on the queer man. "To begin
with, it is now several years ago since a poorly dressed stranger
applied to me one night for money enough to get a meal and a bed to
sleep in. I was living in New York City at the time, and this was
midnight, as I was returning home from my club.

"I was touched by the man's appearance, and gave him some money. He
asked for my card, saying he would repay me some day. I gave it to him,
little thinking I would hear from the man again. But I did. He called
at my apartments about a week later, saying he had secured work as an
expert setter of diamonds, and wanted to repay me. I did not want to
take his money, but the fact that such a sorry looking specimen of
manhood as he had been when I aided him, was an expert handler of gems
interested me. I talked with the man, and he made a curious statement.

"This man, who gave his name as Enos Folwell, said he knew a place where
diamonds could be made, partly in a scientific manner, and partly by the
forces of nature. I laughed at him, but he told me so many details that
I began to believe him. He said he and some other friends of his, who
were diamond cutters, had a plant in the midst of the Rocky Mountains,
where they had succeeded in making several small, but very perfect
diamonds. They had come to the end of their rope, though, so to speak,
because they could not afford to buy the materials needed. Folwell
said that he and his companions had temporarily separated, had left the
mountain where they made diamonds, and agreed to meet there later when
they had more money with which to purchase materials. They had all
agreed to go out into civilization, and work for enough funds to enable
them to go on with their diamond making.

"I hardly knew whether to believe the man or not, but he offered proof.
He had several small, but very perfect diamonds with him, and he gave
them to me, to have tested in any way I desired.

"I promised to look into the matter, and, as I was quite wealthy, as,
in fact I am now, and if I found that the stones he gave me were real, I
said I might invest some money in the plant."

"Were the diamonds good?" asked Tom, who was beginning to be interested.

"They were--stones of the first water, though small. An expert gem
merchant, to whom I took them, said he had never seen any diamonds like
them, and he wanted to know where I got them. Of course I did not tell
him.

"To make a long story short, I saw Folwell again, told him to
communicate with his companions, and to tell them that I would agree to
supply the cash needed, if I could share in the diamond making. To this
they agreed, and, after some weeks spent in preparation, a party of us
set out for Phantom Mountain."

"Phantom Mountain?" interrupted Tom. "Where is it?"

"I don't know, exactly--it's somewhere in the Rockies, but the exact
location is a mystery. That is why I need your help. You will soon
understand the reason. Well, as I said, myself, Folwell and the others,
who were not exactly prepossessing sort of men, started west. When we
got to a small town, called Indian Ridge, near Leadville, Colorado,
the men insisted that I must now proceed in secret, and consent to be
blindfolded, as they were not yet ready to reveal the secret of the
place where they made the diamonds.

"I did not want to agree to this, but they insisted, and I gave in,
foolishly perhaps. At any rate I was blindfolded one night, placed in
a wagon, and we drove off into the mountains. After traveling for some
distance I was led, still blindfolded, up a steep trail.

"When the bandage was taken off my eyes I saw that I was in a large
cave. The men were with me, and they apologized for the necessity that
caused them to blindfold me. They said they were ready to proceed with
the making of diamonds, but I must promise not to seek to discover the
secret until they gave me permission, nor was I to attempt to leave the
cave. I had to agree.

"Next they demanded that I give them a large sum, which I had promised
when they showed me, conclusively, that they could make diamonds. I
refused to do this until I had seen some of the precious stones, and
they agreed that this was fair, but said I would have to wait a few
days.

"Well, I waited, and, all that while, I was virtually a prisoner in the
cave. All I could learn was that it was in the midst of a great range,
near the top, and that one of the peaks was called Phantom Mountain.
Why, I did not learn until later.

"At last one night, during a terrific thunder storm, the leader of the
diamond makers--Folwell--announced that I could now see the stones made.
The men had been preparing their chemicals for some days previous. I
was taken into a small chamber of the cave, and there saw quite a
complicated apparatus. Part of it was a great steel box, with a lever on
it.

"We will let you make some diamonds for yourself," Folwell said to me,
and he directed me to pull the lever of the box, at a certain signal.
The signal came, just as a terrific crash of thunder shook the very
mountain inside of which we were. The box of steel got red-hot, and when
it cooled off it was opened, and was given a handful of white stones.

"Were they diamonds?" asked Tom, eagerly.

Mr. Jenks held out one hand. In the palm glittered a large
stone--ostensibly a diamond. In the rays of the moon it showed all the
colors of the rainbow--a beautiful gem. "That is one of the stones I
made--or rather that I supposed I had made," went on Mr. Jenks. "It is
one of several I have, but they have not all been cut and polished as
has this one.

"Naturally I was much impressed by what I saw, and, after I had made
certain tests which convinced me that the stones in the steel box were
diamonds, I paid over the money as I had promised. That was my undoing."

"How?"

"As soon as the men got the cash, they had no further use for me. The
next I remember is eating a rude meal, while we discussed the future of
making diamonds. I knew nothing more until I found myself back in the
small hotel at Indian Ridge, whence I had gone some time previous, with
the men, to the cave in the mountain."

"What happened?" asked Tom, much surprised by the unexpected outcome of
the affair.

"I had been tricked, that was all! As soon as the men had my
money they had no further use for me. They did not want me to learn the
secret of their diamond making, and they drugged me, carried me away
from the cave, and left me in the hotel."

"Didn't you try to find the cave again?"

"I did, but without avail. I spent some time in the Rockies, but no one
could tell where Phantom Mountain was; in fact, few had heard of it, and
I was nearly lost searching for it.

"I came back East, determined to get even. I had given the men a
very large sum of money, and, in exchange, they had given me several
diamonds. Probably the stones are worth nearly as much as the money I
invested, but I was cheated, for I was promised an equal share in the
profits. These were denied me, and I was tricked. I determined to be
revenged, or at least to discover the secret of making diamonds. It is
my right."

"I agree with you," spoke Tom.

"But, up to the time I met you on Earthquake Island, I could form no
plan for discovering Phantom Mountain, and learning the secret of the
diamond makers," went on Mr. Jenks. "I carried the gems about with me,
as you doubtless saw when we were on the island. But I knew I needed an
airship in which to fly over the mountains, and pick out the location of
the cave where the diamonds are made."

"But how can you locate it, if you were blindfolded when you were taken
there, Mr. Jenks?"

"I forgot to tell you that, on our journey into the mountains, and just
before I was carried into the cave, I managed to raise one corner of
the bandage. I caught a glimpse of a very peculiarly shaped cliff--it
is like a great head, standing out in bold relief against the moonlight,
when I saw it. That head of rock is near the cave. It may be the
landmark by which we can locate Phantom Mountain."

"Perhaps," admitted the young inventor.

"What I want to know is this," went on Mr. Jenks. "Will you go with me
on this quest--go in your airship to discover the secret of the diamond
makers? If you will, I will share with you whatever diamonds we can
discover, or make; besides paying all expenses. Will you go, Tom Swift?"

The young inventor did not know what to answer. How far was Mr. Jenks
to be trusted? Were the stones he had real diamonds? Was his story,
fantastical as it sounded--true? Would it be safe for Tom to go?

The lad asked himself these questions. Mr. Jenks saw his hesitation.

"Here," said the strange man, "I will prove what I say. Take this
diamond. I intended it for you, anyhow, for what you did for me on
Earthquake Island. Take it, and--and give it to the person for whom you
were about to purchase a diamond to-night. But, first of all, take it to
a gem expert, and get his opinion. That will prove the truth of what
I say, Tom Swift, and I feel sure that you will cast your lot in with
mine, and help me to discover the secret of Phantom Mountain, and aid me
to get my rights from the diamond makers!"




CHAPTER IV--ANDY FOGER GETS A FRIGHT


Tom Swift considered a few minutes. On the face of it, the proposition
appealed to him. He had been home some time now after his adventures on
Earthquake Island, and he was beginning to long for more excitement. The
search for the mysterious mountain, and the cave of the diamond makers,
might offer a new field for him. But there came to him a certain
distrust of Mr. Jenks.

"I don't like to doubt your word," began Tom, slowly, "but you know,
Mr. Jenks, that some of the greatest chemists have tried in vain to make
diamonds; or, at best, they have made only tiny ones. To think that any
man, or set of men, made real diamonds as large as the ones you have,
doesn't seem--well--" and Tom hesitated.

"You mean you can hardly believe me?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"I guess that's it," assented Tom.

"I don't blame you a bit!" exclaimed the odd man. "In fact, I didn't
believe it when they told me they could make diamonds. But they proved
it to me. I'm ready now to prove it to you."

"I'll tell you what I'll do. Here's this one stone, cut ready for
setting. Here's another, uncut," and Mr. Jenks drew from his pocket
what looked like a piece of crystal. "Take them to any jeweler," he
resumed--"to the one in whose place I saw you to-night. I'll abide by
the verdict you get, and I'll come here to-morrow night, and hear what
you have to say."

"Why do you come at night?" asked Tom, thinking there was something
suspicious in that.

"Because my life might be in danger if I was seen talking to you, and
showing you diamonds in the daytime--especially just now.

"Why at this particular time?"

"For the reason that the diamond makers are on my trail. As long as I
remained quiet, after their shabby treatment of me, and did not try to
discover their secret, they were all right. But, after I realized that
I had been cheated out of my rights, and when I began to make an
investigation, with a view to discovering their secret whereabouts, I
received mysterious and anonymous warnings to stop."

"But I did not. I came East, and tried to get help to discover the cave
of the diamond makers, but I was unsuccessful. I needed an airship, as
I said, and no person who could operate one, would agree to go with
me on the quest. Again I received a warning to drop all search for the
diamond makers, but I persisted, and about a week ago I found I was
being shadowed."

"Shadowed; by whom?" asked Tom.

"By a man I never remember seeing, but who, I have no doubt, is one of
the diamond-making gang."

"Do you think he means you harm?"

"I'm sure of it. That is the reason I have to act so in secret, and come
to see you at night. I don't want those scoundrels to find out what I am
about to do. On my return from Earthquake Island, I again endeavored to
interest an airship man in my plan, but he evidently thought me insane.
Then I thought of you, as I had done before, but I was afraid you, too,
would laugh at my proposition. However, I decided to come here, and I
did. It seemed almost providential that my first view of you was in
a jewelry shop, looking at diamonds. I took it as a good omen. Now it
remains with you. May I call here to-morrow night, and get your answer?"

Tom Swift made up his mind quickly. After all it would be easy enough to
find out if the diamonds were real. If they were, he could then decide
whether or not to go with Mr. Jenks on the mysterious quest. So he
answered:

"I'll consider the matter, Mr. Jenks. I'll meet you here to-morrow
night. In the meanwhile, for my own satisfaction, I'll let an expert
look at these stones."

"Get the greatest diamond expert in the world, and he'll pronounce them
perfect!" predicted the odd man. "Now I'll bid you goodnight, and be
going. I'll be here at this time to-morrow."

As Mr. Jenks turned aside there was a movement among the trees in the
orchard, and a shadowy figure was seen hurrying away.

"Who's that?" asked the diamond man, in a hoarse whisper. "Did you see
that, Tom Swift? Some one was here--listening to what I said! Perhaps it
was the man who has been shadowing me!"

"I think not. I guess it was Eradicate Sampson, a colored man who does
work for us," said Tom. "Is that you, Rad?" he called.

"Yais, sah, Massa Tom, heah I is!" answered the voice of the negro,
but it came from an entirely different direction than that in which the
shadowy figure had been seen.

"Where are you, Rad?" called the young inventor.

"Right heah," was the reply, and the colored man came from the direction
of the stable. "I were jest out seein' if mah mule Boomerang were all
right. Sometimes he's restless, an' don't sleep laik he oughter."

"Then that wasn't you over in the orchard?" asked Tom, in some
uneasiness.

"No, sah, I ain't been in de orchard. I were sleepin' in mah shack, till
jest a few minutes ago, when I got up, an' went in t' see Boomerang.
I had a dream dat some coon were tryin t' steal him, an' it sort ob
'sturbed me, laik."

"If it wasn't your man, it was some one else," said Mr. Jenks,
decidedly.

"We'll have a look!" exclaimed Tom. "Here, Rad, come over and scurry
among those trees. We just saw some one sneaking around."

"I'll sure do dat!" cried the colored man. "Mebby it were somebody arter
Boomerang! I'll find 'em."

"I don't believe it was any one after the mule," murmured Mr. Jenks,
"but it certainly was some one--more likely some one after me."

The three made a hasty search among the trees, but the intruder had
vanished, leaving no trace. They went out into the road, which the moon
threw into bold relief along its white stretch, but there was no figure
scurrying away.

"Whoever it was, is gone," spoke Tom. "You can go back to bed, Rad,"
for the colored man, of late, had been sleeping in a shack on the Swift
premises.

"And I guess it's time for me to go, too," added Mr. Jenks. "I'll be
here to-morrow night, Tom, and I hope your answer will be favorable."

Tom did not sleep well the remainder of the night, for his fitful
slumbers were disturbed by dreams of enormous caves, filled with
diamonds, with dark, shadowy figures trying to put him into a red-hot
steel box. Once he awakened with a start, and put his hand under his
pillow to feel if the two stones Mr. Jenks had given him, were still
there. They had not been disturbed.

Tom made up his mind to find out if the stones were really diamonds,
before saying anything to his father about the chance of going to seek
Phantom Mountain. And the young inventor wished to get the opinion of
some other jeweler than Mr. Track--at least, at first.

"Though if this one proves to be a good gem, I'll have Mr. Track set it
in a brooch, and give it to Mary for her birthday," decided the young
inventor. "Guess I'll take a run over to Chester in the Butterfly, and
see what one of the jewelers there has to say."

In addition to his big airship, Red Cloud, Tom owned a small, swift
monoplane, which he called Butterfly. This had been damaged by Andy
Foger just before Tom left on the trip that ended at Earthquake Island,
but the monoplane had been repaired, and Andy had left town, not having
returned since.

Telling his father that he was going off on a little business trip,
which he often did in his aeroplane, Tom, with the aid of Mr. Jackson,
the engineer, wheeled the Butterfly out of its shed.

Adjusting the mechanism, and seeing that it was in good shape, Tom took
his place in one of the two seats, for the monoplane would carry two.
Mr. Jackson then spun the propellers, and, with a crackle and roar the
motor started. Over the ground ran the dainty, little aeroplane, until,
having momentum enough, Tom tilted the wing planes and the machine
sailed up into the air.

Rising about a thousand feet, and circling about several times to test
the wind currents, Tom headed his craft toward Chester, a city about
fifty miles from Shopton. In his pocket, snugly tucked away, were the
two stones Mr. Jenks had given him.

It was not long before Tom saw, looming up in the distance the church
spires and towering factory chimneys of Chester, for his machine was a
speedy one, and could make ninety miles an hour when driven. But now a
slower speed satisfied our hero.

"I'll just drop down outside of the city," he reasoned, "for too much
of a crowd gathers when I land in the street. Besides I might frighten
horses, and then, too, it's hard to get a good start from the street.
I'll leave it in some barn until I want to go back."

Tom sent his craft down, in order to pick out a safe place for a
landing. He was then over the suburbs of the city, and was following the
line of a straight country road.

"Looks like a good place there," he murmured. "I'll shut off the motor,
and vol-plane down."

Suiting the action to the word, Tom shut off his power. The little craft
dipped toward the ground, but the lad threw up the forward planes, and
caught a current of air that sent him skimming along horizontally.

As he got nearer to the ground, he saw the figure of a lad riding a
bicycle along the country highway. Something about the figure struck Tom
as being familiar, and he recognized the cyclist a moment later.

"It's Andy Foger!" said Tom, in a whisper. "I wondered where he had been
keeping himself since he damaged the Butterfly. Evidently he doesn't
dare venture back to Shopton. Well, here's where I give him a scare."

Tom's monoplane was making no more noise, now, than a soaring bird. He
was gliding swiftly toward the earth, and, with the plan in his mind of
administering some sort of punishment to the bully, he aimed the machine
directly at him.

Nearer and nearer shot the monoplane, as quietly as a sheet of paper
might fall. Andy pedaled on, never looking up nor behind him, A moment
later, as Tom threw up his headplanes, to make his landing more easy,
and just as he swooped down at one side of the cyclist, our hero let out
a most alarming yell, right into Andy's ear.

"Now I've got you!" he shouted. "I'll teach you to slash my aeroplane!
Come with me!"

Andy gave one look at the white bird-like apparatus that had flown up
beside him so noiselessly, and, being too frightened to recognize Tom's
voice, must have thought that he had been overtaken by some supernatural
visitor.

Andy gave a yell like an Indian, about to do a stage scalping act, and
fairly dived over the handlebars of his bicycle, sprawling in a heap on
the dusty road.

"I guess that will hold you for a while," observed Tom, grimly, as he
put on the ground-brake and brought his monoplane to a stop not far from
the fallen rider.




CHAPTER V--A MYSTERIOUS MAN


For several minutes Andy Foger did not arise. He remained prostrate in
the dust, and Tom, observing him, thought perhaps the bully might have
been seriously injured. But, a little later, Andy cautiously raised his
head, and inquired in a frightened voice:

"Is it--is it gone?"

"Is what gone?" asked Tom, grimly.

At the sound of his voice, Andy looked up. "Was that you, Tom Swift?" he
demanded. "Did you knock me off my wheel?"

"My monoplane and I together did," was the reply; "or, rather, we
didn't. It was the nervous reaction caused by your fright, and
the knowledge that you had done wrong, that made you jump over the
handlebars. That's the scientific explanation."

"You--you did it!" stammered Andy, getting to his feet. He wasn't hurt
much, Tom thought.

"Have it your own way," resumed our hero. "Did you think it was a
hob-goblin in a chariot of fire after you, Andy?"

"Huh! Never mind what I thought! I'll have you arrested for this!"

"Will you? Delighted, as the boys say. Hop in my airship and I'll take
you right into town. And when I get you there I'll make a charge of
malicious mischief against you, for breaking the propeller of the
Butterfly and slashing her wings. I've mended her up, however, so she
goes better than ever, and I can take you to the police station in jig
time. Want to come, Andy?"

This was too much for the bully. He knew that Tom would have a clear
case against him, and he did not dare answer. Instead he shuffled over
to where his wheel lay, picked it up, and rode slowly off.

"Good riddance," murmured Tom. He looked about, and saw that he was near
a house, in the rear of which was a good-sized barn. "Guess I'll ask
if I can leave the Butterfly there," he murmured, and, ringing the
doorbell, he was greeted by a man.

"I'll pay you if you'll let me store my machine in the barn a little
while, until I go into the city, and return," spoke the lad.

"Indeed, you're welcome to leave it there without pay," was the answer.
"I'm interested in airships, and, I'll consider it a favor if you'll let
me look yours over while it's here."

Tom readily agreed, and a few minutes later he had caught a trolley
going into the city. He was soon in one of the largest jewelry stores of
Chester.

"I'd like to get an expert opinion as to whether or not those stones are
diamonds," spoke Tom, to the polite clerk who came up to wait on him,
and our hero handed over the two gems which Mr. Jenks had given him.
"I'm willing to pay for the appraisement, of course," the young inventor
added, as he saw the clerk looking rather doubtfully at him, for Tom had
on a rough suit, which he always donned when he flew in his monoplane.

"I'll turn them over to our Mr. Porter, a gem expert," said the clerk.
"Please be seated."

The young man disappeared into a private office with the stones, and Tom
waited. He wondered if he was going to have his trouble for his pains.
Presently two elderly gentlemen came from the little room, on the glass
door of which appeared the word "Diamonds."

"Who brought these stones in?" asked one of the men, evidently the
proprietor, from the deference paid him by the clerk. The latter
motioned to Tom.

"Will you kindly step inside here?" requested the elderly man. When the
door was closed, Tom found himself in a room which was mostly taken up
with a bench for the display of precious stones, a few chairs, and some
lights arranged peculiarly; while various scales and instruments stood
on a table.

"You wished an opinion on--on these?" queried the proprietor of the
place. Tom noticed at once that the word "diamonds" was not used.

"I wanted to find out if they were of any value," he said. "Are they
diamonds?"

"Would you mind stating where you got them?" asked the other of the two
men.

"Is that necessary?" inquired the lad. "I came by them in a legitimate
manner, if that's what you mean, and I can satisfy you on that point.
I am willing to pay for any information you may give me as to their
value."

"Oh, it isn't that," the proprietor hastened to assure him. "But these
are diamonds of such a peculiar kind, so perfect and without a flaw,
that I wondered from what part of the world they came."

"Then they are diamonds?" asked Tom, eagerly.

"The finest I have ever tested!" declared the other man, evidently Mr.
Porter, the gem expert. "They are a joy to look at, Mr. Roberts," he
went on, turning to the proprietor. "If it is possible to get a supply
of them you would be justified in asking half as much again as we charge
for African or Indian diamonds. The Kimberly products are not to be
compared to these," and he looked at the two stones in his hand--the one
cut, and sparkling brilliantly, the other in a rough state.

"Do you care to state where these diamonds came from?" asked Mr.
Roberts, looking critically at Tom.

"I had rather not," answered the lad. "It is enough for me to know that
they are diamonds. How much is your charge?"

"Nothing," was the unexpected answer. "We are very glad to have had the
opportunity of seeing such stones. Is there any chance of getting any
more?"

"Perhaps," answered Tom, as he accepted the gems which the expert held
out to him.

"Then might we speak for a supply?" went on Mr. Roberts, eagerly. "We
will pay you the full market price."

"What is the value of these stones?" asked Tom.

Mr. Roberts looked at his gem expert.

"It is difficult to say," was the answer of the man who had handed Tom
the gems. "They are so far superior to the usual run of diamonds, that
I feel justified in saying that the cut one would bring fifteen hundred
dollars, anywhere. In fact, I would offer that for it. The other is
larger, though what it would lose in cutting would be hard to say. I
should say it was worth two thousand dollars as it is now."

"Thirty-five hundred dollars for these two stones!" exclaimed Tom.

"They are worth every cent of it," declared Mr. Roberts. "Do you want to
sell?"

Tom shook his head. He could scarcely believe the good news. Mr. Jenks
had told the truth. Now the young inventor could go with him to seek the
diamond makers.

"Can you get any more of these?" went on Mr. Roberts.

"I think so--that is I don't know--I am going to try," answered the lad.

"Then if you succeed I wish you would sell us some," fairly begged the
proprietor of the store.

"I will," promised Tom, but he little knew what lay before him, or
perhaps he would not have made that promise. He thanked the diamond
merchant for his kindness, and arranged to have the cut stone set in a
pin for Miss Nestor. The uncut gem Tom took away with him.

Thinking of many things, and wondering how best to start in his airship
Red Cloud for the mysterious Phantom Mountain, Tom hurried back to where
he had left the monoplane, wheeled it out, and was soon soaring through
the air toward Shopton.

"I think I'll go with Mr. Jenks," he decided, as he prepared for a
landing in the open space near his aeroplane shed. "It will be a
risky trip, perhaps, but I've taken risks before. When Mr. Jenks comes
to-night I'll tell him I'll help him to get his rights, and discover the
secret of the diamond makers."

As Tom was wheeling the Butterfly into the shed, Eradicate came out to
help him.

"Dere's a gen'man here to see yo', Massa Tom," said the colored man.

"Who is it?"

"I dunno. He keep askin' ef yo' de lad what done bust up Earthquake
Island, an' send lightnin' flashes up to de sky, an' all sech questions
laik dat."

"It isn't Mr. Damon; is it, Rad? He hasn't been around in some time."

"No, Massa Tom, it ain't him. I knows dat blessin' man good an' proper.
I jest wish he'd bless mah mule Boomerang some day, an' take some oh
de temper out ob him. No, sah, it ain't Massa Damon. De gen'man's in de
airship shed waitin' fo' you."

"In the airship shed! No strangers are allowed in there, Rad."

"I knows it, Massa Tom, but he done persisted his se'f inter it, an'
he wouldn't come out when I told him; an' your pa an' Mr. Jackson ain't
home."

"I'll see about this," exclaimed Tom, striding to the large shed, where
the Red Cloud was kept. As he entered it he saw a man looking over the
wonderful craft.

"Did you want to see me?" asked Tom, sharply, for he did not like
strangers prowling around.

"I did, and I apologize for entering here, but I am interested in
airships, and I thought you might want to hire a pilot. I am in need
of employment, and I have had considerable to do with balloons and
aeroplanes, but never with an airship like this, which combines the two
features. Do you wish to hire any one."

"No, I don't!" replied Tom, sharply, for he did not like the looks of
the man.

"I was told that you did," was the rather surprising answer.

"Who told you?"

The man looked all around the shed, before replying, as if fearful of
being overheard. Then, stepping close to Tom, he whispered:

"Mr. Jenks told me!"

"Mr. Jenks?" Tom could not conceal his astonishment.

"Yes. Mr. Barcoe Jenks. But I did not come here to merely ask you for
employment. I would like to hire out to you, but the real object of my
visit was to say this to you."

The man approached still closer to Tom, and, in a lower voice, and one
that could scarcely be heard, he fairly hissed:

"Don't go with Barcoe Jenks to seek the diamond makers!"

Then, before Tom could put out a hand to detain him, had the lad so
wished, the man turned suddenly, and fairly ran from the shed.




CHAPTER VI--MR. DAMON IS ON HAND


The young inventor stood almost spellbound for a few moments. Then
recovering himself he made a dash for the door through which the
mysterious man had disappeared. Tom saw him sprinting down the road, and
was half-minded to take after him, but a cooler thought warned him that
he had better not.

"He may be one of those men who are on Mr. Jenks' trail," reasoned Tom,
in which case it might not be altogether safe to attempt to stop him,
and make him explain. Or he may be a lunatic, and in that case it
wouldn't be altogether healthy to interfere with him.

"I'll just let him go, and tell Mr. Jenks about him when he comes
to-night. But I must warn Rad never to let him in here again. He might
damage the airship."

Calling to the colored man, Tom pointed to the stranger, who was almost
out of sight down the road, and said earnestly:

"Rad, do you see that fellow?"

"I sho do, Massa Tom, but I sorter has t' strain my eyes t' do it. He's
goin' laik my mule Boomerang does when he's comm' home t' dinnah."

"That's right, Rad. Well, never let that man set foot inside our fence
again! If he comes, and I'm home, call me. If I'm away, call dad or Mr.
Jackson, and if you're here alone, drive him away, somehow."

"I will, Massa Tom!" exclaimed the colored man, earnestly, "an' if I
can't do it alone, I'll get Boomerang t' help. Once let dat ar' mule
git his heels on a pusson, an' dat pusson ain't goin' t' come bodderin'
around any mo'--that is, not right away."

"I believe you, Rad. Well, keep a lookout for him, and don't let him
in," and with that Tom entered the house to think over matters. They
were beginning to assume an aspect he did not altogether like. Not that
Tom was afraid of danger, but he preferred to meet it in the open, and
the warning, or threat, of the mysterious man disquieted him.

When Mr. Swift came home, a little later, his son told him of the
midnight interview with Mr. Jenks, for, up to this time, the aged
inventor was unaware of it, and Tom also gave an account of the
diamonds, speaking of their value.

"And do you propose to go to Phantom Mountain, in search of the makers
of these gems, Tom?" asked Mr. Swift.

"I had about decided to do so, dad."

"And you're going in the Red Cloud?'

"Yes."

"Who are going with you?"

"Well, Mr. Jenks will go, of course, and I've no doubt but that if I
mention the prospective trip to Mr. Damon, that he'll bless his skating
cap, or something like that, and come along."

"I suppose so, Tom, and I'd like to have you take him. But I think
you'll need some one else."

"Because, from what you have told me, you are going out to a dangerous
part of the country, and you may have to deal with unscrupulous men.
Three of you are hardly enough to cope with them. You ought to have at
least another member of your party. If I was not busy on my invention of
a new wireless motor I would go along, but I can't leave. You might take
Mr. Jackson."

"No, you need him here to help you, dad."

"How about Eradicate?"

Tom smiled.

"Rad would get homesick for his mule Boomerang, and I'd have to bring
him back just when we'd found the diamonds," replied the young inventor.
"No, we'll have to think of some one else. I'll ask Mr. Damon, and then
I'll consider matters further. I expect to see Mr. Jenks to-night, and
he may have some one in mind."

"Perhaps that will be a good plan. Well, Tom, I trust you will take good
care of yourself, and not run into unnecessary danger. Is the Red Cloud
in good shape for the voyage?"

"It needs looking over. I'm going to get right at it."

"It's a pretty indefinite sort of a quest you're going on, Tom, my son.
How do you expect to find Phantom Mountain?"

"Well, it's going to be quite a task. In the first place we'll head for
Leadville, Colorado, and then we'll go to Indian Ridge and make some
inquiries. We may get on the track of the place that way. If we don't,
why I'll take the airship up as high as is necessary and sort of
prospect until we see that big cliff that's shaped like a head. That
will give us something to go by."

"Well, do the best you can. If you can discover the secret of making
diamonds it will be a valuable one."

"I guess it will, dad; and Mr. Jenks is entitled to know it, for he paid
his good money to that end. He has promised to go halves with me, as
payment for the use of the airship, and I must say the two diamonds he
gave me last night have proved very valuable."

"Two diamonds, Tom? You only showed me one, an uncut gem;" and Mr. Swift
looked at his son.

"Oh, the other--er--the other is--I left it with a jeweler," and Tom
blushed a trifle, as he thought of the present he contemplated making to
Mary Nestor.

That afternoon, as Tom was out in the shed of the Red Cloud looking over
the airship, to see what would be necessary to do to it in order to get
it in shape for a long trip, he heard voices outside.

"Yes--yes, I know the way in perfectly well," he caught. "You needn't
bother to come, my good fellow. Just step this way, and I'll show you
something worth seeing."

"I wonder if it's that mysterious man coming back?" thought Tom. He
dropped the tool he was using, and hurried to the door. As he approached
it he heard the voice continue.

"Why bless my shoe laces, Mr. Parker! You'll see a wonderful airship, I
promise you. Wonderful! Bless my hatband, but I hope Tom is here!"

"Mr. Damon!" exclaimed our hero, as he recognized the tones of his
eccentric friend. "But who is with him?"

A moment later he caught sight of the gentleman who was always blessing
himself, or something. Behind him stood another man, whose features Tom
could not see plainly.

"Hello, Tom Swift!" called Mr. Damon. "Looking over the Red Cloud, eh?
Does that mean you're off on another trip?"

"I guess it does," answered the lad.

"Where to this time? if I may ask."

"I'm thinking of going off to the mountains to find a band of men
engaged in making diamonds," replied Tom.

"Making diamonds! Bless my finger ring! Making diamonds! A trip to the
mountains! Bless my disposition! but do you know I'd like to go with
you!"

"I was thinking of asking you, Mr. Damon."

"Were you? Bless my heart, I'm glad you thought of me. You don't by any
possible chance want another person; do you?"

"We were thinking of having four in the party, Mr. Damon," and Tom
wondered who was with his eccentric friend.

"Then bless my election ticket! This is the very chance for you, Mr.
Parker!" cried Mr. Damon. "Will you go with us? It will be just what you
need," and Mr. Damon stepped aside, revealing to Tom the features of Mr.
Ralph Parker, the scientist who had correctly predicted the destruction
of Earthquake Island.




CHAPTER VII--MR. PARKER PREDICTS


Tom Swift was a most generous lad, but when he saw that Mr. Damon had
with him Mr. Parker, the gloomy scientist, who seemed to take delight in
predicting disasters, our hero's spirits were not exactly of the best.
He would have much preferred not to take Mr. Parker on the quest for the
diamond makers, but, since Mr. Damon had mentioned it, he did not see
how he could very well refuse.

"But perhaps he won't care to go," thought Tom.

He was undeceived a moment later, however, for the scientist remarked:

I am very glad to meet you once more, Mr. Swift. I have scarcely thanked
you enough for what you did for us in erecting your wireless station on
Earthquake Island, which, as you recall, I predicted would sink into
the sea. It did, I am glad to say, not because I like to see islands
destroyed, but because science has been vindicated. Now I have just
heard you remark that you are about to set off to the mountains in
search of some men who are making diamonds. I need hardly state that
this is utterly useless, for no diamonds, commercially valuable, can be
made by men. But the trip may be valuable in that it will permit me to
demonstrate some scientific facts.

"Therefore, if you will permit me, I will be very glad to accompany you
and Mr. Damon. I shall be delighted, in short, and I can start as soon
as you are ready."

"There's no hope for it!" thought Tom, dismally. "I suppose he'll wake
up every morning, and predict that before night the world will come to
an end, or he'll prophesy that the airship will blow up, and vanish,
when about seven miles above the clouds. Well, there's no way out of it,
so here goes."

Thereupon Tom welcomed the scientist as cordially as he could, and
invited him to form one of the party that would set off in the airship
to search for Phantom Mountain.

"Bless my jewelry box!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, when this formality was
over. "Tell me more about it, Tom."

Which our hero did, stating the need of maintaining secrecy on account
of the danger to Mr. Jenks. Mr. Damon and Mr. Parker both agreed to say
nothing about the matter, and then the scientist became much interested
in the Red Cloud, which he closely examined. He even complimented Tom on
the skill shown in making it, and, contrary to our hero's expectation,
did not predict that it would blow up the next time it was used.

"How did you happen to arrive just at this time, Mr. Damon?" asked Tom.

"It was partly due to Mr. Parker," was the answer. "I had not seen him
since we were rescued from the island, until a few days ago he called
on me at my home. I happened to mention that you lived near here, and
suggested that he might like to see some of your inventions. He agreed,
and we came over in my auto. And now, bless my liver-pin! I find you
about to start off on another trip."

"And have you fully decided to go with me?" asked Tom. "There may be
danger, and I don't like the way that mysterious man behaved."

"Oh, bless my revolver!" cried Mr. Damon. "I'm used to danger by this
time. Of course I'm going, and so is Mr. Parker. Do you know," and the
man, who was always blessing something, came closer to the lad, and
whispered: "Do you know, Tom, Mr. Parker is a very peculiar individual."

"I'm sure of it," answered the young inventor, looking at the gentleman
in question, who was then inside the airship cabin.

"But he's all right, even if he is predicting unpleasant things," went
on Mr. Damon. "I think we'll get better acquainted with him after a
bit."

"I hope so," agreed Tom, but he did not realize then how close his
companionship with Mr. Parker was to be, nor what dangers they were to
share later.

The friends talked at considerable length of the prospective trip, and
Tom, by this time, had ascertained what needed to be done to the airship
to get it in shape to travel. It would take about a week, and, in the
meanwhile, Mr. Damon would go home and get his affairs in order for
the voyage. Tom's father was introduced to Mr. Parker, and, the former,
finding that the scientist held some views in common with him, invited
the gloomy predictor to remain at the Swift home until the Red Cloud was
ready to sail. Tom could not repress a groan at this, but he decided he
would have to make the best of it.

Mr. Damon left for home that afternoon, promising to be on hand at the
time set to start for Phantom Mountain.

Tom was up waiting for Mr. Jenks at twelve o'clock that night. Shortly
after the hour he saw a dark figure steal into the orchard. At first he
feared lest it might be one of the spies who were, he was now convinced,
on the trail of the man who was seeking to discover the secret of the
diamond makers. But a whistle, which came to the lad's ear a moment
later (that being a signal Mr. Jenks had agreed to sound), told Tom that
it was none other than the visitor he expected.

"All right, Mr. Jenks, I'm here," called Tom, cautiously. "Come over
this way," and he went out from the shadow of the house, where he had
been waiting, and met the men. "We'll go into my private work-shop," the
youth added, leading the way.

"Have you decided to go with me?" asked Mr. Jenks, in an anxious
whisper. "Did you find the diamonds to be real ones?"

"I did; and I'm going," spoke Tom.

"Good! That relieves my mind. But we are still in danger. I was followed
by my shadower to-day, and only succeeded in shaking him off just before
coming here. I don't believe he knows what I am about to do."

"Oh, yes he does," said Tom.

"He does? How?"

"Because he was here, and warned me against you!"

"You don't mean it! Well, they are getting desperate! We must be on our
guard. What sort of a man was he?"

Tom described the fellow, and Mr. Jenks stated that this tallied with
the appearance of the person who had been shadowing him.

"But we'll fool them yet!" cried Tom, who had now fully entered into the
spirit of the affair. "If they can follow us in the Red Cloud they're
welcome to. I think we'll get ahead of them."

He then told of Mr. Damon and Mr. Parker, and Mr. Jenks agreed that
it would add to the strength of the party to take these two gentlemen
along.

"Though I can't say I care so much for Mr. Parker," he added. "But now
as to ways and means. When can we start?"

Thereupon he and Tom talked over details in the seclusion of the little
office, and arranged to leave Shopton in about a week. In the meanwhile
the airship would be overhauled, stocked with supplies and provisions,
and be made ready for a swift dash to the mountains.

"And now I must be going," said Mr. Jenks. "I have a great deal to do
before I can start on this trip, and I hope I am not prevented by any of
those men who seem to be trailing me."

"How could they prevent you?" Tom wanted to know.

"Oh, there are any number of ways," was the answer. "But I'm glad you
found that my diamonds were real. We'll soon have plenty, if all goes
well."

As Mr. Jenks left the shop, he started back, in some alarm.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom.

"Over there--I thought I saw a figure sneaking along under the
trees--that man--perhaps--"

"That's Eradicate, our colored helper," replied Tom, with a laugh.
"I posted him there to see that no strangers came into the orchard.
Everything all right, Rad?" he asked, raising his voice.

"Yais, sah, Massa Tom. Nobody been around yeah this night."

"That's good. You can go to bed now," and Eradicate, yawning loudly,
went to his shack. A little later Tom sought his own room, Mr. Jenks
having hurried off to town, where he was boarding.

The next few days saw Tom busily engaged on the airship, making some
changes and a few repairs that were needed. His father, Eradicate and
Mr. Jackson helped him. As for Mr. Parker, the scientist, he went about
the place, being much interested in the various machines which Tom or
Mr. Swift had patented.

At other times the scientist would stroll about the extensive grounds,
making what he said were "observations." One afternoon Tom saw him,
apparently much excited, kneeling down back of a shed, with his ear to
the ground.

"What is the matter?" asked the lad, thinking perhaps Mr. Parker might
be ill.

"Have you ever had any earthquakes here, Tom Swift?" asked the
scientist, quietly.

"Earthquakes? No. We had enough of them on the island."

"And you are going to have one here, in about two minutes!" cried Mr.
Parker. "I predict that this place will be shaken by a tremendous shock
very soon. We had all better get away from the vicinity of buildings."

"What makes you think there will be an earthquake?" asked Tom.

"Because I can hear the rumbling beneath the ground at this very minute.
It is increasing in volume, showing that the tremors are working this
way. There will soon be a great subterranean upheaval! Listen for
yourself."

Tom cast himself down on the grass. Placing his ear close to the ground
he did hear a series of dull thuds. He arose, not a little alarmed.
There had never been any earthquakes in Shopton, yet he had great
respect for Mr. Parker's scientific attainments.

Just then Eradicate Sampson came along. He saw Tom and Mr. Parker lying
flat on the ground, and surprise showed on his honest, black face.

"Fo' de land sakes!" cried Eradicate. "What am de mattah now, Massa
Tom?"

"Earthquake coming," answered Tom, briefly. "Better get away from the
buildings, Rad. They might fall!" Tom's face showed the alarm he felt.
What would happen to all of his valuable machines--to the Red Cloud?

"Earthquake?" murmured Eradicate, and he, too, cast himself down to
listen. A moment later he arose with a laugh.

"What's the matter?" cried Tom.

"Why, dat ain't no earthquake!" declared the colored man.

"No. Then perhaps you know what it is," said Mr. Parker, somewhat
sharply.

"Course I knows what it am," answered Eradicate, with dignity. "Dat
noise am my mule Boomerang, kickin' in his stable, on account oh me not
feedin' him yet. Dat's what it am. I'se gwine right now t' gib him his
oats, and den yo' see dat de noise stop. Boomerang allers kick dat way
when he's hungry. I show yo'!"

And, sure enough, when Eradicate had gone to the mule's stable,
which was near where Mr. Parker had heard the mysterious sounds, they
immediately ceased.

"Dat mule was all de earthquake dere was around here," said the colored
man as he came out.

Mr. Parker walked away, saying nothing, and Tom did not make any
comments--just then.




CHAPTER VIII--OFF FOR THE WEST


It was a great relief to Tom, to find that there was no danger from an
earth tremor. Now that he had made up his mind to go in search of
the diamond makers, he wanted nothing to interfere with it. Lest the
feelings of Mr. Parker might be hurt by the mistake he had made, the
young inventor cautioned Eradicate not to say anything more about the
matter.

"'Deed an' I won't," the colored man promised. "I'se only too glad dere
wa'n't no earthquake, dat's what I is."

As for Mr. Parker, he did not appear much put out by his error in
predicting.

"I am sure that what I heard was a tremor, due to some distant
earthquake shock," he said. "The mule's kicking was only a coincidence."

And Tom let him have his way about it. The week was drawing to a close,
and the Red Cloud was nearly in shape for the voyage. At almost the
last minute Tom found that he needed some electrical apparatus for the
airship, and as he had to go to Chester for it, he decided he would make
the trip in his monoplane, and, while in the city, would also get the
diamond pin he was having made for Mary Nestor.

He started off early one morning, in the swift little craft Butterfly,
and soon had reached Chester. The diamond brooch was ready for him.

"It is one of the most beautiful stones we have ever set," the diamond
merchant told him. "Don't forget, if you find any more, Mr. Swift, to
let us have a chance to bid on them."

"I may," Tom promised, rather indefinitely. Then, having purchased his
electrical supplies, he made a quick trip to Shopton, stopping on the
way to call on Miss Nestor.

"Why Tom, I'm delighted to see you!" cried the girl, blushing prettily.
"Did you come for some apple turnovers?" and she laughed, as she
referred to a call Tom had once paid, when a new cook had been engaged,
and when the pastry formed a feature of the meal.

"No turnovers this time," said the young inventor. "I came to wish you
many happy returns of the day."

"Oh, you remembered my birthday! How nice of you!"

"And here is something else," added our hero, rather awkwardly, as he
handed her the diamond pin.

"Oh, Tom! This for me! Oh, it's too lovely--it's far too much!"

"It isn't half enough!" he declared, warmly.

"Oh, what a large diamond!" Mary cried as she saw the sparkling stone.
"I never saw one so large and beautiful!"

"It's just as easy to make them large as small," explained Tom.

"Make them?" she looked the surprise she felt.

"Yes, I'm about to start for the place where diamonds are made."

"Oh, Tom! But isn't it dangerous? I mean won't you have to go to some
far country--like Africa--to get to where diamonds are made?"

"Well, we are going on quite a trip, but not as far as that. And as
for the danger--well, we'll have to take what comes," and he told her
something of the proposed quest.

"Oh, it sounds--sounds scary!" Mary exclaimed, when she had heard of Mr.
Jenks' experience. "Do be careful, Tom!"

"I will," he promised, and, somehow he was glad that she had cautioned
him thus--and in such tones as she had used. For Mary Nestor was a girl
that any young chap would have been glad to have manifest an interest in
him.

"Well, I guess I'll have to say good-by," spoke Tom, at length. "We
expect to start in a couple of days, and I may not get another chance to
see you."

"Oh, I--I hope you come back safely," faltered Mary, and then she held
out her hand, and Tom--well, it's none of our affair what Tom did
after that, except to say that he hurried out, fairly jumped into his
monoplane, and completed the trip home.

As the Red Cloud has been fully described in the volume entitled "Tom
Swift and His Airship," we will not go into details about it now.
Sufficient to say that it was a combination of a biplane and dirigible
balloon. It could be used either as one or the other, and the gas-bag
feature was of value when the wind was too great to allow the use of the
planes, or when the motive power, for some reason stopped. In that event
the airship could remain suspended far above the clouds if necessary.
There was provision for manufacturing the gas on board.

The Red Cloud was fitted up to accommodate about ten persons, though it
was seldom that this number was carried. Two persons could successfully
operate the machinery. There were sleeping berths, and in the main cabin
a sitting-room, a dining-room, and a kitchen. There was also the motor
compartment, and a steering tower, from which the engines could be
controlled.

It was in this craft that the seekers after the diamond makers proposed
undertaking the trip. Mr. Damon came on from his home in Waterfield
about two days before the date set to leave, and Mr. Jenks, had, three
days before this, taken up his abode at the Swift home. Mr. Parker, as
has been stated, was already there, and he had put in his time making
a number of scientific observations, though he had made no more
predictions.

Nothing more had been seen of the mysterious man who had warned Tom,
and the young inventor and Mr. Jenks began to hope that they had thrown
their enemies off the track.

"Though I don't imagine they'll give up altogether," said Mr. Jenks.
"They're too desperate for that. We'll have trouble with them yet."

"Well, it can't be helped," decided Tom. "We'll try and be ready for it,
when it comes," and then, dismissing the matter from his mind, he busied
himself about the airship.

The food and supplies had all been put aboard, and they expected to
start the next morning. In order to make sure that any stones which they
might succeed in getting from the diamond makers were real gems, a set
of testing apparatus was taken along. Mr. Parker had had some experience
in this line, and, in spite of the fact that he might make direful
predictions, Tom was rather glad, after all, that the scientist was
going to accompany them.

"But what is worrying me," said Mr. Damon, "is what we are going to do
after we get to Phantom Mountain. What are your plans, Mr. Jenks? Will
you go in, and demand your share of the diamond-making business?"

"I have a right to it, as I invested a large sum in it, and I am
entitled to more than a half-share. But, of course, I can't say what
I'll do until I get there. We may have to act very secretly."

"I'm inclined to think we will," said Tom. "My plan would be to gain
access to the cave, if possible, and watch them at work. We might be
able to discover the secret of making diamonds, and, after all, that's
what you want, isn't it, Mr. Jenks?"

"Yes, I paid my money for the secret, and I ought to have it. If I can
get it quietly, so much the better. If not, I'll fight for my rights!"
and he looked very determined.

"Bless my powder horn!" cried Mr. Damon. "That's the way to talk! And
so we're to go cruising about in the air, looking for a mountain shaped
like a man's head."

"That's it," agreed Mr. Jenks, "and when we find it we will be near
Phantom Mountain, and the diamond makers."

The final details were completed that night. The last of the supplies
had been put aboard, the larder was well stocked, the diamond testing
apparatus was stored safely away, and all that remained was for the
adventurers to board the Red Cloud in the morning, and soar away.

That night Tom was uneasy. Several times he got up, and looked toward
the shed where the airship was stored. He could not rid himself of
the idea that the men to whose interest it was that the diamond-making
secret remain undiscovered, might attempt to wreck the airship before
the start. Consequently both Eradicate Sampson and Engineer Jackson were
on guard. Tom looked from his window, to the shed where the Red Cloud
was housed. He saw nothing to cause him any uneasiness.

"I guess I'm just nervous," he mused. "But, all the same, I'll be glad
when we've started."

They were all up early the next morning, Mr. Damon beginning the day by
blessing the sunrise, and many other things that struck his fancy.
The airship was wheeled out of the shed, and Tom gave her a final
inspection.

"It's all right," he declared. "All aboard!"

"Now, do be careful," begged Mr. Swift. "Don't take too many chances,
Tom."

"I'll not."

The adventurers were in the forward part of the ship, and Tom had taken
his place at the wheels and levers in the pilot house. As he was about
to start the motor he looked toward the road, and saw a horse and
carriage. In the vehicle was a girlish figure, at the sight of which Tom
blushed and smiled. He waved his hand.

"I came to wish you good luck!" cried Mary Nestor, for it was she in the
carriage.

"Thanks!" cried Tom, leaning from the window of the pilot house. "It was
good of you to get up so early."

"Oh. I'm always up early," she informed him.

"Look out that the motor doesn't scare your horse," Tom warned her.

"Old Dobbin doesn't mind anything," was her answer. "I'll see that he
doesn't run away with me, as long as you're not on earth to rescue me.
Good-by, Tom!"

"Good-by!" he called, and then he pulled the lever that set in motion
the motor, and whirled the great propellers about. They whizzed around
with a roar, and the Red Cloud, shivering and trembling with the
vibration, rose in the air like some great bird.

"We're off for the West and Phantom Mountain!" called Tom to his
companions.

As the airship soared upward, Eradicate Sampson ran forward from where
he had been standing near his mule Boomerang. He waved his hands, and
shouted something.

"Bless my hatband! What does he want?" asked Mr. Damon, watching him
curiously.

"It sounds as if he were calling to us to come back," spoke Mr. Parker.

"It's too late now," decided Tom. "Maybe he forgot to tell us good-by,"
but, he felt a vague wonder at Eradicate's odd motions; for the colored
man was pointing toward the stern of the airship, as if there was
something wrong there. But the Red Cloud soared on.




CHAPTER IX--A WARNING BY WIRELESS


Rapidly the airship ascended, and, when it was high over the town of
Shopton, Tom headed the craft due west. Looking down he tried to descry
Mary Nestor, in her carriage, but the trees were in the way, their
interlocking branches hiding the girl. Tom did see crowds of other
persons, though, thronging the streets of Shopton, for, though the young
inventor had made many flights, there was always a novelty about them,
that brought out the curious.

"A good start, Tom Swift," complimented Mr. Parker. "Is it always as
easy as this?"

"Starting always is," was the answer, "though, as the Irishman said,
coming down isn't sometimes quite so comfortable."

"Bless my gizzard! That's so," cried the eccentric Mr. Damon. "Can we
vol-plane to earth in the Red Cloud, Tom?"

"Yes, but not as easily as in the Butterfly. However I hope we will not
have to. Now, Mr. Damon, if you will just take charge of the steering
apparatus for a minute, I want to go aft."

"What for?"

"I wish to see if everything is all right. I can't imagine why Eradicate
was making those queer motions."

Mr. Damon, who knew how to operate the Red Cloud, was soon guiding her
on the course, while Tom made his way to the rear compartments, through
the motor room, where the stores of supplies and food were kept. He made
a careful examination, looking from an after window, and even going out
on a small, open platform, but could discover nothing wrong.

"I guess Rad was just capering about without any special object," mused
Tom, but it was not long after this that they learned to their dismay,
that the colored man had had a method in his madness.

On his way back through the motor room Tom looked to the machinery,
and adjusted some of the auxiliary oil feeders. The various pieces of
apparatus were working well, though the engine had not yet been speeded
up to its limit. Tom wanted it to "warm-up" first.

"Everything all right?" asked Mr. Damon, as Tom rejoined them in the
pilot house, which was just forward of the living room in the main
cabin.

"Yes, I can't imagine what made Rad act that way. But I'll set the
automatic steering gear now, Mr. Damon, and then you will be relieved."

Mr. Jenks was gazing off toward the west--to where he hoped to discover
the secret of Phantom Mountain.

"How do you like it?" asked Tom.

"It's great," replied the diamond man. "I've never been in an airship
before, and it's different than what I expected; but it's great! It's
the only craft that will serve our purpose among the towering mountain
peaks, where the diamond makers are hidden. I hope we can find them."

In a little while the Red Cloud was skimming along at faster speed,
guided by the automatic rudders, so that no one was needed in the pilot
house, since there was no danger of collisions. Airships are not quite
numerous enough for that, yet, though they may soon become so.

Tom and the others devoted several hours to arranging their staterooms
and bunks, and getting their clothing stowed away, and when this was
done Mr. Parker and Mr. Jenks sat gazing off into space.

"It's hard to realize that we are really in an airship," observed the
diamond man. "At first I thought I would be frightened, but I'm not a
bit. It doesn't seem as if anything could happen."

"Something is likely to happen soon," said Mr. Parker, suddenly, as he
gazed at some weather instruments on the cabin wall.

"Bless my soul! Don't say that!" cried Mr. Damon. "What is it?"

"I think, from my observations, that we will soon have a hurricane,"
said the scientific man. "There is every indication of it;" and he
seemed quite delighted at the prospect of his prediction coming true.

"A hurricane!" cried Mr. Damon. "I hope it isn't like the one that blew
us to Earthquake Island."

"Oh, I think there will be no danger," spoke Tom. "If it comes on to
blow we will ascend or descend out of the path of the storm. This craft
is not like the ill-fated Whizzer. I can more easily handle the Red
Cloud; even in a bad storm."

"I'm glad to hear that," remarked Mr. Jenks. "It would be too bad to be
wrecked before we got to Phantom Mountain."

"Well, I predict that we will have a bad storm," insisted Mr. Parker,
and Tom could not help wishing that the scientist would keep his gloomy
forebodings to himself.

However the storm had not developed up to noon, when Tom, with Mr.
Damon's help, served a fine meal in the dining-room. In the afternoon
the speed of the ship was increased, and by night they had covered
several hundred miles. Through the darkness the Red Cloud kept on,
making good time. Tom got up, occasionally, to look to the machinery,
but it was all automatically controlled, and an alarm bell would sound
in his stateroom when anything went wrong.

"Bless my napkin!" exclaimed Mr. Damon the next morning, as they sat
down to a breakfast of fruit, ham and eggs and fragrant coffee, "this is
living as well as in a hotel, and yet we are--how far are we above the
earth, Tom?" he asked, turning to the young inventor.

"About two miles now. I just sent her up, as I thought I detected that
storm Mr. Parker spoke of."

"I told you it would come," declared the scientist, and there was a
small hurricane below them that morning, but only the lower edge of it
caught the Red Cloud, and when Tom sent her up still higher she found a
comparatively quiet zone, where she slid along at good speed.

That afternoon Tom busied himself about some wires and a number of
complicated pieces of apparatus which were in one corner of the main
cabin.

"What are you doing now?" asked Mr. Jenks, who had been talking with Mr.
Parker, and showing that scientist some of the manufactured diamonds.

"Getting our wireless apparatus in shape," answered the lad. "I should
have done it before, but I had so much to do that I couldn't get at it.
I'm going to send off some messages. Dad will want to know how we are
doing."

As he worked away, he also made up his mind to send another message, in
care of his father, for there was a receiving station in the Swift home.
And to whom this message was addressed Tom did not say, but we fancy
some of our readers can guess.

Finally, after several hours of work, the wireless was in shape to send
and receive messages. Tom pulled over the lever, and a crackling sound
was heard, as the electricity leaped from the transmitters into space.
Then he clamped the receiver on his ear.

"All ready," he announced. "Has anybody any messages they wish sent?"
For, with the courtesy of a true host he was ready to serve his guests
before he forwarded his own wireless notes.

"Just tell my wife that I'm enjoying myself," requested Mr. Damon.
"Bless my footstool! But this is great! We're off the earth yet,
connected with it."

Mr. Jenks had no one to whom he wanted to send any word, but Mr. Parker
wish to wire to a fellow scientist the result of some observations made
in the upper air.

Tom noted all the messages down, and then, when all was in readiness he
began to call his home station. He knew that either his father or Mr.
Jackson, the engineer, could receive the wireless.

But, no sooner had the young inventor sent off the first few dots and
dashes representing "S. I."--his home station call--than he started and
a look of surprise came over his face.

"They're calling us!" he exclaimed.

"Who is?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"My house--my father. He--he's been trying to get us ever since we
started, but I didn't have the wireless in shape to receive messages.
Oh, I hope it's not too late!"

"Too late! Bless my soul, too late for what?" gasped Mr. Damon, somewhat
alarmed by Tom's manner.

The lad did not answer at once. He was intently listening to a series
of dots and dashes that clicked in the telephone receiver clamped to his
left ear. On his face there was a look of worriment.

"Father has just sent me a message," he said. "It's a warning flashed
through space! He's been trying to get it to me since yesterday!"

"What is it?" asked Mr. Jenks, rising from his seat.

"The mysterious man is aboard the airship--hidden away!" cried Tom.
"That's what Eradicate was trying to call to our attention as we started
off. Eradicate saw his face at a rear window, and tried to warn us! The
mysterious man is a stowaway on board!"




CHAPTER X--DROPPING THE STOWAWAY


Tom's excited announcement startled Mr. Damon and the others as much as
if the young inventor had informed them that the airship had exploded
and was about to dash with them to the earth. The men leaped to their
feet, and stared at the lad.

"A stowaway on board!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my soul! How did he--"

"Are you sure that message is straight?" asked Mr. Jenks. "Did Eradicate
see the man?"

"He says he did," answered Tom. "The man is hidden away on board
now--probably among the stores and supplies."

"Bless my tomato sauce!" exploded Mr. Damon. "I hope he doesn't eat them
all up!"

"We must get him out at once!" declared Mr. Jenks.

"I knew something would happen on this voyage," came from Mr. Parker. "I
predicted it from the first!"

Tom thought considerable, but he did not answer the scientist just
then. Another communication was coming to him by wireless. He listened
intently.

"Father says," the lad told his companions "that Eradicate only had
a glimpse of the man at the last moment. He was looking from the rear
storeroom window--he's the same man who called on me that time--Rad
remembers him very well."

"Bless my shoes! What's to be done?" inquired Mr. Damon, looking around
helplessly.

"We must get him out, that's all," decided Mr. Jenks; with vigor. "Get
him out and drop him overboard!"

"Drop him overboard!" cried Mr. Parker, in horror.

"Not exactly, but get rid of him," proceeded the diamond seeker. "That
man is one of my enemies. He has been sent by the band of diamond makers
hidden among the mountains, to spy on me, and, if possible, prevent me
from seeking to discover their secret. He tried to work on Tom's Swift's
fears, and frighten him from using his airship on this quest. Then, when
he failed, the man must have sneaked into the shed, and hidden himself
in the ship. We must get rid of him, or he may wreck the Red Cloud!"

"That's so!" cried Tom. "We must try to capture him. I think we had
better--" the lad paused, and again listened to the wireless message.
"Father says Eradicate saw the man have a gun, so we must be careful,"
the young inventor translated the dots and dashes.

"Bless my powder horn!" exploded Mr. Damon.

"We shall have to proceed cautiously then," spoke Mr. Jenks. "If he is
like any others in the gang he is a desperate man."

"Better sneak up on him then, if we can," proposed Mr. Parker. "There
are enough of us to cope with one man, even if he is armed. You have
weapons aboard, haven't you?" he inquired of Tom.

"Yes," was the hesitating answer, "but I don't want to use them if I
can help it. Not only because of the danger, and a dislike of shedding
blood, but because a stray bullet might pierce the gas bag and damage
the ship."

"That's so," agreed Mr. Jenks. "Well, I guess if we go at it the right
way we can capture him without any shooting. But we must talk more
quietly--we ought to have whispered--he may have heard us."

"I don't think so," replied Tom. "The storeroom is far enough off so
that he couldn't hear us. Besides, the motor makes such a racket that
he couldn't distinguish what we were talking about, even if he heard our
voices. So, unless he heard the wireless working, and suspects something
from that, he probably doesn't know that we are aware of his presence
aboard."

"But why do you think he has remained quiet all this while, Tom?" asked
Mr. Damon.

"Probably he wants to wait until the ship is farther out west,"
suggested Mr. Jenks. "Then he will be nearer his friends, and can get
help, if he needs it."

"And do you really believe he would destroy the Red Cloud?" asked Mr.
Parker.

"I think that all he is waiting for is a favorable chance," declared
the diamond seeker. "He would destroy the craft, and us too, if he could
prevent us from discovering the secret of Phantom Mountain, I believe."

"Then we must get ahead of him," decided Tom, quietly. "I have just
flashed to dad a message, telling him that we will heed his warning. Now
to capture the stowaway!"

"And while we're about it, give him a good scare when we do get him,"
suggested Mr. Jenks.

"How?" asked Tom.

"Threaten to drop him overboard. Perhaps that will make him tell how
he happened to get in our ship, and what are the plans of the gang of
diamond makers. We may get valuable information that way."

"I don't believe you can scare such fellows much," was Tom's opinion,
but it was agreed to try.

"How are you going to capture him?" asked Mr. Parker. "If he has a gun
it won't be any too easy to go in the storeroom, and drag him out."

"We'll have to use a little strategy," decided Tom, and then they
discussed several plans. The one finally adopted was that Tom and Mr.
Damon should enter the storeroom, casually, as if in search of food to
cook for supper. They would discuss various dishes, and Mr. Damon was to
express a preference for something in the food line, the box containing
which, was well back in the room. This would give the two a chance
to penetrate to the far end of the apartment, without arousing the
suspicions of the hidden man, who, doubtless, would be listening to the
conversation.

"And as soon as we get sight of him, you and I will jump right at him,
Mr. Damon," said Tom. "Jump before he has a chance to use his gun. Mr.
Jenks and Mr. Parker will be waiting outside the room, to catch him if
he gets away from us. I'll have some ropes ready, and we'll tie him up,
and--well, we'll decide later what to do with him."

"All right. I'm ready as soon as you are, Tom," said the eccentric man.
"Come ahead."

They went softly to the storeroom, and listened at the door. There was
no sound heard save that made by the machinery.

"I wonder if he's really here?" whispered Mr. Damon.

"We'll soon find out," answered Tom. "Let's go in."

They entered, and, in pursuance of their plan, Tom and his friend talked
of various foods.

"I think I'd like some of that canned lobster, with French dressing on,"
spoke the eccentric man.

"That's away in the back end of the room," said Tom, in a loud voice.
"It's under a lot of boxes."

"Then I'll help you get it out! Bless my frying pan! but I am very fond
of lobster!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, in as natural tones as was possible
under the circumstances.

He and Tom moved cautiously back among the boxes and barrels. They were
glancing about with eager eyes. Tom switched on an electric light, and,
the instant he did so, he was aware of a movement in a little space
formed by one box which was placed on top, of two others. The lad saw a
dark figure moving, as if to get farther out of sight.

"I've got him!" cried Tom, making a dive for the shadow.

A moment later the young inventor was bowled over, as a dark figure
leaped over his head.

"Catch him, Mr. Damon!" he cried.

"Bless my hatband! I--I--" Mr. Damon's voice ended in a grunt. He, too,
had been knocked down by the fleeing man.

"Look out, Mr. Jenks!" cried Tom, to warn those on guard at the door of
the storeroom.

There was the report of a gun, some excited shouts, and when Tom could
scramble to his feet, and rush out, he beheld Mr. Parker calmly sitting
on a struggling man, while Mr. Jenks held a gun, that was still smoking.

"We caught him!" cried the scientist.

"Anybody hurt?" asked Tom, anxiously.

"No, I knocked up his gun as he fired," explained Mr. Jenks. "Where are
the ropes, Tom?"

The cords were produced and the man, who had now ceased to struggle,
was tightly bound. He uttered not a word, but he smiled grimly when Mr.
Damon remarked:

"I guess I'll go back in the storeroom, Tom, and see how much food he
ate."

"Oh, I guess he didn't take much," declared the lad. "He wasn't there
long enough."

"Well, Farley Munson, so it's you, is it?" asked Mr. Jenks, as he
surveyed the prisoner.

"Do you know him?" asked Tom, in some surprise.

"He was in with the diamond makers," said Mr. Jenks. "He was one of
those who took me to the secret cave. But it will be the last time he
ever goes there. How high up are we, Tom?"

"About two miles. Why?"

"I guess that will be far enough to let him fall," went on the diamond
seeker. "Come on, Mr. Damon, help me throw him overboard!"

"You--you're not going to throw me over--with the airship two miles
high; are you?" gasped the man.

"Will you tell us what we want to know, if we don't?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"What do you want to know?"

"How you got aboard, and what your object was in coming."

"That's easy enough. I had been hanging around the shed for several
days, watching a chance to get in. Finally I saw it, when that colored
man went to feed his mule, and I slipped in, and hid in the airship. The
stores were all in then, and I stowed myself away among the boxes. I had
food and water, so I didn't touch any of yours," and he looked at Mr.
Damon, who seemed much relieved.

"And what was your object?" demanded Mr. Jenks.

"I wanted to prevent you from going to Phantom Mountain."

"How?"

"By destroying the airship if need be. But I hoped to accomplish it by
other means. I would have stopped at nothing, though, to prevent you.
You must keep away from there!"

"And if we refuse?" asked Tom.

"Then you'll have to take what comes!"

"But not from you!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks. "We're going to get rid of
you."

The man's face showed the alarm he felt.

"Oh, don't worry," said Mr. Jenks, quickly, "we're not going to toss you
overboard. We're not as desperate as your crowd. But we're going to
get rid of you, and then go on before you can send any word to your
confederates. We'll put you off in the most lonesome spot we can find,
and I guess you'll be some time getting back to civilization. By that
time we'll have the secret of the diamonds."

"You never will!" declared the man, firmly. And he would say nothing
more, though by threats and promises Mr. Jenks tried to get from him
something about the men in with him, and where the cave of the diamonds
was located.

Heavily bound with ropes the man was locked in a small closet, to be
kept there until a favorable spot was reached for letting him go. Mr.
Jenks' plan, of dropping him down in some place where he would have
difficulty in sending on word to his confederates was considered a good
one.

Three days later, in crossing over a lonely region, near the Nebraska
National Forest, Farley Munson, which was one of the names the spy went
by, was dropped off the airship, when it was sent down to within a few
feet of the earth.

"It will take you some time to get to a telegraph office," said Mr.
Jenks, as a package of food, and a flask of water was tossed down to the
stowaway. He shook his fist at those in the airship, and shouted after
them:

"You'll never discover the secret of Phantom Mountain!"

"Yes, we will," declared Tom, as he sent the Red Cloud high into the air
again.



CHAPTER XI--A WEARY SEARCH


During the three days when the stowaway had been kept a prisoner, the
Red Cloud had made good time on her western trip. She was now about two
hundred and fifty miles from Leadville, Colorado, and Tom knew he could
accomplish that distance in a short time. It was necessary, therefore,
since they were so close to the place where the real search would begin,
to make some more definite plans.

"We will need to replenish our supply of gasoline," said Tom, shortly
after the stowaway had been dropped, and when the young inventor had
made a general inspection of the airship.

"Is it all gone?" inquired Mr. Damon.

"Not all, but we will soon be in the wildest part of the Rocky
Mountains, and gasoline is difficult to procure there. So I want to fill
all our reserve tanks. But I would rather do that before we get far into
Colorado."

"Why?" inquired Mr. Parker.

"Because airships are not so common but what the appearance of one
attracts attention. Ours is sure to be talked about, and commented on.
In that case, in spite of our precaution in putting Munson off in this
lonely place, word of the Red Cloud being in the vicinity of Leadville
may reach the diamond makers, and put them on their guard. We want to
take them unawares if we can."

"That's so," agreed Mr. Jenks. "We had better get our gasoline at the
first stopping place, then, and proceed with our search. Our first
object ought to be to look for the landmark--the head of stone. Then we
can begin to prospect about a bit."

"My idea, exactly," declared Tom. "Well, then, I'll go down at the
first place we cross, where we can get gasoline, and then we'll be in a
position to hover in the air for a long time, without descending."

The airship kept on her way, traveling slowly the remainder of that day,
and at dusk, when there was less chance of big crowds seeing them, the
Red Cloud was sent down on the outskirts of a large village. Tom and Mr.
Damon went to a supply store, and arranged to have a sufficient quantity
of the gasoline taken out to the airship. It was delivered after dark,
and little talk was occasioned by the few who were aware of the presence
of the craft. Then, once more, they went aloft, and Tom sent several
wireless messages to Shopton, including one to Miss Nestor.

"Please tell my wife that I am well, and that I have a good appetite,"
said Mr. Damon.

Mr. Parker also sent a message to a scientific friend of his, stating
that he made some observations among the mountains, of the region in
which the airship then was, and that the indications were that a great
landslide would soon take place.

"That won't worry us," spoke Tom, "for we'll be far above it."

"I hope we will be near enough to enable me to observe it, and make
some scientific notes," came from Mr. Parker. "I am positive that one
of these mountain peaks that we saw to-day will disappear in a landslide
within a few days. I have an instrument somewhat like the one that
records earthquakes, and it has been acting strangely of late."

Tom wondered what enjoyment Mr. Parker got out of life, when he was
always looking for some calamity to happen, but the scientist seemed
to take as much pleasure in his gloomy forebodings now, as he had on
Earthquake Island.

They reached the vicinity of Leadville the next day, but took care to
keep high above the city, so that the airship could not be observed.
With powerful glasses they examined the mountainous country, looking for
the little settlement of Indian Ridge.

"There it is!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks, just as dusk was settling down. "I
can make out the hotel I stopped at. Now we can really begin our search.
The next thing is to find the stone head, and then, I think, I will have
my bearings."

"We'll begin the hunt for that landmark in the morning," said Tom.

High in the air hovered the Red Cloud. At that distance above the earth
she must have looked like some great bird, and the adventurers thought
it unlikely that any one in the vicinity of Leadville would observe
them.

The quest for the great mountain peak, that looked like a stone head,
was under way. Back and forth sailed the airship. Sometimes she was
enveloped in fog, and no sight could be had of the earth below. At
other times there were rain storms, which likewise prevented a view. Mr.
Parker was on the lookout for his predicted mountain landslide, but it
did not occur, and he was much disappointed.

"It's queer I can't pick out that landmark," said Mr. Jenks after two
days of weary searching, when their eyes were strained from long peering
through telescopes. "I'm sure it was around Indian Ridge, yet we've
covered almost all the ground in this neighborhood, and I haven't had a
glimpse of it."

"Perhaps it was destroyed in a landslide, or some cataclysm of nature,"
suggested Mr. Parker. "That is very possible."

"If that's the case we're going to have a hard time to locate the cave
of the diamond makers," answered Mr. Jenks, "but I hope it isn't so."

They continued the search for another day, and then Tom, as they sat
in the comfortable cabin of the airship that night, hovering almost
motionless (for the motor had been shut down) made a proposition.

"Why not descend in some secluded place," he suggested, "and wander
around on foot, making inquiries of the miners. They may know where the
stone head is, or they may even know about Phantom Mountain."

"Good idea," spoke Mr. Jenks. "We'll do it."

Accordingly, the next morning, the Red Cloud was lowered in a good but
lonely landing place, and securely moored. It was in a valley, well
screened from observation, and the craft was not likely to be seen,
but, to guard against any damage being done to it by passing hunters or
miners, Mr. Parker and Mr. Damon agreed to remain on guard in it, while
Tom and Mr. Jenks spent a day or two traveling around, making inquiries.

The young inventor and his companion proceeded on foot to a small
settlement, where they hired horses on which to make their way about.
They were to be gone two days, and in that time they hoped to get on the
right trail.




CHAPTER XII--THE GREAT STONE HEAD


It was a wild and desolate country in which Tom Swift and Mr. Jenks
were traveling. Villages were far apart, and they were at best but
small settlements. In their journeys from place to place they met few
travelers.

But of these few they made cautious inquiries as to the location
of Phantom Mountain, or the landmark known as the great stone head.
Prospectors, miners and hunters, whom they asked, shook their heads.

"I've heard of Phantom Mountain," said one grizzled miner, "but I
couldn't say where it is. Maybe it's only a fish story--the place may
not even exist."

"Oh, it does, for I've been there!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks.

"Then why don't you go back to it?" asked the miner.

"Because I can't locate it again," was the reply.

"Humph! Mighty queer if you've seen a place once, and can't get to it
again," and the man looked as if he thought there was something strange
about Tom and his companion. Mr. Jenks did not want to say that he had
been taken to the mountain blindfolded, for that would have caused too
much talk.

"I think if we spent to-night in a place where the miners congregate,
listened to their talk, and put a few casual questions to them, more as
if we were only asking out of idle curiosity, we might learn something,"
suggested Tom.

"Very well, we'll try that scheme."

Accordingly, after they had left the suspicious miner the two proceeded
to a small milling town, not far from Indian Ridge. There they engaged
rooms for the night at the only hotel, and, after supper they sat around
the combined dance hall and gambling place.

There were wild, rough scenes, which were distasteful to Tom, and to Mr.
Jenks, but they felt that this was their only chance to get on the right
trail, and so they stayed. As strangers in a western mining settlement
they were made roughly welcome, and in response to their inquiries about
the country, they were told many tales, some of which were evidently
gotten up for the benefit of the "tenderfeet."

"Is there a place around here called Phantom Mountain?" asked Tom, at
length, as quietly as he could.

"Never heard of it, stranger," replied a miner who had done most of the
talking. "I never heard of it, and what Bill Slatterly don't know ain't
worth knowin'. I'm Bill Slatterly," he added, lest there be some doubt
on that score.

"Isn't there some sort of a landmark around here shaped like a great
stone head?" went on Tom, after some unimportant questions. "Seems to me
I've heard of that."

"Nary a one," answered Mr. Slatterly. "No stone heads, and no Phantom
Mountains--nary a one.

"Who says there ain't no Phantom Mountains?" demanded an elderly miner,
who had been dozing in one corner of the room, but who was awakened by
Slatterly's loud voice. "Who says so?"

"I do," answered the one who claimed to know everything.

"Then you're wrong!" Tom's heart commenced beating faster than usual.

"Do you mean to say you've seen Phantom Mountain, Jed Nugg?" demanded
Slatterly.

"No, I ain't exactly seen it, an' I don't want to, but there is such
a place, about sixty mile from here. Folks says it's haunted, and them
sort of places I steer clear from."

"Can you tell me about it?" asked Mr. Jenks, eagerly. "I am interested
in such things."

"I can't tell you much about it," was the reply, "and I wouldn't git too
interested, if I was you. It might not be healthy. All I know is that
one time my partner and I were in hard luck. We got grub-staked, and
went out prospectin'. We strayed into a wild part of the country about
sixty mile from here, and one night we camped on a mountain--a wild,
desolate place it was too."

The miner stopped, and began leisurely filling his pipe.

"Well?" asked Tom, trying not to let his voice sound too eager.

"Well, that was Phantom Mountain."

The miner seemed to have finished his story.

"Is that all?" asked Mr. Jenks. "How did you know it was Phantom
Mountain?"

"'Cause we seen the ghost--my partner and I--that's why!" exclaimed the
man, puffing on his pipe. "As I said, we was campin' there, and 'long
about midnight we seen somethin' tall and white, and all shimmerin',
with a sort of yellow fire, slidin' down the side of the mountain. It
made straight for our camp."

"Huh! Guess you run, didn't you, Jed?" asked Bill Slatterly.

"Course we did. You'd a run too, if you seen a ghost comm' at you, an'
firin' a gun."

"Ghosts can't fire guns!" declared Bill. "I guess you dreamed it, Jed."

"Ghosts can't fire guns, eh? That's all you know about it. This one did,
and to prove I didn't dream it, there was a bullet hole in my hat next
mornin'. I could prove it, too, only I ain't got that hat any more. But
that was Phantom Mountain, strangers, an' my advice to you is to keep
away from it. I was on it but I didn't exactly see it, 'cause it was
dark at the time."

"Was it near a peak that looked like a stone head?" asked Tom.

"It were, stranger, but I didn't take much notice of it. Me and my
partner got out of them diggin's next day, and I never went back. I
ain't never said much about this place, but it's called Phantom Mountain
all right, and I ain't the only one that's seen a ghost there. Other
grub-stakers has had the same experience."

"Why ain't I never heard about it?" demanded Bill, suspiciously.

"'Cause as why you're allers so busy talkin' that you don't never listen
to nothin' I reckon," was Jed's answer, amid laughter.

"Can you tell us what trail to take to get there?" asked Tom, of the
miner.

"Yes, it's called the old silver trail, and you strike it by goin' to a
place called Black Gulch, about forty mile from here. Then it's twenty
mile farther on. But take my advice and don't go."

"Can it be reached by way of Indian Ridge?" asked Mr. Jenks, wondering
how he had been taken to the cave of the diamond makers. He did not
remember Black Gulch.

"Yes, you can git there by Indian Ridge way, but it's more dangerous.
You're likely to lose your way, for that's a trail that's seldom
traveled." Mr. Jenks thought that, perhaps, was the reason the gang had
taken him that way. "It's easier to get to the stone head and Phantom
Mountain by Black Gulch, but it ain't healthy to go there, strangers,
take my advice on that," concluded the miner, as he prepared to go to
sleep again.

Tom could scarcely contain the exultation he felt. At last, it seemed,
they were on the trail. He motioned to Mr. Jenks, and they slipped
quietly from the place, just as another dance was beginning.

"Now for Black Gulch!" cried Tom. "We must hurry back to the airship,
and tell the good news.

"It's too late to-night," decided Mr. Jenks, and so they waited until
morning, when they made an early start.

They found Mr. Damon and Mr. Parker anxiously awaiting their return. Mr.
Damon blessed so many things that he was nearly out of breath, and Mr.
Parker related something of the observations he had made.

"I think I have discovered traces of a dormant volcano," he said. "I am
in hopes that it will have an eruption while we are here."

"I'm not," spoke Tom, decidedly. "We'll start for Black Gulch as soon as
possible."

The airship once more rose in the air, and, following the directions
the miner had given him, Tom pointed his craft for the depression in the
mountains which had been given the name Black Gulch. It was reached in
a short time, and then, making a turn up a long valley the airship
proceeded at reduced speed.

"We ought to see that stone head soon now," spoke Tom, as he peered from
the windows of the pilot house.

"It's queer we didn't notice it when we were up in the air," remarked
Mr. Jenks. "We've been over this place before, I'm sure of it."

The next moment Mr. Damon uttered a cry. "Bless my watch-chain!" he
exclaimed. "Look at that!"

He pointed off to the left. There, jutting out from the side of a steep
mountain peak was a mass of stone--black stone--which, as the airship
slowly approached, took the form and shape of a giant's head.

"That's it! That's it!" cried Tom. "The great stone head!"

"And now for Phantom Mountain and the diamonds!" shouted Mr. Jenks, as
Tom let the airship slowly settle to the bottom of the valley.




CHAPTER XIII--ON PHANTOM MOUNTAIN


Out from the Red Cloud piled Tom and the others. They made a rush for
the irregular mass of rock which bore so strong a resemblance to the
head of some gigantic man.

"That's the one! That's the thing I saw when they were taking me along
here blindfolded!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks. "I'm sure we're on the right
trail, now!"

"But what gets me, though," remarked Mr. Damon, "is why we couldn't see
that landmark when we were up in the air. We had a fine view, and ought
to have been able to pick it out with the telescopes."

The adventurers saw the reason a few seconds later. The image was
visible only from one place, and that was directly looking up the
valley. If one went too far to the right or left the head disappeared
from view behind jutting crags, and it was impossible to see it from
overhead, because the head was almost under a great spur of a mighty
mountain.

"We might have hunted for it a week in the airship, and been directly
over it," said Tom, "and yet we would never have seen it."

"Yes, but we never would have gotten here in such good shape if it
hadn't been for your wonderful craft," declared Mr. Jenks. "It brought
us here safely and quickly, and enabled us to elude the men who tried to
keep us back. We're here in spite of them. If we had traveled by train
they might have interfered with us in a dozen ways."

"That's so," agreed Mr. Damon. "Well, now we're here, what's to be
done? Which way do we start to reach the cave where the diamonds are
manufactured, Mr. Jenks?"

"That I can't say. As you know, I only had a momentary glimpse of this
stone head as they were taking me along the trail. Then one the men
noticed that the bandage had slipped and he pulled it into place. So I
really can't say which direction to take now, in order to discover the
secret."

"How long after you saw the head before you reached the cave?" asked
Tom. "In that way we may be able to tell how far away it is."

"Well, I should say it was about two or three hours after I saw the
head, before we got to the halting place, and I was carried into the
cave. That would make it several miles from here, for we went in a
wagon."

"Yes, and they might have driven in a round-about way, in order to
deceive you," suggested Mr. Damon. "At best we have but a faint idea
where the diamond cave is, but we must search for it; eh, Tom?"

"Certainly. We'll start right in. And as the airship will be of but
little service to us now, I suggest that we leave it in this valley.
It is very much secluded, and no one will harm it, I think. We can then
start off prospecting, for I have a large portable tent, and we can
carry enough food with us, with what game we can shoot, to enable us to
live. I have a regular camping outfit on board."

"Fine!" cried Mr. Parker, "and that will give me a chance to make some
observations among the mountains, and perhaps I can predict when a
landslide, or an eruption of some dormant volcano, may occur."

"Bless my stars!" cried Mr. Damon. "I don't wish you any bad luck, Mr.
Parker, but I sincerely hope nothing of the sort happens! We had enough
of that on Earthquake Island!"

"One can not halt the forces of nature," said the scientist, solemnly.
"There are many towering peaks around here which may contain old
volcanoes. And I notice the presence of iron ore all about. This must be
a wonderful place in a thunder and lightning storm."

"Why?" asked Tom, curiously.

"Because lightning would be powerfully attracted here by the presence
of the metal. In fact there is evidence that many of the peaks have been
struck by lightning," and the scientist showed curious, livid scars on
the stone faces of the peaks within sight.

"Then this is a good place to stay away from in a storm," observed Mr.
Damon. "However, we won't worry about that now. If this is the landmark
Mr. Jenks was searching for, then we must be in the vicinity of Phantom
Mountain."

"I think we are," declared the diamond seeker. "Probably it is within
sight now, but there are so many peaks, and this is such a wild and
desolate part of the country that we may have trouble in locating it."

"We've got to make a beginning, anyhow," decided Tom, "and the sooner
the better. Come, we'll make up our camping kits, and start out."

It was something to know that they were on the right trail, and it was a
relief to be able to busy oneself, and not be aimlessly searching for a
mysterious landmark. They all felt this, and soon the airship was taken
to a secluded part of the valley, where it was well hidden from sight in
a grove of trees.

Tom and Mr. Damon then served a good meal, and preparations were made
to start on their search among the mountains--a search which they hoped
would lead them to Phantom Mountain, and the cave of the diamond makers.

The tent which would afford them shelter was in sections, and could
be laced together. They carried food, compressed into small packages,
coffee, a few cooking utensils; and each one had a gun, Tom carrying a
combination rifle and shotgun, for game.

"We can't live very high while we're on the trail," said the young
inventor, "but it won't be much worse than it was on Earthquake Island.
Are we all ready?"

"I guess so," answered Mr. Damon. "How long are we going to be away?"

"Until we find the diamond makers!" declared Tom, firmly.

Shouldering their packs, the adventurers started off. Tom turned for a
last look at his airship, dimly seen amid the trees. Would he ever come
back to the Red Cloud? Would she be there when he did return? Would
their quest be successful? These questions the lad asked himself, as he
followed his companions along the rocky trail.

"Perhaps we can find the road by which these men go in and out of the
cave," suggested Mr. Damon, when they had gone on for several miles.

"I fancy not," replied Mr. Jenks. "They probably take great pains to
hide it. I think though, that our best plan will be to go here and
there, looking for the entrance to the cave. I believe I would remember
the place."

"But why can't you follow the directions given by the miner who told you
about Phantom Mountain?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Because his talk was too indefinite," answered Mr. Jenks. "He was so
frightened by seeing what he believed to be a ghost, that he didn't take
much notice of the location of the place. All he knows is that Phantom
Mountain is somewhere around here."

"And we've got to hunt until we find it; is that the idea?" asked Mr.
Parker.

"Or until we see the phantom," added Tom, in a low voice.

"Bless my topknot!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "You don't mean to say you
expect to see that ghost; do you Tom?"

"Perhaps," answered the young inventor, and he did not add something
else of which he was thinking. For Tom had a curious theory regarding
the phantom.

They tramped about the remainder of that day. Toward evening Tom shot
some birds, which made a welcome addition to their supper. Then the tent
was put together, some spruce and hemlock boughs were cut to make a soft
bed, and on these, while the light of a campfire gleamed in on them, the
adventurers slept.

Their experience the following day was similar to the first. They saw no
evidence of a large cave such as Mr. Jenks had described, nor were there
any traces of men having gone back and forth among the mountains, as
might have been expected of the diamond makers, for, as Mr. Jenks had
said, they made frequent journeys to the settlement for food, and other
supplies.

"Well, I haven't begun to give up yet," announced Tom, on the third day,
when their quest was still unsuccessful. "But I think we are making one
mistake."

"What is that?" inquired Mr. Jenks.

"I think we should go up higher. In my opinion the cave is near the top
of some peak; isn't it, Mr. Jenks?"

"I have that impression, though, as you know, I never saw the outside of
it. Still, it might not be a bad idea to ascend some of these peaks."

Following this suggestion, they laid their trail more toward the sky,
and that night found them encamped several thousand feet above the
sea-level. It was quite cool, and the campfire was a big one about which
they sat after supper, talking of many things.

Tom did not sleep well that night. He tossed from side to side on the
bed of boughs, and once or twice got up to replenish the fire, which had
burned low. His companions were in deep slumber.

"I wonder what time it is?" mused Tom, when he had been up the third
time to throw wood on the blaze. "Must be near morning." He looked at
his watch, and was somewhat startled to see that it was only a little
after twelve. Somehow it seemed much later.

As he was putting the timepiece back into his pocket the lad looked
around at the dark and gloomy mountains, amid which they were encamped.
As his gaze wandered toward the peak of the one on the side of which the
tent was pitched, he gave a start of surprise.

For, coming down a place where, that afternoon, Tom had noticed a sort
of indefinite trail was a figure in white. A tall, waving figure, which
swayed this way and that--a figure which halted and then came on again.

"I wonder--I wonder if that can be a wisp of fog?" mused the young
inventor. He rubbed his eyes, thinking it might be a swirling of the
night mist or a defect of vision. Then, as he saw more plainly, he
noticed the thing in white rushing toward him.

"It's the phantom--the phantom!" cried Tom, aloud. "It's the thing the
miner saw! We're on Phantom Mountain now!"




CHAPTER XIV--WARNED BACK


Tom's cries awakened the sleepers in the tent. Mr. Damon was the first
to rush out.

"Bless my nightcap, Tom!" he cried. "What is it? What has happened? Are
we attacked by a mountain lion?"

For answer the young inventor pointed up the mountain, to where, in the
dim light from a crescent moon, there stood boldly revealed, the figure
in white.

"Bless--bless my very existence!" cried the odd man. "What is it, Tom?"

"The phantom," was the quiet answer. "Watch it, and see what it does."

By this time Mr. Jenks and Mr. Parker had joined Tom and Mr. Damon.
The four diamond seekers stood gazing at the apparition. And, as they
looked, the thing in white, seemingly too tall for any human being, slid
slowly forward, with a gliding motion. Then it raised its long, white
arms, and waved them threateningly at the adventurers.

"It's motioning us to go back," said Mr. Parker in an awed whisper. "It
doesn't want us to go any farther."

"Very likely," agreed Tom, coolly. "But we're not going to be frightened
by anything like that; are we?"

"Not much!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks. "I expected this. A ghost can't drive
me back from getting my rights from those scoundrels!"

"Suppose it uses a revolver to back up its demand?" asked the scientist.

"Wait until it does," answered Mr. Jenks. But the figure in white
evidently had no such intentions. It came on a little distance
farther, still waving the long arms threateningly, and then it suddenly
disappeared, seeming to dissolve in the misty shadows of the night.

"Bless my suspenders!" cried Mr. Damon. "That's a very strange
proceeding! Very strange! What do you make of it, Tom?"

"It is evidently some man dressed up in a sheet," declared Mr. Jenks. "I
expected as much."

"The work of those diamond makers; do you think?" continued Mr. Damon.

"I believe so," answered Tom, slowly, for he was trying to think it out.
"I believe they are the cause of the phantom, though I don't know that
it's a man dressed in a sheet."

"Why isn't it?" demanded Mr. Jenks.

"Because it was too tall for a man, unless he's a giant."

"He may have been on stilts," suggested Mr. Parker.

"No man on stilts could walk along that way," declared Tom, confidently.
"He glided along too easily. I am inclined to think it may be some sort
of a light."

"A light?" queried Mr. Damon.

"Yes, the diamond makers may be hidden in some small cave near here, and
they may have some sort of a magic lantern or a similar arrangement, for
throwing a shadow picture. They could arrange it to move as they liked,
and could cause it to disappear at will. That, I think, is the ghost we
have just seen."

"But the diamond makers have only been in this mountain recently,"
objected Mr. Jenks, "and the phantom was here before them. In fact, that
was what gave the place its name."

"That may be," admitted the lad. "There are many places that have the
name of being haunted, but no one ever sees the ghost. It is always some
one else, who has heard of some one who has seen it. That may have been
the case here. I grant that this place may have been called 'Phantom
Mountain' for a number of years, due to the superstitious tales of
miners. The diamond makers came along, found the conditions just right
for their work, and adopted the ghost, so to speak. As there wasn't any
real spirit they made one, and they use it to scare people away. I think
that's what we've just seen, though I may be wrong in my theory as to
what the phantom is."

"Well, it's gone now, at any rate," said Mr. Jenks, "and I think we'd
better get back inside the tent. It's cold out here."

"Aren't some of us going to stand guard?" demanded Mr. Damon.

"What for?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"Why--er--bless my key-ring! Suppose that ghost takes a notion to come
down here, and use his gun, as he did on the miners?"

"I don't believe that will happen," remarked Tom. "The diamond makers,
if the white thing had anything to do with them, have given us a
warning, and I think they'll at least wait until morning to see how we
heed it."

"We aren't going to heed it!" burst out Mr. Jenks. "I'm going to go
right ahead and find that cave where they make diamonds!"

"And we're with you!" exclaimed Tom. "We'll have a good fire going the
rest of the night, and that may keep intruders away. In the morning
we'll begin our search, and we'll go up the trail where we saw the white
figure."

A big pile of wood had been collected for the fire, and Tom now piled
some logs and branches on the blaze. It would last for some time now,
and the adventurers, still talking of the "ghost" went back into the
tent. It was over an hour before they all got to sleep again, and Mr.
Jenks and Mr. Damon took turns in getting up once or twice during the
remainder of the night to replenish the fire.

Morning dawned without anything further having occurred to disturb them,
and, after a hearty breakfast, to which Tom added some fish he caught in
a nearby mountain stream, they set off up the trail on Phantom Mountain.

They had left their tent standing, as they proposed making that spot
their headquarters until they located the cave they were seeking. What
their course would be after that would depend on the circumstances.

If they had expected to have an easy task locating the cavern in which
Mr. Jenks had seen diamonds made, the adventurers were disappointed. All
that day they tramped up and down the mountain, looking for some secret
entrance, but none was disclosed. The higher they went up the great
peak, the fainter became the trail, until, at length it vanished
completely.

But this was not to be wondered at, since it was on solid rock, in which
no footsteps would leave an impression.

"They never brought you up here in a wagon, Mr. Jenks," decided Tom,
when he saw how steep the place was.

"I'm inclined to think so myself," admitted the diamond man. "They must
have reached the cave from some other way. As a matter of fact, I walked
some distance after getting out of the vehicle, before we got to the
cavern. But, even at that, I don't believe we came this way."

"Yet the phantom was here," persisted Tom, "and I'm convinced that the
cave is in this neighborhood. It's up to us to find it!"

But they searched the remainder of that day in vain, and as night was
coming on, they made their way back to the camp. As Tom, who was in
the lead, approached the tent, he saw something black fastened to the
entrance.

"Hello!" he cried. "Some one's been here. That wasn't on the tent when
we left this morning."

"What is it?" asked Mr. Damon.

"A black piece of paper, written on with white ink," replied the lad. He
was reading it, and, as he perused it a look of surprise came over his
face.

"Listen to this!" called Tom. "It's evidently from the diamond makers."

Holding up the black paper, on which the white writing stood out in bold
relief Tom read aloud:


"Be warned in time! Go back before it is too late! You are near to
death! Go back!"


"Bless my shoelaces!" cried Mr. Damon. "This is getting serious."




CHAPTER XV--THE LANDSLIDE


Gathered about the young inventor, the three men looked at the warning.
The writing was poor, and it was evident that an attempt had been made
to disguise it. But there was no misspelling of words, and there were no
rudely drawn daggers, or bloody hands or anything of that sort. In fact,
it was a very business-like sort of warning.

"Rather odd," commented Mr. Jenks. "Black paper and white ink."

"White ink is easy enough to make," stated Mr. Parker. "I fancy they
wanted it as conspicuous as possible."

"Yes," agreed Tom, "and this warning, together with the antics of the
thing in white last night, shows that they are aware of our presence
here, and perhaps know who we are. We will have to be on our guard."

"Do you think that fellow Munson, whom we left in the forest, could have
gotten here and warned them?" asked Mr. Damon.

"It's possible," admitted Tom, "but now let's see if the person who
pinned this warning on our tent took any of our things."

A hasty examination, however, showed that nothing had been disturbed,
and Tom and Mr. Damon were soon getting supper ready, everyone talking,
during the progress of the meal, about the events of the day, and the
rather weird culmination of it.

"Well, we haven't had a great deal of success--so far," admitted Tom, as
they sat about the fire, in the fast gathering dusk. "I think, perhaps,
we'd better try on the other side of the mountain to-morrow. We've
explored this side pretty thoroughly."

"Good idea," commented Mr. Jenks. "We'll do it, and move our camp. I
only hope those fellows don't find our airship and destroy it. We'll
have a hard time getting back to civilization again, if we have to walk
all the way."

This contingency caused Tom some uneasiness. He did not like to think
that the unscrupulous men might damage the Red Cloud, that had been
built only after hard labor. But he knew he could accomplish nothing by
worrying, and he tried to dismiss the matter from his mind.

They rather expected to see the thing in white again that night, but it
did not appear, and morning came without anything having disturbed their
heavy sleep, for they were tired from the day's tramp.

It took them the greater part of the day to make a circuit of the base
of Phantom Mountain in order to get to a place where a sort of trail led
upward.

"It's too late to do anything to-night," decided Tom, as they set up the
tent. "We'll rest, and start the first thing in the morning."

"And the ghost isn't likely to find us here," added Mr. Damon. "Where
are you going, Mr. Parker?" he asked, as he saw the scientist tramping a
little way up the side of the mountain.

"I am going to make some observations," was the answer, and no one paid
any more attention to him for some time. Supper was nearly ready when
Mr. Parker returned. His face wore a rather serious air, and Mr. Damon,
noting it, asked laughingly:

"Well, did you discover any volcanoes, that may erupt during the night,
and scare us to death?"

"No," replied Mr. Parker, calmly, "but there is every indication that we
will soon have a terrific electrical storm. From a high peak I caught a
glimpse of one working this way across the mountains."

"Then we'd better fasten the tent well down," called Tom. "We don't want
it to blow away."

"There will not be much danger from wind," was Mr. Parker's opinion.

"From what then?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"From the discharges of lightning among these mountain peaks, which
contain so much iron ore. We will be in grave danger."

The fact that the scientist had not always made correct predictions was
not now considered by his hearers, and Tom and the two men gazed at Mr.
Parker in some alarm.

"Is there anything we can do to avoid it?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"The only thing to do would be to leave the mountain," was the answer,
"and, as the iron ore extends for miles, we can not get out of the
danger zone before the storm will reach us. It will be here in less than
half an hour."

"Then we'd better have supper," remarked Tom, practically, "and get
ready for it. Perhaps it may not be as bad as Mr. Parker fears."

"It will be bad enough," declared the gloomy scientist, and he seemed to
find pleasure in his announcement.

The meal was soon over, and Tom busied himself in looking to the guy
ropes of the tent, for he feared lest there might be wind with the
storm. That it was coming was evident, for now low mutterings of thunder
could be heard off toward the west.

Black clouds rapidly obscured the heavens, and the sound of thunder
increased. Fitful flashes of lightning could be seen forking across the
sky in jagged chains of purple light.

"It's going to be a heavy storm," Tom admitted to himself. "I hope
lightning doesn't strike around here."

The storm came on rapidly, but there was a curious quietness in the air
that was more alarming than if a wind had blown. The campfire burned
steadily, and there was a certain oppressiveness in the atmosphere.

It was now quite dark, save when the fitful lightning flashes came,
and they illuminated the scene brilliantly for a few seconds. Then, by
contrast, it was blacker than ever.

Suddenly, as Tom was gazing up toward the peak of Phantom Mountain, he
saw something that caused him to cry out in alarm. He pointed upward,
and whispered hoarsely:

"The ghost again! There's our friend in white!"

The others looked, and saw the same weird figure that had menaced them
when they were encamped on the other side of the peak.

"They must have followed us," said Mr. Jenks, in a low voice.

Slowly the figure advanced, It waved the long white arms, as if in
warning. At times it would be only dimly visible in the blackness, then,
suddenly it would stand out in bold relief as a great flash of fire
split the clouds.

The thunder, meanwhile, had been growing louder and sharper, indicating
the nearer approach of the storm. Each lightning flash was followed in a
second or two, by a terrific clap. Still there was no wind nor rain, and
the campfire burned steadily.

All at once there was a crash as if the very mountain had split asunder,
and the adventurers saw a great ball of purple-bluish fire shoot down,
as if from some cloud, and strike against the side of the crag, not a
hundred feet from where stood the ghostly figure in white.

"That was a bad one," cried Mr. Damon, shouting so as to be heard above
the echoes of the thunderclap.

Almost as he spoke there came another explosion, even louder than the
one preceding. A great ball of fire, pear shaped, leaped for the same
spot in the mountain.

"There's a mass of iron ore there!" yelled Mr. Parker. "The lightning is
attracted to it!"

His voice was swallowed up in the terrific crash that followed, and,
as there came another flash of the celestial fire, the figure in
white could be seen hurrying back up the mountain trail. Evidently the
electrical storm, with lightning bolts discharging so close, was too
much for the "ghost."

In another instant it looked as if the whole place about where the
diamond seekers stood, was a mass of fire. Great forked tongues of
lightning leaped from the clouds, and seemed to lick the ground. There
was a rattle and bang of thunder, like the firing of a battery of guns.
Tom and the others felt themselves tingling all over, as if they had
hold of an electrical battery, and there was a strong smell of sulphur
in the air.

"We are in the midst of the storm!" cried Mr. Parker. "We are standing
on a mass of iron ore! Any minute may be our last!"

But fate had not intended the adventurers for death by lightning. Almost
as suddenly as it had begun, the discharge of the tongues of fire ceased
in the immediate vicinity of our friends. They stood still--awed--not
knowing what to do.

Then, once more, came a terrific clap! A great mass of fire, like some
red-hot ingot from a foundry, was hurled through the air, straight at
the face of the mountain, and at the spot where the figure in white had
stood but a few minutes before.

Instantly the earth trembled, as it had at Earthquake Island, but it was
not the same. It was over in a few seconds. Then, as the diamond seekers
looked, they saw in the glare of a score of lightning flashes that
followed the one great clap, the whole side of the mountain slip away,
and go crashing into the valley below.

"A landslide!" cried Mr. Parker. "That is the landslide which I
predicted! The lightning bolt has split Phantom Mountain!"




CHAPTER XVI--THE VAST CAVERN


For a time the roiling, slipping, sliding and tumbling of the mass of
earth and stones, down the side of the mountain, effectually drowned
all other sounds. Even the thunder was stilled, and though Tom and his
companions called to one another in terror, their voices could not rise
above that terrific tumult.

Finally, when they found that the direction of the slide was away from
their tent, and that they were not likely to be engulfed, they grew more
calm.

Gradually the noise subsided. The great boulders had rolled to the
bottom of the valley, and now only a mass of earth and stones was
sliding down. Even this stopped in about five minutes, and, as though
satisfied with what it had done, the electrical storm passed. Not a drop
of rain had fallen.

"Bless my shirt studs!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, who was the first to speak
after the din had quieted. "Bless my soul! But that was awful!"

"It was just what I expected," said Mr. Parker, calmly. "I knew, from
my observations, that we were in a region where landslides and terrific
electrical storms may be expected at any time. I fully looked for this."

"Well," remarked Mr. Jenks, rather sarcastically, "I hope it came up to
your expectations, Mr. Parker."

"Oh, fully," was the answer, "though I wish it could have happened
in daylight, so that I could better have observed certain phenomena
regarding the landslide. They are very interesting."

"At a distance," admitted Tom, with a laugh of relief. "Well, I'm glad
it's over, though we'll have to wait until morning to see what damage
has been done. Lucky we weren't struck by lightning. I never saw such
bolts!"

"Me, either!" declared Mr. Damon. "This mountain seems to attract them."

"It is like a magnet," said Mr. Parker. "I think I shall be able to make
some fine observations here."

"If we live through it," murmured Mr. Jenks.

They watched the play of lightning about a distant bank of clouds,
but the storm was now far away, only a faint rumbling of thunder being
heard.

"I'm wondering what happened to the phantom," said Tom, after a pause.
"Seems to me he was right in that track of the storm."

"Do you think it was a 'he'?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"I think we'll find that it's some sort of a man," answered the young
inventor. "We may find out very soon, now. I've changed my theory about
the ghost being reflections of light."

"How's that?" Mr. Damon wanted to know.

"Well, I think we are on the side of Phantom Mountain where the diamond
cave is," went on the lad. "The fact that the phantom appeared here,
soon after we arrived, shows that the men kept close track of our
movements. It also shows, I think, that the phantom did not have to
travel far to be on the spot, whereas we had to make quite a trip to get
around the base of the mountain. I think the cave is up there," and
Tom pointed toward the spot where the weird figure had been last seen,
before the storm drove it back.

"There may be two phantoms," suggested Mr. Jenks. "They may keep one on
this side of the mountain, and one on the other, to warn intruders away.

"It's possible," admitted Tom. "Well, we'll see how things look in the
morning, when we'll take up our march again, and go up the mountain.
We'll reach the top, if possible, which we couldn't do from the other
side, as it was too steep."

"I hope we shall be able to go forward in the morning," came from Mr.
Jenks.

"What do you mean?" asked the lad, struck by a peculiar significance in
the diamond man's tones.

"Why, that landslide may have opened a great gully in the side of
Phantom Mountain, which will prevent us from passing. It was a terrific
lot of earth and stones that slid away," answered Mr. Jenks.

"It certainly was," agreed Mr. Parker. "I would not be surprised if
the mountain was half destroyed, and it may be that the diamond cave no
longer exists."

"Not very cheerful, to say the least," murmured Mr. Jenks to Tom, and,
as it was getting quite chilly, following the storm, they went inside
the tent.

Tom could hardly wait for daylight, to get up and see what havoc the
landslide had wrought. As soon as the first faint flush of dawn showed
over the eastern peaks, he hurried from the tent. Mr. Damon heard him
arise, and followed.

A curious scene met their eyes. All about were great rocks rent and torn
by the awful power of the lightning. The fronts of the stone cliffs
were scarred and burned by the electrical fire, and fantastic markings,
grotesque faces, and leering animals seemed to have been drawn by some
gigantic artist who used a bolt from heaven for his brush.

But the eyes of Tom and Mr. Damon took all this in at a glance, and then
their gaze went forward to where the avalanche had torn away a great
part of the mountain.

"Whew! I should say it was a landslide!" cried Tom.

"Bless my wishbone, yes!" agreed Mr. Damon.

Below them, in the valley, lay piled immense masses of earth and stones.
Boulders were heaped up on boulders, and rocks upon rocks, being tossed
about in heaps, strung about in long ridges, and swirled about in
curves, as though some cyclone had toyed with them after the lightning
flash had tossed them there.

"But the mountain isn't half gone," said Tom, as his eyes took in what
was left of the phantom berg. "I guess it will take a few more bolts
like that one, to put this hill out of business."

Though the landslide had been a great one, the larger part of the
mountain still stood. An immense slice had been taken from one side, but
the summit was untouched.

"And there's where the diamond cave is!" cried Tom, pointing to it.

"I think so myself," agreed Mr. Jenks, who came from the tent at that
moment, and joined the lad and Mr. Damon. "I think we shall find the
cave somewhere up there. We must start for it, as soon as we have eaten,
and we may reach it by night."

The three stood gazing up toward the summit of the great mountain.
Suddenly, as the sun rose higher in the heavens, it sent a shaft of rosy
light on the face of the berg that had been scarred by the landslide.
Tom Swift uttered an exclamation, and pointed at something.

"See!" he cried. "Look where the trail is--the trail down which the
phantom must have come. It is on the edge of a cliff now!"

They looked, and saw that this was so. The increasing light had just
revealed it to them. When the lightning bolt had torn away a great
portion of the mountain it had cut sheer down for a great depth and
when the earth and stones fell away they left a narrow pathway, winding
around the mountain, but so near the edge of a great chasm, that there
was room but for one person at a time to walk on that footway. The
uncertain trail up Phantom Mountain had all but been destroyed.

"The way up to the peak is by that path, now," spoke Tom, in a low
voice.

"Bless my soul!" cried Mr. Damon. "It's as much as a man's life is worth
to attempt it. If he got dizzy, he'd topple over, and fall a thousand
feet. Dare we risk it?"

"It's the only way to get up," went on Tom. "It's either that way, or
not at all. We've tried the other side without success. We must go up
this way--or turn back."

"Then we'll go up!" cried Mr. Jenks. "It may not be as dangerous as it
looks from here."

But it was even more dangerous than it appeared, when they went part way
up it after a hasty breakfast. The trail was a mere ledge of rock now,
and in some places, to get around a projecting edge of the mountain,
they had to stand with their backs to the dizzy depths at their feet,
and with both arms outstretched work their way around to where the trail
was wider.

"Shall we risk it?" asked Tom, when they had tried the way, and found
it so dangerous. "We can't take anything with us--even our guns, for
we couldn't carry them, and if we reach the mouth of the cave, and find
those men there--"

He paused significantly. The adventurers looked at one another. The
search for the diamond makers was becoming more and more dangerous.

"I say let's go on!" decided Mr. Damon, suddenly. "We want to locate
that cave, first of all. Perhaps, when we do find it, we may see some
easier way of getting to it than this. And if those diamond makers do
attack us--well, I don't believe they'll shoot defenseless men, and they
may listen to reason, and give Mr. Jenks his rights--tell him how to
make diamonds in return for the money he gave them."

"I don't believe those scoundrels will listen to reason," replied the
diamond man, "but I agree with Mr. Damon that we ought to go on. We may
find some other means of reaching the cave--if we can discover it, and
we'll take a chance with the men."

"Forward it is, then!" cried Tom. "I have a revolver, and I can supply
one of you gentlemen with another. They may come in useful in an
emergency. Let's go back to camp, take a little lunch in our pockets,
and try to scale the mountain."

They were soon on their way up the dizzy path once more, and, as they
advanced, they found it growing more and more dangerous. In some places
they found it almost impossible to get around certain corners, where
there was barely room for their feet. As Tom remarked grimly, a fat man
never could have done it. Fortunately they were all comparatively thin,
for their hard work, and not too abundant food, since they had left the
airship, had reduced their weight.

Up and up they went, higher and higher, sometimes finding the path wide
enough for two to walk abreast, and again seeing it narrow almost to
a ribbon. They hardly dared look down into the chasm at their left--a
chasm filled, in part, with the rocks and boulders tossed into it by the
lightning bolt.

Tom was in the lead, and had just made a dangerous turn around a
shoulder of rock--one of those places where he had to extend both arms,
and fairly hug the cliff before he could get around.

But, when he had made it, and found himself on a broad pathway, cut
in the living rock, he gave a great shout--a shout that caused his
companions to hasten to his side. They found the young inventor pointing
to a clump of bushes and small trees.

But it was not the shrubbery that Tom desired to call to their
attention. They saw that in an instant, for, dimly seen through the
leaves, was something black, and, as they looked more closely, they saw
that it was a great hole in the side of the mountain--a vast cavern,
opening like a tunnel.

"The cave! The cave!" cried Tom. "The diamond makers' cave!"

Hardly had he spoken than two men, each one carrying a gun, showed
themselves in the mouth of the cavern, and, instant later they both ran
toward the little party of adventurers.




CHAPTER XVII--THE PHANTOM CAPTURED


Surprise held Tom and his friends almost spellbound for the moment.
The young inventor's hand went toward the pocket where he carried his
revolver. Mr. Jenks, who had the only other weapon, sought to draw it,
but he was stopped by a gesture of one of the two men with guns.

"Hold on, strangers!" the man cried. "I know what you're up to! Better
not try to draw anything--it might not be healthy. Now, then, who are
you, and what do you want?"

The question came rather as a surprise, at least to Tom and Mr. Jenks.
They had taken it for granted that these men--if they were the diamond
makers--would know Mr. Jenks, and guess at his errand in coming back
to Phantom Mountain. But, it seemed, that they took them all for casual
strangers.

No one answered for a moment. Tom caught the eye of Mr. Jenks, and there
was a look of hope in it. If ever there was a time for strategy, it was
now. Evidently Munson, the stowaway on the airship, had not yet been
able to send a warning to his confederates. And neither of the two men
recognized Mr. Jenks as the man who had been defrauded of his rights.
It might be possible to conceal the real object of the adventurers until
they had time to formulate a plan of action.

"Well," exclaimed the man with the gun, impatiently, "I ask you folks a
question. What do you want?"

Fortunately, neither Mr. Damon nor Mr. Parker replied. The former
because he deferred to Tom and Mr. Jenks, and the scientist because he
was busy inspecting some curious rocks he picked up. As it turned out
this was the luckiest thing he could have done. It lent color to what
Mr. Jenks said a moment later.

"What are you doing up here?" demanded the man again. "Don't you know
this is private property?"

"We--we were just looking around," answered Mr. Jenks, which was true
enough; as far as it went.

"Prospecting," added Tom.

"After gold?" demanded the second man, suspiciously.

"We'd be glad to find some," retorted the lad. At that moment Mr. Parker
began breaking off bits of rock with a small geologist's hammer which he
carried. The men with the guns looked at him.

"So you think you'll find gold up here?" asked the one who had first
spoken.

"Is there any?" inquired Tom, trying to make his voice sound eager.

"Nary a bit, strangers," was the answer, and the two men laughed
heartily. "Now, we don't want to seem harsh," went on the man who seemed
to be the spokesman, "but you'd better get away from here. This is
private ground, and dangerous too--how'd you ever get up the trail--we
heard it was destroyed."

"There is still a narrow path," said Mr. Jenks. "We came up that--the
lightning and landslide haven't left much of it, though."

Mr. Parker looked quickly up from the rocks at which he was tapping with
his small hammer. "You have terrific lightning up here," he said. "I am
much interested in it, from a scientific standpoint. I predict that some
day the entire mountain will be destroyed by a blast from the sky."

"I hope it won't be right away," spoke one of the men. "Now I guess you
folks had better be leaving while there's a path left to go down by."

"Might I ask," broke in Mr. Parker, as calmly as though he was lecturing
to a class of students, "might I ask if you have noticed any peculiar
effect of the lightning up here on the summit of the mountain? Does it
fuse and melt rocks, so to speak?"

"What's that?" cried the spokesman, with a sudden flash of anger. The
two men looked at each other.

"I wanted to know, merely for scientific reasons, whether the lightning
up here ever melted rocks?" repeated Mr. Jenks.

"Well, whether it's for scientific reasons or for any other, I'm not
going to answer you!" snapped the man. "It's none of your affair what
the lightning does up here. Now you'd all better 'vamoose'--clear out!"

"All right--we'll go," said Tom, quickly, at the same time motioning to
Mr. Jenks to agree with him. The eyes of the young inventor were
roving about. He saw what looked like a second trail, leading down the
mountain, from the far side of the cave. He was convinced now that there
was another way to get to it. Possibly they might find it. At any rate
nothing more could be done now. They must go back, for the cavern was
too well guarded to attempt to enter it by force--at least just yet.

"Yes, we'll go back," assented Mr. Jenks.

Mr. Parker was tapping away at the rocks. He looked toward the black
mouth of the big cave. On what corresponded to the roof of it, some
distance back from the entrance, he saw a slender metal rod sticking up
into the air.

"May I ask if that's a lightning rod?" he inquired innocently. "If
it is, I should like to ask about its action in a mountain that is so
impregnated with iron ore.

"You may ask until you get tired!" cried the spokesman, again showing
unreasoning anger, "but you'll get no answer from us. Now get away from
here before we do something desperate. You're on private ground and
you're not wanted. Clear out while you have the chance."

There was no help for it. Slowly our friends turned and began to go
down the dangerous trail. They were soon out of sight of the two men who
stood before the cave, with their guns ready, but neither Tom nor any of
his companions spoke for some time.

When they had rounded one of the most dangerous turns the young inventor
sat down to rest, an example followed by the others.

"Well," asked Tom, "do you think those are some of the diamond makers,
Mr. Jenks?"

"I certainly do, though I never saw those two men before. If I could
once get inside the cave, I could tell whether or not it was the one
where I was practically held a prisoner. But I'm sure it is. I know some
of the men used to go off every day with guns, and not come back until
night. I have no doubt they were on guard, just as these two are. And,
also, I think I heard them speak of a second entrance to the cavern. The
one we just saw may not be the main one, through which I was taken."

"I believe we are on the right track," ventured Mr. Damon, "but we will
either have to go up there after dark, which will be risky, on account
of the narrow trail, or else we will have to find some other path."

"The last would be better," spoke Tom.

"That rod of metal sticking up on top of the cave interested me," said
the scientist. "Did you hear anything of that when you were here before,
Mr. Jenks?"

"No. Probably that is only a lightning rod, or it may be a staff for a
signal flag. But what surprises me is that those men didn't suspect
that we were seeking to discover their secret. They took us for ordinary
prospectors."

"So much the better," remarked Tom. "We have a chance now of getting
inside that cave. But we will have to go back to camp, and make other
plans. And we must hurry, or it will be dark before we get there."

They hastened their steps, pausing only briefly to eat some of the lunch
they had brought along, and to drink from a spring that bubbled from the
side of the mountain. It was getting dusk when they got back to their
tent. They found nothing disturbed.

"I wonder if we'll see that phantom again to-night?" ventured Tom, as
they were sitting about the campfire a little later.

"Probably not," remarked Mr. Jenks. "I don't believe the ghost will
venture down the dangerous trail after dark, and the gang may think
that the warning given us by the two men on guard at the cave will be
sufficient. But if we don't leave here by to-morrow I think we will have
another visit from the thing in white."

It was about an hour after this when Tom was collecting some wood in a
pile nearer the fire, so as to have it ready to throw on, in case there
was any alarm in the night, that he happened to look up toward the
summit of the mountain. A slight noise, as of loose stones rolling down,
attracted his attention, and, at first, he feared lest another landslide
was beginning, but a moment later he saw what caused it.

There, advancing down the steep and dangerous trail was the figure
in white--the phantom. Instantly a daring plan came into Tom's head.
Dropping the wood softly, he moved back out of the glare of the fire.

"Mr. Jenks!" he called in a whisper.

The diamond man, who was behind the tent, came toward Tom.

"What is it?" he asked. Then, as he saw the ghostly visitor, he added:
"Oh--the phantom again! What's it up to?"

"The same thing," replied Tom, "but it won't do it long, if my plan
succeeds."

"What plan is that, Tom?"

"I'm going to try to capture that--that man--or whatever it is. Will you
help?"

"Surely!"

"Then let's work around behind it, while Mr. Damon and Mr. Parker come
up from in front. We'll solve this part of the mystery, anyhow, if it's
possible!"

The two other men were soon told of the plan. Meanwhile the thing in
white had advanced slowly, until within a few hundred feet of the camp.
They could see now that it was no shaft of light, but some white body,
shaped like a tall, thin man, draped in a white garment. The long arms
waved to and fro. There was no semblance of a head.

"You and Mr. Parker go right toward it, slowly, Mr. Damon," advised
Tom. "Mr. Jenks and I will make a circle, and get in back. Then, if it's
anything alive we'll have it."

The "ghost" continued to advance. Tom and the diamond man stole off to
one side, their buckskin moccasins making no sound. Mr. Damon and the
scientist went boldly forward.

This movement appeared to disconcert the spirit. It halted, waved the
arms with greater vigor than before, and seemed to indicate to the
adventurers that it was dangerous to advance. But Mr. Damon and Mr.
Parker kept on. They wanted to give Tom and Mr. Jenks time enough to
make the circuit.

Suddenly the stillness of the night was broken by a low whistle. It was
Tom's signal that he and Mr. Jenks were ready.

"Come on! Run!" cried Mr. Damon.

The scientist and the eccentric man leaped forward.

The "ghost" heard the whistle, and heard the spoken words. The thing in
white hesitated a moment, and then raised one arm. There was a flash of
fire, and a loud report.

"He's firing in the air!" cried Tom. "Come on, we have him now!"

Undaunted by the display of firearms, Mr. Damon and Mr. Parker kept on.
They could hear Tom and Mr. Jenks running up in back of the figure.
The latter also heard this, and suddenly turned. Caught between the two
forces of our friends, the "ghost" was at a loss what to do.

The next instant Tom, who had distanced Mr. Jenks, made a flying tackle
for the figure in white, and caught it around the legs. Very substantial
legs they were, too, Tom felt--the legs of a man.

"Wow!" yelled the "ghost," as he went down in a heap, the revolver
falling from his hand.

"Come on!" cried Tom. "I have him!"

His friends rushed to his aid. There was a confused mass of dark bodies,
arms and legs mingled with something tall and thin, all in white.
Suddenly the moon came from behind a cloud and they could see what they
had captured--for captured the phantom was.

It proved to be a rather small man, who wore upon his shoulders a
framework of wood, over which some white cloth was draped. It had fallen
off him when Tom made that tackle.

"Well," remarked the young inventor, as he sat on the struggling man's
chest. "I guess we've got you."

"I rather guess you have, stranger," was the cool reply.




CHAPTER XVIII--BILL RENSHAW WILL HELP


They were all panting from the exertion of the run up the mountain and
the contest with the phantom--a phantom no longer--though, truth to
tell, the struggle was not nearly so fierce as Tom had expected. He
thought the "ghost" would put up a stiff fight.

"Got any ropes to tie him with?" asked Mr. Damon, who was helping Tom
hold the man down.

"Ropes? You aren't going to tie me up are you, strangers?" asked the
captive.

"That's what we are!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks. "We've had trouble enough in
this matter, and if I've got one of the gang, perhaps I can get some of
the others, and have my rights. So tie him up, Tom, and we'll take him
to camp.

"Oh, you needn't go to all that trouble, strangers," went on the man,
calmly. "If one of you will get off my chest, and the other gentleman
ease up on my stomach a bit, I'll walk wherever you want me, and not
make any trouble. I haven't got a gun."

"Bless my gloves! But you're a cool one," commented Mr. Damon, as he
complied with the man's request, and got up from his stomach. "But look
out for him, Tom. He had a gun, for he fired it in the air."

"He hasn't it now," answered the young inventor. "I knocked it from his
hand when I leaped for him."

"That's what you did," assented the man, as he got up, while Tom kept a
tight hold of him, as did Mr. Jenks. "What kind of a grizzly bear hug do
you call that, anyhow, that you gave me?"

"That was a football tackle," explained Tom.

"I allers heard that was a dangerous game!" remarked the former phantom
simply. "Well, now you've got me, what are you going to do with me?"

"Take you where we can have a good look at you," replied Mr. Jenks, as
he kicked aside the wooden framework, and the sheet which had made the
"ghost" appear so tall. "So this is how you worked it; eh?"

"Yep. That was the 'haunt' stranger. I made it myself, and it worked all
right until you folks come along. I rather suspicioned from the first,
when I played the trick over on 'tother side of the mountain, that you
wouldn't be so easy to fool as most prospectors are."

"Oh, so you're the only ghost then?" asked Tom.

"I'm the only one."

By this time they had reached the camp. Tom threw some light logs on the
fire, which blazed up brightly. As the flames illuminated the face of
their captive, Mr. Jenks looked at him, and cried out:

"Why it's Bill Renshaw!"

"That's me," admitted the man who had played the part of the phantom,
"and thunder-turtles! if it ain't Mr. Jenks who was once in the diamond
cave with us. Whatever happened to you? I never heard. The others said
you got tired and went away."

"They took me away--defrauded me of my rights!" declared Mr. Jenks,
bitterly. "But I'll get them back! To think of Bill Renshaw playing the
part of a ghost!"

"They made me do it," went on the man, somewhat dejectedly. "I wanted to
be at work in the cave, but they wouldn't let me."

"Is this man one of the diamond makers?" asked Tom, in great surprise.

"He is--one of the helpers, though I don't believe he knows the secret
of making the gems," explained Mr. Jenks. "He was one of the men in the
cave when I was there before, and he and I struck up quite a friendship;
didn't we, Renshaw?"

"That's what, and there ain't no reason why we can't be friends now;
that is unless you hold a grudge against me for firing at you. But I
only shot in the air, to scare you away. Them's my instructions. I'm
supposed to be on guard, and scare away strangers. I'm tired of the
work, too, for I don't get my share, and those other fellows, in the
cave, get all the money from the diamonds."

Tom Swift uttered an exclamation. A sudden plan had come to him. Quickly
he whispered to Mr. Jenks:

"Make a friend of this man if possible. He evidently is dissatisfied.
Offer him a sum to show us another way into the cave, and we may yet
discover the secret of the diamond makers."

"I will," declared Mr. Jenks, quietly. Then, turning to Renshaw, he
added:

"Bill, come over here. I want to have a talk with you. Perhaps it will
be to our mutual advantage."

He led the former phantom to one side, and for some time conversed
earnestly with him. Mr. Jenks told the story of how he had been deceived
by Folwell and the others who were at the head of the gang of diamond
makers. The rich man related how they had taken his money, and, after
promising to disclose the secret process to him, had broken faith, and
had drugged him, afterward taking him out of the cave.

"I want only my rights, and that for which I paid," concluded Mr. Jenks.
"Now, I gather that these men haven't treated you altogether fairly,
Bill."

"Indeed they haven't. I helped 'em to the best of my ability, and all
I get out of it is to stay out on this lonely side of the mountain,
and play ghost. They owe me money, too, and they won't pay me, either,
though they have lots, for they sold some diamonds lately."

"Then they are still making diamonds?" asked Mr. Jenks, eagerly. "Have
you seen them? Do you know the secret?"

"No, I don't know it, for they won't let me in on it. I'm always sent
out of the cave just before they make the gems. But I know they've made
some lately, and have sold 'em. I want my share."

"Look here!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks, quickly, wishing to strike while the
iron was hot. "I'll make you a proposition. Show us how to get into that
cave, unknown to the diamond makers, and I'll pay you twice what they
agreed to. Is it a bargain?"

Bill Renshaw considered a moment. Then he thrust out his hand, clasped
that of Mr. Jenks, and exclaimed:

"It is. I'll take you into the cave by an entrance that's seldom used.
There are four ways to get in. The one where the two men drove you back
is the rear one. The front one is on the other side of the mountain, but
it's so well concealed that you'd never find it. But I can take you to
one where you can get in, and those fellows will never know it. And,
what's more, I'll help you if it comes to a fight!"

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks. "I think we'll discover the secret of the
diamond makers this time," and he went to tell the others of the success
of his talk. Bill Renshaw had been converted from an enemy into a
friend, and the former phantom was now ready to lead Tom and the others
into the secret cave.

"We'll start in the morning," decided Mr. Jenks, who, after many
disappointments, at last saw success ahead of him.




CHAPTER XIX--IN THE SECRET CAVE


Tom Swift was up at break of day, and the others were not far behind
him.

"Now for the secret cave!" cried the young inventor as he gazed up
the mountain, in the interior of which the mysterious band of men were
making the diamonds.

"Have you made any plans, Bill?" asked Mr. Jenks of the former phantom,
who had cast his lot in with the adventurers. "What will be the best
course for us to follow?"

"You just leave it to me, Mr. Jenks," was the answer. "I'll get you into
the cave, and those fellows, who, I believe, are trying to do me out of
my rights, as they did you out of yours, will never know a thing about
it."

"Bless my finger-nails!" cried Mr. Damon. "That will be great! We can
get in the cave, and watch them make the diamonds at our leisure."

"They don't make them every day," explained Renshaw. "It seems they
have to wait for certain occasions. Mostly they make the diamonds when
there's a big storm."

"A big storm," asked the scientist with a sudden show of interest.
"Do you mean one of those electrical storms, such as we had the other
night?"

"That's it, Mr. Parker, though why they wait until there's a storm is
more than I can tell."

"Perhaps they know that on such occasions no one will venture up the
mountain," spoke Mr. Damon.

"No, it isn't that," declared the scientist. "I think I am on the
track of a great scientific discovery, and I will soon be able to make
observations that will confirm it."

"Well, I'm going to make an observation right now," said Tom, with a
laugh. "I'm going to see what there is for breakfast."

"And that reminds me," came from Mr. Jenks, "shall we move our camp,
Bill, and take the tent with us to the cave?"

"I hardly think so," was the answer. "I think the best plan would be to
conceal the tent somewhere around here, in case you might need it again.
You can also store what food you have left."

"But, bless my appetite, we don't want to starve in that diamond cave!"
objected Mr. Damon.

"I'll see that you don't," declared Bill Renshaw. "I'll take you in
there, unbeknownst to those fellows, and I'll provide you with plenty
of food and water. You see the cave is so big that there are some parts
they never visit."

"And we can stay in one of those parts, and eat?" asked Tom.

"Sure," answered Bill.

"And watch the diamond makers at work?" asked Mr. Jenks.

"That's it," replied the former phantom.

"Then the sooner we get started the better," remarked Mr. Damon. Mr.
Parker said nothing. He appeared to be thinking deeply, and was tapping
at some rocks with his little hammer.

The advice of Bill Renshaw was followed, and the tent, and what food
remained, was concealed in the bushes, with rocks piled over to keep
away prowling animals. Then they started for the secret cave.

The man who played the part of a ghost picked up the framework and white
cloth that had formed his disguise.

"I'll still have to use this," he explained, "for I don't want those
fellows to know that I'm helping you. I'll continue to play the spirit
of the mountain, but there won't be much need of it. I don't think any
more people will come prospecting out here."

"Have you heard of the arrival of Farley Munson?" asked Tom, as he
related the facts about the stowaway.

"He hadn't arrived up to a day or so ago," answered Bill. "I guess he's
still traveling. Farley is one of the heads of the gang," he added, "and
a dangerous man."

As Bill led the way toward the cave, taking a route that the adventurers
had never suspected led to it, he explained that the cavern was a large
one, capable of holding an army.

"But there's only a small part of it used by the diamond makers," he
added. "They work in a small recess, near the summit of the mountain.
The little cave, where I'm going to take you, opens off from it by a
long passage. And, except that you'll be pretty much in the dark, you'll
be quite comfortable. There are tables, chairs, and some bunks in the
place. I can get you some lights, and plenty of food."

"But, if you are seen taking away food, won't the others suspect
something?" asked Tom.

"I do pretty much as I please," said Bill. "I go and come when I like.
All I'm supposed to do is to watch my two sides of the mountain, play
the ghost, and give warning when any one is coming. Sometimes I leave
black and white messages, like the one I put on your tent. Those fellows
fix 'em up for me. I've told 'em about you, though I didn't know who you
were, and they think you have gone, for the two men on guard at the rear
entrance so reported. Sometimes I stay out on the mountain for a couple
of days at a time, when the weather's good, and don't go back to the
cave. Those times I take food with me, and so if they see me making off
with some supplies they'll think I'm going to camp out."

"It doesn't look as though we'd ever get into a cave near the top of the
mountain, going this way," said Tom, as they marched along. "We're going
down, instead of up."

"That's the secret of this trail," explained Bill. "We go down in a
sort of valley, and then go up a pretty stiff place, and then we're on
a direct trail to the entrance I told you about. It's a steep road to
climb, but I guess we can manage it."

And a hard climb the adventurers did find it. The road was almost as bad
as the one along the edge of the chasm, but they managed to negotiate
it, and finally found themselves on a fairly good trail.

"We'll soon be there," Bill assured them. "After you get in the little
cave, where I'm going to hide you, I'll have to leave you for a spell,
until I get my ghost rigging fixed up again. But I'll see that you have
plenty of food and drink."

A little later their guide came to a sudden halt, and peered around
anxiously.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom.

"I was just looking to see if any of the men were about," he answered.
"But I guess not--it looks all right. The entrance is right here."

They were on a side of the mountain, near the summit. Below stretched a
magnificent scene. A great valley lay at their feet, and they could look
off to many distant peaks. The main trail to Leadville, and the one to
the settlement of Indian Ridge, was in sight.

Suddenly Tom, who had been using a small but powerful telescope, uttered
an exclamation, and focussed the instrument on a speck that seemed
moving along on the trail below.

"A man--coming up the mountain," cried Tom. "And--it can't be--yet it
is--it's Farley Munson--the stowaway!" he cried. "He's coming here!"

"Let me look!" begged Mr. Jenks, taking the glass from Tom. An instant
later the diamond man exclaimed: "Yes, it's Munson!"

"Then in here with you--quick!" cried Renshaw. "He can't see us yet, and
we'll be out of sight in another minute."

The former spirit pulled aside some thick bushes, and pointed to a hole
which was disclosed.

"The entrance to the secret cave," he announced. "Slip in all of you."

Tom, after another glance at the man toiling his way up the mountain,
entered the cavern. He was followed by the others. Bill was the last to
enter, and he replaced the bushes over the entrance.

"At last!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks, as he gazed up at the roof of the
dimly-lighted vault in which they found themselves.

"Yes, we're in the diamond makers' secret cave," added Tom. "Now to
catch them at work!"

"Come on," advised Bill, in a low tone, "We're not safe yet," and he
produced a lantern from some hidden recess, lighted the wick, and led
the way. As the others followed they were aware of a subdued noise in
the great cavern.




CHAPTER XX--MAKING THE DIAMONDS


"What's that noise?" asked Tom, as their guide flashed the lantern to
show them the way.

"That's the men getting ready to make diamonds, I guess," was the
answer. "You see it takes quite a while to get the stuff ready. I don't
know what they use--they never tell me any of their secrets."

"Oh, I know the ingredients well enough," said Mr. Jenks, "but I
don't know the secret of how they apply the terrific heat and pressure
necessary to fuse the materials into diamonds."

"Well, you'll soon know," declared Bill Renshaw. "Of course it isn't
always successful. I've known 'em to try half a dozen times before they
got any diamonds big enough to satisfy 'em. They gave me some of the
small ones when I asked for my wages.

"How did you come to get in with these men?" asked Tom, curious to
understand how a person seemingly as honest as Renshaw appeared to be
had cast his lot in with the men who had broken faith with Mr. Jenks.

"Oh, I've lived around these parts all my life," was the answer. "I knew
of this cave before these diamond fellers came to it. In fact, I
showed it to 'em. It was several years ago that a party of men who were
prospecting around here came to me and asked if I knew of a small cave
near the top of a high mountain, where lightning storms were frequent.
I told them about Phantom Mountain, as it was called then, and also of
this cave. If there's any place where they have worse lightning storms
than here, I'd like to know it. They scare me, sometimes, like the night
when that landslide happened, and I'm sort of used to 'em.

"Well, I took these men to the cave, and they hired me as a sort of
lookout. Then they began their work, and at first I didn't know what
they were up to, but finally I caught on. Then Mr. Jenks came, and
disappeared mysteriously, though then I didn't know that they had played
a trick on him. I was outside most of the time, pretending I was the
ghost. So that's how I came to get in with 'em, and I wish I was out."

"You soon will be, I think," declared Mr. Jenks. "But won't our talking
be heard by the men?"

"No danger. There is a thick wall between this part of the cave, and the
part where they live and work. I'll soon have you well hid, and then you
wait until I come back."

"What about Munson?" asked Tom. "He is evidently on his way here to tell
his confederates about us."

"He won't know what has happened to us," said Mr. Jenks, "and he won't
see anything of us. I guess we're safe enough."

Through the dark passage they followed Bill Renshaw until he came to a
halt in a place that suddenly widened and broadened into a good-sized
cave.

"Here's your stopping place," said the former ghost. "Now if you follow
that passage, off to the left," and he pointed to it, "you'll come
to the larger part of the cave where the diamond makers are. But go
cautiously, and don't make any noise. I won't be responsible for what
happens."

"We'll take all the risk," interrupted Tom.

"All right. Now there's a couple of lanterns around here. I'll light
them, and leave you for a while until I can get some grub. I'll be back
as soon as I can."

He glided away, after lighting two lanterns, by the gleams of which
the adventurers could see that they were in a vaulted cavern that had
evidently been fitted up as a living apartment. The sides, roof and
floor were of stone. It was clean, and the air was fresh. There were
some chairs, a table, and several cots, with pieces of bagging for
bedding, though it was warm in the place.

"I guess we can stay here until we discover the secret," spoke Tom.

"Bless my watch! We can if we have something to eat," came from Mr.
Damon, with something like a sigh. "I'm hungry!"

"And I want to make some observations," said Mr. Parker. "From what I
have seen of this mountain, I would not be surprised if this cave was
to be suddenly destroyed by a landslide or a lightning bolt. I will make
some further investigations."

"Well, if it's going to cause you to make such gloomy prophecies as
that, I'd just as soon you wouldn't look any further," spoke Tom, in
a low voice. But Mr. Parker, taking one of the lanterns, set about
examining the rock of which the cave consisted.

In a short time Bill Renshaw returned with enough food to last for two
days. He said he was going out on the mountain once more to act the part
of a lookout, and would visit the adventurers again the next day.

"In the meanwhile you can do just as you please," he said. "Nobody is
likely to disturb you here, and you can sneak up and take a look at the
men in the other cave whenever you're ready. Only be careful--that's all
I've got to say. They're desperate men."

It was not very pleasant, eating in the gloomy cavern, but they made the
best of it. They cooked on a small oil-stove they found in the place,
and after some hot coffee they felt much better.

"Well," remarked Tom, after a while, "shall we take a chance, and go
look at the men at work?"

"I think so," answered Mr. Jenks. "The sooner we discover this mystery,
the better. Then we can go back home."

"And recover my airship," added Tom, who was a bit uneasy regarding the
safety of the Red Cloud.

"Then, bless my finger-rings! let's go and see if we can find the big
cave your friend the ghost told us of," suggested Mr. Damon.

Cautiously they made their way along the passage Bill had pointed out.
As they went forward the subdued noise became louder, and finally they
could feel the vibration of machinery.

"This is the place," whispered Mr. Jenks. "That sound we hear is one of
the mixing machines, for grinding the materials--carbon and the other
substances--which go to make up the diamonds. I remember hearing that
when I was in the cave before."

"Then we must be near the place," observed Tom.

"Yes, but I didn't have much chance to look around when I was here
before. They wouldn't let me. I never even knew of the small cave Bill
took us to."

"Well, if we're close to it, we'd better go cautiously, and not talk any
more than we're obliged to," suggested Mr. Parker, and they agreed that
this was good advice.

They walked on softly. Suddenly Tom, who was in the lead, saw a gleam of
light.

"We're here," he whispered. "I'll put out our lantern, now," which he
did. Then, stealing forward he and the others beheld a curious sight.
The tunnel they were in ended at a small hole which opened into a large
cavern, and, fortunately, this opening was concealed from the view of
those in the main place.

"The diamond makers!" whispered Tom, hoarsely, pointing to several men
grouped about a number of strange machines.

"Yes--the very place where I was," answered Mr. Jenks, "and there is the
apparatus--the steel box--from which the diamonds are taken--now to see
how they make them."

Fascinated, the adventurers looked into the cave. The men there were
unaware of the presence of our friends, and were busily engaged. Some
attended to the grinding machine, the roar and clatter of which made
it possible for Tom and the others to talk and move about without being
overheard. Into this machine certain ingredients were put, and they were
then pulverized, and taken out in powdery form.

The power to run the mixing machine was a gasoline motor, which
chug-chugged away in one corner of the cave.

As the powder was taken out, other men fashioned it into small balls,
which were put on pan, and into a sort of oven, that was heated by a
gasoline stove.

"Is that how they make the diamonds?" asked Mr. Damon.

"That is evidently the first step," said Mr. Jenks. "Those balls of
powdered chemicals are partly baked, and then they are put into the
steel box. In some way terrific heat and pressure are applied, and the
diamonds are made. But how the heat and pressure are obtained is what we
have yet to learn."

He paused to watch the men at work. They were all busy, some attending
to the machines, and others coming and going in and out of the cave. In
one part a man was apparently getting ready a meal.

Suddenly there rushed into the cave a man who seemed much excited.

"Are you nearly ready with that stuff?" he cried. "There's a good storm
gathering on the mountain!"

"Yes, we'll be ready in half an hour," answered one of the men at the
mixing machine.

"Good. It will be flashing lightning bolts then, and we can see what
luck we have. The last batch was a failure." The man hurried out again.
Mr. Parker touched Tom and Mr. Jenks on their shoulders.

"What is it?" asked Tom.

"I know the secret of making the diamonds," said the scientist.

"What?" cried Mr. Jenks.

"It is by the awful power of the lightning bolts!" whispered Mr. Parker.
"Everything is explained now--the reason why they make diamonds in this
lonely place, near the top of the mountain. They need a place where the
lightning is powerful. I can understand it now--I suspected it before.
They make diamonds by lightning!"

"Are you sure?" cried Mr. Jenks.

"Positive."

"I agree with you," said Tom Swift. "I was just getting on that track
myself, when I saw the electric wires running to the steel box. That
explains the upright rod on the top of the mountain. The man says
a storm is coming--very well; we'll stay here and watch them make
diamonds!"

As he spoke there came the mutter of thunder, and the mountain vibrated
slightly. The men in the cave redoubled their activity. Tom and his
friends felt that the secret process they had so long sought was about
to be demonstrated before their eyes.



CHAPTER XXI--FLASHING GEMS


Eagerly the adventurers looked through the opening at the end of the
passage into the larger cave. The men opened the small oven in which the
balls of white chemicals and carbon mixed, had been baked, and a pile of
things, that looked like irregularly-shaped marbles, were placed in the
steel box.

This box, which was about the size of a trunk, was of massive metal. It
was placed in a recess in the solid rock, and all about were layers of
asbestos and other substances that were nonconductors of heat.

"That box becomes red hot," exclaimed Mr. Jenks, in a whisper. "When
things are in readiness, that lever is pulled and the diamonds are
made. I pulled it once, but I did not then know the process involved. I
supposed that the lightning had nothing to do with making the diamonds."

"It has--a most important part," said Mr. Parker. The hidden adventurers
could talk in perfect safety now, for the men in the large cave were too
excited to pay much attention to them. The muttering of the thunder
grew louder, and at times a particularly loud crash told that a bolt had
struck somewhere in the vicinity of the cave.

"But, bless my watch-charm!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, "I didn't know
lightning made diamonds."

"It does not--always," went on the scientist. "But great heat and
pressure are necessary to create the gems. In nature this was probably
obtained by prehistoric volcanic fires, and by the terrific pressure of
immense rocks. It is possible to make diamonds in the laboratory of the
chemist, but they are so minute as to be practically valueless.

"However, these men seem to have hit upon a new plan. They utilize the
terrific heat of lightning, and the pressure which is instantaneously
obtained when the bolt strikes. I am anxious to see how it is done.
Look, I think they are getting ready to make the gems."

Indeed there seemed to be an air of expectancy among the diamond makers.
The mixing machine had now been stopped, and, as it was more quiet
in the cave, our friends, in their hiding-place, had to speak in mere
whispers. All the men were now gathered about the great steel box.

This receptacle had been closed by a solid metal door, which was screwed
and clamped tight. Then one of the men examined a number of heavily
insulated electric wires that extended from the box off into the
darkness where Tom and his companions could not discern them.

"That's Folwell--the man I befriended, and who got me into this game,"
whispered Mr. Jenks. "He was also one of the first to turn against me. I
think he's one of the leaders."

Folwell came back, after having gone into a dark part of the cave. He
went over to an electrical switch on one of the stone walls.

"It's almost time," Tom heard him say to his confederates. "The storm is
coming up rapidly."

"Will it be severe enough?" asked one of the helpers. "We had all our
work for nothing last time. The flashes weren't heavy enough."

"These will be," asserted Folwell. "The indicator shows nearly a million
volts now, and it's increasing."

"A million volts!" exclaimed Tom. "I hope it doesn't strike anywhere
around here."

"Oh, it will probably be harmlessly conducted down on the heavy wires,"
said Mr. Parker. "We are in no danger, at present, though ultimately I
expect to see the whole mountain shattered by a lightning bolt."

"Cheerful prospect," murmured Tom.

There was a terrific crash outside. The rocky floor of the cave
trembled.

"Here she comes!" cried Folwell. "Get back, everybody! I'm going to
throw over the switch now!"

The men retreated well away from the steel box. Folwell threw over the
lever--the same one Mr. Jenks remembered pulling. Then the man ran
to the electric switch on the wall, and snapped that into place,
establishing a connection.

There was a moment's pause, as Folwell ran to join the others in their
place of safety. Then from without there came a most nerve-racking and
terrifying crash. It seemed as if the very mountain would be rent into
fragments.

Watching with eager eyes, the adventurers saw sparks flash from the
steel box. Instantly it became red hot, and then glowed white and
incandescent. It was almost at the melting point.

Then came comparative quiet, as the echoes of the thunder died away amid
the mountain peaks.

"I guess that did the trick!" cried Folwell. "It was a terrific crash
all right!"

He and the others ran forward. The steel box was now a cherry red,
for it was cooling. Folwell threw back the lever, and another man
disconnected the switch. There was a period of waiting until the box was
cool enough to open. Then the heavy door was swung back.

With a long iron rod Folwell drew something from the retort. It was the
tray which had held the white balls. But they were white no longer, for
they had been turned into diamonds. From their hiding-place Tom and the
others could see the flashing gems, for, in spite of the fact that the
diamonds were uncut, some of them sparkled most brilliantly, due to the
peculiar manner in which they were made.

"We have the secret of the diamonds!" whispered Mr. Jenks. "There must
be a quart of the gems there!"

The men gathered about Folwell, uttering exclamations of delight. The
diamonds were too hot to handle yet.

"That's going some!" exclaimed the chief of the diamond makers. "We have
a small fortune here."

The was a sudden commotion at one end of the cave. A man rushed in. At
the sight of him Tom stared and uttered an exclamation.

"Munson--the stowaway!" he whispered.

"Hello!" cried Folwell, as he saw his confederate. "I thought you were
East, keeping Jenks away from here."

"He got the best of me!" cried Munson, "he and that Tom Swift! I stowed
away on their airship, but they found me out by a wireless message,
and marooned me in the woods. I've been trying to get here ever since!
Didn't you get my messages of warning?"

"No--what warnings?" cried Folwell.

"About Jenks, Tom Swift and the others. They're here--they must be on
Phantom Mountain now. In fact, I shouldn't be surprised if they were in
this cave. I traced them to their camp, but they're gone. They may be
among us now--in some of the secret recesses!"

For an instant Folwell stared at the bearer of these tidings. Then he
cried out:

"Scatter men, and find these fellows! We must get them before they
discover our secret!"

"It's too late--we know it!" exulted Tom Swift. Then he whispered to
the others to hurry to the part of the cave where Bill Renshaw had first
hidden them.




CHAPTER XXII--PRISONERS


"Do you think there is any danger of them finding us?" asked Mr. Damon,
as he hurried along beside Tom.

"I'm afraid so," was the answer. "I've been worried ever since we saw
Munson heading this way. But we couldn't do any differently."

"Perhaps Bill Renshaw may be able to conceal us," suggested Mr. Jenks.
"Very likely he knows that Munson is on hand. Perhaps we will be safe
for a while. I want to make a few more observations as to how they
manufacture the diamonds, and then, with what I already know, I'll have
the secret."

"And I'd like to make some scientific tests of the sides and bottom
rocks of the cave," spoke Mr. Parker. "I think it will bear out my
theory that the mountain will soon be destroyed."

"Well, you were right about Earthquake Island, and you may be right
about this mountain," said Tom, "but if it is going to be annihilated I
hope we get far enough away from it."

"We can keep our presence here a secret for a few more days, I think
that will be long enough," proceeded Mr. Jenks. "Then we will leave."

"And, in the meanwhile, they'll be searching for us," objected Mr.
Damon. "I wish that ghost-chap would come back and tell us what to do.
Bless my liver-pin, but we are going to be in considerable danger, I'm
afraid! Those men may capture us, and decide to make diamond dust from
us."

"Come on--hurry to the little cave," urged Tom. "Then we'll get ready to
defend ourselves."

"The main cave is a large one," said Mr. Jenks, "and there are many
hiding places in it. In fact, it is so large that it will take those
fellows several days to complete a circuit of it. By that time Bill
Renshaw may come back, and take us to some place in which they have
already searched for us. Then we'll be comparatively safe."

This thought was some consolation to them, as they made their way
through the dark passage, dimly illuminated by the lantern they had
rekindled, to the place where Bill had hidden them. They found things
as they had left them, and proceeded to get a meal, though Tom said it
would be best not to cook anything, or even to make coffee, for fear the
odors would enable the searchers to trail them.

So they ate cold food, glad to get that. Silently they sat about the
dimly-lighted cavern, and discussed the situation. True they might even
now retreat, going out of the entrance Bill had showed them, and so
escape. But Mr. Jenks felt that his mission was not completed yet, and
they all agreed to stay with him.

"For there are several points about making diamonds that are not
quite clear to me," he said. "I need to know how that steel box is
constructed, how the electrical switches are arranged, what kind of
lightning rods they use, and how they regulate the pressure. The other
things, and how to mix the ingredients, I already know."

"Then we'll do our best to help you," promised Tom. "But now I think we
had better see what sort of a defense we can put up. We have our guns
and revolvers, and with these chairs and tables we can build a sort of
barricade behind which we can take refuge if those fellows do discover
our hiding place."

This was conceded to be a good idea, and soon a rude sort of fort was
made, behind which the adventurers could take their stand and fight, if
necessary, though they hoped this would not come to pass.

They remained quietly in the cave the remainder of that day, and, when
it was night, as they could tell by their timepieces--there was no
daylight--they divided the hours into watches, taking turns standing
guard.

Morning, at least in point of time, came without any disturbance, and
they made a cold breakfast. They hoped that Bill Renshaw would come, but
he did not appear.

After sitting in the dark cave until afternoon, Tom said:

"I think we might as well go and take another observation of the big
cave. We can tell what the men are doing, then, for they don't seem to
have been near us. Maybe they have given up the search for us, and we
can see them at work, and Mr. Jenks can gain what further knowledge he
needs."

"That will be a good plan," agreed the diamond man. "It's maddening to
sit here, doing nothing."

"And it will be comparatively safe to go from here to our former post of
observation," added Tom, "for there doesn't seem to be any opening along
the tunnel, into the larger cave, except the place where we were."

Accordingly they started off. Cautiously they looked through the opening
into the apartment where they had seen the diamonds made.

"There's not a soul here!" exclaimed Tom, in a whisper. The others
looked. The place was deserted--the machinery silent. Mr. Jenks peered
in for a moment, and then exclaimed:

"I'm going in! Now's my chance to find out all that I wish to know! It
may never come again, and then we can soon leave Phantom Mountain!"

It was a daring plan, but it seemed to be the best one to follow. They
were all tired of inactivity. Mr. Jenks managed to get through the
opening, and dropped into the big cave. The others followed. Mr. Jenks
hurried over to the steel box, and began an examination of it. Tom Swift
was looking at the electrical switch. He saw how it was constructed. Mr.
Damon and Mr. Parker were peering interestedly about.

Suddenly the sound of voices was heard, and the echo of footsteps. Mr.
Jenks started.

"They're coming back!" he whispered hoarsely. "Run!"

They all turned and sped toward their hiding place. But they were too
late. An instant later Folwell, Munson and the other diamond makers
confronted them. Our friends made a bold rush, but were caught before
they could go ten feet.

"We have them!" cried Munson. "They walked right into our hands!"

It was true. Tom Swift and the others were the prisoners of the diamond
makers.



CHAPTER XXIII--BROKEN BONDS


"Well," remarked Tom Swift, in mournful tones, "this looks as if we were
up against it; doesn't it?"

"Bless my umbrella, it certainly does," agreed Mr. Damon.

"And it's all my fault," said Mr. Jenks. "I shouldn't have gone into the
big cave. I might have known those men would come back any time."

The above conversation took place as our friends lay securely bound in
a small cave, or recess, opening from the larger cavern, where, about
an hour before, they had been captured and made prisoners by the diamond
makers. Despite their struggles they had been overpowered and bound,
being carried to the cave, where they were laid in a row on some old
bags.

"It certainly is a most unpleasant situation, to say the least,"
observed Mr. Parker.

"And all my fault," repeated Mr. Jenks.

"Oh, no it isn't," declared Tom Swift, quickly. "We were just as ready
to follow you into that cave as you were to go. No one could tell that
the men would return so soon. It's nobody's fault. It's just our bad
luck."

From where he lay, tied hand and foot, the young inventor could look
out into the cave where he and the others had been caught. The diamond
makers were busily engaged, apparently in getting ready to manufacture
another batch of the precious stones. They paid little attention to
their captives, save to warn them, when they had first been taken into
the little cave, that it was useless to try to escape.

"They needn't have told us that," observed Tom, as he and the others
were talking over their situation in low voices. "I don't believe any
one could loosen these ropes."

"They certainly are pretty tight," agreed Mr. Damon. "I've been tugging
and straining at mine for the last half hour, and all I've succeeded in
doing is to make the cords cut into my flesh."

"Better give it up," advised Mr. Jenks.

"We'll just have to wait."

"For what?" the scientist wanted to know.

"To see what they'll do with us. They can't keep us here forever.
They'll have to let us go some time." Following their capture, Folwell
and Munson, the latter the stowaway of the airship, had been in earnest
conversation regarding our friends, but what conclusion they had reached
the adventurers could only guess.

"And we didn't have time to examine the diamond-making machinery close
enough so that we could duplicate it if necessary," complained Tom, a
little later.

"No," agreed Mr. Jenks. "There are certain things about it that are not
clear to me. Well, I don't believe I'll have another chance to inspect
it. They'll take good care of that, though they seem to be getting ready
to make more diamonds."

"Perhaps they're going to manufacture a big batch, and then leave this
place," suggested Mr. Damon. "They will probably go to some other secret
cave, and leave us here."

"I hope they untie us before they leave, and give us something to eat,"
remarked the young inventor.

For two hours longer the captives lay there, in most uncomfortable
positions. Then Folwell and Munson, leaving the group of diamond makers
who were grouped about the machinery, approached the captives.

"Well," remarked Munson, "we got ahead of you after all; didn't we. You
thought you had our secret, but it will be a long while before you ever
make diamonds."

"What are you going to do with us?" asked Tom.

"Never mind. You came where you had no right to, and you must take the
consequences."

"We did have a right to come here!" exclaimed Mr. Jenks. "I am entitled
to know how the diamonds are made. I paid for the information, and you
tricked me. If ever it's possible I'll have the whole gang arrested for
swindling."

"You'll never get the chance!" declared Folwell. "You were given some
diamonds for the money you invested, and that makes us square."

"No, it doesn't!" declared Mr. Jenks. "I invested the money to learn how
to make diamonds, and you know it! You tricked me, and I had a right
to try to discover your secret! I nearly have it, too, and I'll get it
completely before I'm done with you!"

"No, you won't!" boasted Folwell. "But we didn't come here to tell you
that. We came to give you something to eat. We're not savages and
we'll treat you as well as we can in spite of the fact that you are
trespassers. We're going to give you some grub, but I warn you that any
attempt to escape will mean that some of you will get hurt."

He signalled to some of his confederates. These men unbound the
captives' arms, and stood over them while they ate some coarse food that
was brought into the small cave. They were given coffee to drink, and
then, when the simple meal was over, they were securely bound again,
and left to themselves, while the diamond makers went back to their
machinery.

It was evident that they were going to attempt a big operation, for an
unusually large quantity of the white stuff was prepared. The prisoners
watched them idly. They could see some but not all of the operations. In
this way several hours passed.

Gloom possessed the hearts of Tom and his friends. Not only had their
expedition been almost a failure so far, but the young inventor was
worried lest the gang might discover and wreck his airship. This would
prove a serious loss. Lying there in the semi-darkness the lad imagined
all sorts of unpleasant happenings.

At times he dozed off, as did the others. They had become somewhat used
to the pain caused by the bonds, for their nerves were numb from the
strain and pressure.

Once, as he was lightly sleeping, Tom was awakened by hearing loud
voices in the main cave. He looked out, rolling over slightly to get a
better view. He saw the man who, once before had run in to give news of
an approaching electrical storm.

"Are you fellows all ready?" asked this same man again.

"Yes. Is there another storm coming?"

"Yes, and it's going to be a corker!" was the reply. "It's one of the
worst I've ever seen. It's sweeping right up the valley. It'll be here
in an hour."

"That's good. We need a big flash to make all the material we have
prepared into diamonds. It's the biggest batch we ever tried. I hope it
succeeds, for we're going to leave--" The rest was in so low a tone that
Tom could not catch it.

The storm messenger departed. Folwell and Munson busied themselves about
the machinery. Tom dozed off again, dimly wondering what had become of
Bill Renshaw, and whether the former ghost knew of their plight. The
others were asleep, as the young inventor saw by the dim light of a
lantern in the cave. Then, he too, shut his eyes.

Tom was suddenly awakened by feeling some one's hands moving about his
clothing. At first he thought it was one of the diamond-making gang, who
had sneaked in to rob him. "Here! What are you up to?" exclaimed Tom.

"Quiet!" cautioned a voice. "Are you all here?"

"All of us--yes. But who are you?"

"Easy--keep quiet, Tom Swift! I'm Bill Renshaw! I've been searching all
over for you, since I got back to your cave and found it empty. Now I'm
going to free you. I got in here by a secret entrance. Wait, I'll cut
your ropes." There was a slight sound, and an instant later Tom was
freed from his bonds.




CHAPTER XXIV--IN GREAT PERIL


The young inventor could scarcely believe the good luck that had so
unexpectedly come to him and his companions. No sooner was Tom able to
move freely about than Bill Renshaw performed the same service for Mr.
Jenks and the others, cautioning them to be quiet as he awakened them,
and cut the ropes.

"Bless my circulation!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, in a hoarse whisper. "How
did you ever get here. I'd given ourselves up for lost."

"Oh, I came in off the mountain, as there's a big storm due," explained
the man. "There was no need of me playing the haunt in daytime, anyhow.
I went to the cave, found you and your things gone, and I surmised that
you might have walked into some trap."

"We did," admitted Mr. Jenks, grimly.

"Well, I hunted around until I found you," went on Bill. "This mountain
is honeycombed with caves, all opening from the large one, I know them
better than these fellows do, so I could explore freely, and keep out of
their sight. They didn't know that there was a second entrance to this
place, but I did, and I made for it, when I couldn't find you in some of
the other caves where I looked. And, sure enough, here you were."

"Well, we can't thank you enough," said Mr. Parker. "But you say there
is a big storm coming?"

"One of the biggest that's been around these parts in some time,"
replied Bill.

"Then perhaps the mountain will be destroyed," went on the scientist, as
calmly as if he had remarked that it might rain.

"I hope nothing like that happens until we get away," spoke Mr. Damon,
fervently.

"What had we better do?" inquired Tom.

"Get away, unless you want to discover some more of their secrets,"
advised Bill. "Those fellows are planning something, but I can't find
out what it is. They are suspicious of me, I think. But they are up to
something, and I believe, it would be best for you to leave while you
have the chance. It may not be healthy to stay. That's why I did my best
to untie you."

"We appreciate what you have done," declared Mr. Jenks, "but I want my
rights. I must learn a few more facts about how to make diamonds from
lightning flashes, and then I will have the same secret they cheated me
out of. I think if we wait a while we may be able to see the parts of
the process that are not quite clear to us. What do you say, Tom Swift?"

"Well, I would like to learn the secret," replied the lad, "and if Bill
thinks it's safe to stay here a while longer--"

"Oh, I guess it will be safe enough," was the reply. "Those fellows
won't bother about you now that they are about to make some more
diamonds. Besides, they think you're all tied up. Yes, you can stay here
and watch, I reckon. I've got a couple of guns, and--"

"Then we'll stay," decided Tom. "We can put up a better fight now."

Silently, in their prison, but which they could now leave whenever they
pleased, the adventurers watched the diamond makers once more. The same
process they had witnessed before was gone through with. The white balls
were put inside the steel box and sealed up. Then they waited for the
storm to reach its height.

That this would not be long was evidenced by the mutterings of thunder
which every moment grew louder. The outburst of electrical fury was
likely to take place momentarily, and that it would be unusually severe
was shown by the precautions taken by the diamond makers. They attached
a number of extra wires, and brought out some insulated, hard rubber
platforms, on which they themselves stood. Tom and Mr. Jenks were much
interested in watching this detail of the work, and sought to learn how
each part of the process was done.

"I almost think we can make diamonds, Tom, when we get back to
civilization," whispered Mr. Jenks.

"I hope we can," answered Tom, "and we can't get back any too soon to
suit me. I want to be in my airship again."

"I don't blame you. But look, they are getting ready to adjust the
switch."

The adventurers ceased their whispered talk, and eagerly watched the
diamond makers. Folwell and Munson were hurrying to and fro in the big
cave, attending to the adjustments of the machinery.

"On your insulated plates--all of you," Folwell gave the order. "This
is going to be a terrific storm. The gage shows twice the power we have
ever used, and it's creeping up every minute! We'll have more diamonds
than ever had before!"

"Yes, if the mountain isn't destroyed," added Mr. Parker, in a low
voice. "I predict that it will be split from top to bottom!"

"Comforting," thought Tom, grimly.

"I guess we're all ready," said Folwell, in a low tone to Munson. "We'd
better get insulated ourselves. I'm going to throw the switch."

He did so. A moment later the man who had before given warning of the
storm came dashing in. He was very much excited.

"It's awful!" he cried. "The lightning is striking all over! Big rocks
are being split like logs of wood!"

"Well, it can't do any damage in here," said Munson. "We are well
protected. Get on one of the plates," and he motioned to one of the
hard-rubber platforms that was not occupied. The roar and rumble of the
storm outside had given place to short terrific crashes. In their small
cave the adventurers could feel the solid ground shake.

A bluish light began dancing about the electrical wires. There was a
smell of sulphur in the air. Crash after crash resounded outside. A
flash of flame lit up the whole interior of the cave. It came from the
copper switch.

"Something's wrong with the insulation!" cried Munson.

"Don't go near it!" yelled Folwell. "If you value your life, stand
still!"

Hardly had he spoken than inside the cavern there sounded a report like
that of a small cannon. A big ball of fire danced about the middle of
the cave and then leaped on top of the steel box.

"This is a fearful storm," cried Munson.

The adventurers in the cave did not know what to say or do. They were in
deadly peril.

Suddenly there came a crash louder than any that had preceded it. The
whole side of the cave where the switches were was a mass of bluish
flame. Then came a ripping, tearing sound, and a tangle of wires and
copper connections were thrown to the floor. At the same time the steel
box, containing the materials from which diamonds were made, turned
blue, and flames shot from it.

"It's all up with us!" cried Munson. "Run for it, everybody! The wires
are down, and this place will be an electric furnace in another minute!"

He leaped toward the exit from the cave.

"What about those fellows?" asked Folwell, indicating the place where
Tom and the others had been tied.

"They'll have to do the best they can! It's every man for himself, now!"
yelled Munson. There was a wild scramble from the cavern.

"Come on!" cried Tom. "We must escape! It's our only chance!"

He leaped into the big cave, followed by the others. Already long
tongues of electrical fire were shooting out from the walls and roof as
Tom Swift and his companions, evading them as best they could, sought
safety in flight.



CHAPTER XXV--THE MOUNTAIN SHATTERED--CONCLUSION


"Can't we get some of the diamonds?" cried Mr. Damon, as he raced along
behind Tom. "Now's our chance. Those fellows have all gone!" The odd man
made a grab for something as he ran.

"It's as much as our lives are worth," declared the young inventor. "We
dare not stop! Come on!"

"I'd like to investigate some of the machinery," spoke Mr. Jenks, "but I
wouldn't stop, even for that."

"The storm is too dangerous," called Bill Renshaw. "I can show you a
shorter way out than the one those fellows have taken. Follow me."

"No way can be too short," said Mr. Parker, solemnly. "This mountain
will go to pieces shortly, I think!"

Tom shuddered. He remembered how narrow had been their escape when
Earthquake Island sank into the sea. And that some terrific upheaval was
now imminent might be judged from the awful reports that sounded more
plainly as the adventurers raced toward the opening of the cave. It was
like the bombardment of some doomed city.

Mr. Jenks and Tom cast one longing look behind at the complicated and
expensive machinery that had been installed in the cave by the diamond
makers. They had abandoned it, and in it lay the secret of making
precious gems. But there was no time to stop now, and investigate.

"This way," urged Bill Renshaw. "We'll soon be out."

"But won't it be dangerous to go outside?" asked Mr. Damon. "Shan't we
be struck by lightning? There is some protection in here."

"None at all," said Mr. Parker, quickly. "This mountain is a natural
lightning rod. To stay here in this cave will be sure death when the
storm gets directly over it. And that will be very soon. We must get
on insulated ground. Is there any part of this mountain that does not
contain iron ore?" the scientist asked of the former spirit.

"Yes; the way out by which we are going lands on a dirt hill."

"That's good; then we may be saved."

On they ran. They had no lanterns, but the blue light of the
electricity, as it leaped from point to point inside the cave, where
there were outcroppings of iron ore, made the place bright enough to
see.

"Here we are!" cried Bill Renshaw at length. "Here's the way out!"

Making a sudden turn in the winding passage he showed the adventurers
a small opening in the side of the crag. In an instant they had passed
through, and found themselves in daylight once more. The sudden glare
almost blinded them, for, though the sky was overcast by clouds, from
which jagged tongues of lightning played, the outside was much lighter
than the dark cave.

"I should say it was a storm!" cried Tom Swift. "See, it is striking
every minute, and all around us!"

In fact, lightning bolts were falling on every side of the adventurers.
Every time the balls of fire struck, they burst open great stones,
or seared a livid scar on the face of some cliff. As for Tom and the
others, they stood on a dry dirt hill, in which, fortunately, there was
no iron ore. To this fact they undoubtedly owed their lives, though
had there been rain, to moisten the ground and make the earth a good
conductor of electricity, they probably would have been badly shocked.
But the electrical outburst was not accompanied by rain.

Tom looked up. He saw a compact mass of cloud moving toward the summit
of the mountain on the slope of which they stood. From this cloud there
played shafts of reddish-green fire.

"Look!" called the young inventor to Mr. Parker. The instant the latter
saw the cloud, he cried:

"We must get away from here by all means! That is the center of the
storm. As soon as it gets over the mountain, where that lightning rod
is, all the electrical fluid will be discharged in one bolt at the
mountain, and it will be destroyed! We must run, but keep on the dirt
places! Run for your lives!"

They needed no second warning. Turning, they fled down the steep side of
the mountain, slipping and stumbling, but taking care not to step on any
iron ore. Behind them flashed the lightning bolts.

Suddenly there was a most awful crash. It seemed as if the end of the
world had come, and the ear drums of Tom and his companion almost burst
with the fearful report. The concussion knocked them down, and they lay
stunned for a moment.

Following the terrible report there was a low, rumbling sound. Hardly
knowing whether he was dead or alive, Tom opened his eyes and looked
about him. What he saw caused him to cry out in terror.

The whole mountain seemed bathed in fire. Great blue, red and green
flashes played around it. Then the towering cliff seemed to melt and
crumble up, and the great peak, the top of it containing the diamond
makers' cave, from which they had fled but a few minutes before, the
entire summit was toppled over into the valley on the other side, and in
the direction opposite to that where the adventurers stood.

Then came a profound silence, and the lightning ceased. The storm was
over, and only the rattle of stones and boulders, as they came to rest
in the valley below, reached the ears of our friends.

"Phantom Mountain has been destroyed, just as I said it would be," spoke
Mr. Parker, solemnly. Once more he had prophesied correctly.

For a few minutes the adventurers hardly knew what to say. They arose
awkwardly from the ground where the shock had tossed them. Then Tom
remarked, as calmly as possible:

"Well, it's all over. I guess we may as well get back to our airship."

"What became of Munson and the others?" asked Mr. Damon.

Mr. Jenks pointed to the trail, far below. The figures of some men,
running madly, could be seen.

"There they go," he said; "I fancy we have seen the last of them." And
they had, for some time at least.

There was little use lingering any longer on Phantom Mountain--indeed
little of it was left on which to remain. Looking back toward the place
where the cave had been, Tom and the others started forward again.
The diamond-making machinery had all been destroyed. So, also, had the
finished diamonds stored in the cavern and the large supply which had
probably been made by the last terrific crash. No one would ever have
them now. Tom and Mr. Jenks felt a sense of disappointment, but they
were glad to have escaped with their lives. They sought their former
camp, but the tent and all their food was buried under tons of earth and
rocks.

Three days later, after rather severe hardships, they were near the
place where they had left the Red Cloud. They had suffered cold and
hunger, for they had no food supplies, and, had it not been that Bill
Renshaw knew the haunts of some game, of which they managed to snare
some, they would have fared badly, for they had left their guns in the
cave.

"Well, there are the trees behind which I hope my airship is hidden,"
announced Tom, as they came to the spot. "Good old Red Cloud! Maybe we
won't do some eating when we get aboard, eh?"

"Bless my appetite! but we certainly will!" cried Mr. Damon.

"There's somebody walking around the place," spoke Mr. Jenks.

"I hope it's no one who has damaged the ship," came from Tom,
apprehensively. He broke into a run, and soon confronted an aged miner,
who seemed to have established a rude sort of camp near the airship.

"Is anything the matter?" asked Tom, breathlessly. "Is my airship all
right?"

"I guess she's all right, stranger," was the reply. "I don't know much
about these contraptions, but I haven't touched her. I knowed she was an
airship, for I've seen pictures of 'em, and I've been waiting until the
owner came along."

"Why?" asked Tom, wonderingly.

"Because I've got a proposition to make to you," went on the miner, who
said his name was Abe Abercrombie. "I've been a miner for a good many
years, and I'm just back from Alaska, prospecting around here. I haven't
had any luck, but I know of a gold mine in Alaska that will make us all
rich. Only it needs an airship to get to it, and I've been figuring how
to hire one. Then I comes along, and I sees this big one, and I makes up
my mind to stay here until the owners come back. That's what I've done.
Now, if I prove that I'm telling the truth, will you go to Alaska--to
the valley of gold with me?"

"I don't know," answered Tom, to whom the proposition was rather sudden.
"We've just had some pretty startling adventures, and we're almost
starved. Wait until we get something to eat, and we'll talk. Come aboard
the Red Cloud," and the lad led the way to his craft which was in as
good condition as when he left it to go to the diamond cave. Later he
listened to the miner's story.

Tom Swift did go to the valley of gold in Alaska, and what happened to
him and his companions there will be told of in the next volume of this
series, to be called "Tom Swift in the Caves of Ice; or, the Wreck of
the Airship."

It did not take our friends long, after they had eaten a hearty meal,
to generate some fresh gas, and start the Red Cloud on her homeward way.
Tom wanted to take Bill Renshaw with him, but the old man said he would
rather remain among the mountains where he had been born. So, after
paying him well for his services, they said good-by to him. Abercrombie,
the miner, also remained behind, but promised to call and see Tom in a
few months.

"Well, we didn't make any money out of this trip," observed Mr. Jenks,
rather dubiously, as they were nearing Shopton, after an uneventful
trip. "I guess I owe you considerable, Tom Swift. I promised to get you
a lot of diamonds, but all I have are those I had from my first visit to
the cave."

"Oh, that's all right," spoke Tom, easily. "The experience was worth all
the trip cost."

"Speaking of diamonds, look here!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, suddenly, and he
pulled out a double handful.

"Where did you get them?" cried the others in astonishment.

"I grabbed them up, as we ran from the cave," said the eccentric man;
"but, bless my gaiters! I forgot all about them until you spoke. We'll
share them."

These diamonds, some of which were large, proved very valuable, though
the total sum was far below what Mr. Jenks hoped to make when he started
on the remarkable trip. Tom gave Mary Nestor a very fine stone, and it
was set in a ring, instead of a pin, this time.

On their arrival in Shopton, where Mr. Swift, the housekeeper, Mr.
Jackson and Eradicate Sampson were much alarmed for Tom's safety, an
attempt was made to manufacture diamonds, using a powerful electric
current instead of lightning. But it was not a success, and so Mr. Jenks
concluded to give up his search for the secret which was lost on Phantom
Mountain.

And now we will take leave of Tom Swift, to meet him again soon in other
adventures he is destined to have in the caves of ice and the valley of
gold.

