




THE LIGHT PRINCESS






I. WHAT! NO CHILDREN?


Once upon a time, so long ago that I have quite forgotten the date,
there lived a king and queen who had no children.

And the king said to himself, "All the queens of my acquaintance have
children, some three, some seven, and some as many as twelve; and my
queen has not one. I feel ill-used." So he made up his mind to be cross
with his wife about it. But she bore it all like a good patient queen
as she was. Then the king grew very cross indeed. But the queen
pretended to take it all as a joke, and a very good one too.

"Why don't you have any daughters, at least?" said he. "I don't say
_sons_; that might be too much to expect."

"I am sure, dear king, I am very sorry," said the queen.

"So you ought to be," retorted the king; "you are not going to make a
virtue of _that_, surely."

But he was not an ill-tempered king, and in any matter of less moment
would have let the queen have her own way with all his heart. This,
however, was an affair of state.

The queen smiled.

"You must have patience with a lady, you know, dear king," said she.

She was, indeed, a very nice queen, and heartily sorry that she could
not oblige the king immediately.

The king tried to have patience, but he succeeded very badly. It was
more than he deserved, therefore, when, at last, the queen gave him a
daughter--as lovely a little princess as ever cried.






II. WON'T I, JUST?


The day drew near when the infant must be christened. The king wrote
all the invitations with his own hand. Of course somebody was
forgotten.

Now it does not generally matter if somebody _is_ forgotten, only you
must mind who. Unfortunately, the king forgot without intending to
forget; and so the chance fell upon the Princess Makemnoit, which was
awkward. For the princess was the king's own sister; and he ought not
to have forgotten her. But she had made herself so disagreeable to the
old king, their father, that he had forgotten her in making his will;
and so it was no wonder that her brother forgot her in writing his
invitations. But poor relations don't do anything to keep you in mind
of them. Why don't they? The king could not see into the garret she
lived in, could he?

She was a sour, spiteful creature. The wrinkles of contempt crossed the
wrinkles of peevishness, and made her face as full of wrinkles as a pat
of butter. If ever a king could be justified in forgetting anybody,
this king was justified in forgetting his sister, even at a
christening. She looked very odd, too. Her forehead was as large as all
the rest of her face, and projected over it like a precipice. When she
was angry her little eyes flashed blue. When she hated anybody, they
shone yellow and green. What they looked like when she loved anybody, I
do not know; for I never heard of her loving anybody but herself, and I
do not think she could have managed that if she had not somehow got
used to herself. But what made it highly imprudent in the king to
forget her was--that she was awfully clever. In fact, she was a witch;
and when she bewitched anybody, he very soon had enough of it; for she
beat all the wicked fairies in wickedness, and all the clever ones in
cleverness. She despised all the modes we read of in history, in which
offended fairies and witches have taken their revenges; and therefore,
after waiting and waiting in vain for an invitation, she made up her
mind at last to go without one, and make the whole family miserable,
like a princess as she was.

So she put on her best gown, went to the palace, was kindly received by
the happy monarch, who forgot that he had forgotten her, and took her
place in the procession to the royal chapel. When they were all
gathered about the font, she contrived to get next to it, and throw
something into the water; after which she maintained a very respectful
demeanour till the water was applied to the child's face. But at that
moment she turned round in her place three times, and muttered the
following words, loud enough for those beside her to hear:--

  "Light of spirit, by my charms,
    Light of body, every part,
   Never weary human arms--
    Only crush thy parents' heart!"

They all thought she had lost her wits, and was repeating some foolish
nursery rhyme; but a shudder went through the whole of them
notwithstanding. The baby, on the contrary, began to laugh and crow;
while the nurse gave a start and a smothered cry, for she thought she
was struck with paralysis: she could not feel the baby in her arms. But
she clasped it tight and said nothing.

The mischief was done.






III. SHE CAN'T BE OURS


Her atrocious aunt had deprived the child of all her gravity. If you
ask me how this was effected, I answer, "In the easiest way in the
world. She had only to destroy gravitation." For the princess was a
philosopher, and knew all the _ins_ and _outs_ of the laws of
gravitation as well as the _ins_ and _outs_ of her boot-lace. And being
a witch as well, she could abrogate those laws in a moment; or at least
so clog their wheels and rust their bearings, that they would not work
at all. But we have more to do with what followed than with how it was
done.

The first awkwardness that resulted from this unhappy privation was,
that the moment the nurse began to float the baby up and down, she flew
from her arms towards the ceiling. Happily, the resistance of the air
brought her ascending career to a close within a foot of it. There she
remained, horizontal as when she left her nurse's arms, kicking and
laughing amazingly. The nurse in terror flew to the bell, and begged
the footman, who answered it, to bring up the house-steps directly.
Trembling in every limb, she climbed upon the steps, and had to stand
upon the very top, and reach up, before she could catch the floating
tail of the baby's long clothes.

When the strange fact came to be known, there was a terrible commotion
in the palace. The occasion of its discovery by the king was naturally
a repetition of the nurse's experience. Astonished that he felt no
weight when the child was laid in his arms, he began to wave her up
and--not down, for she slowly ascended to the ceiling as before, and
there remained floating in perfect comfort and satisfaction, as was
testified by her peals of tiny laughter. The king stood staring up in
speechless amazement, and trembled so that his beard shook like grass
in the wind. At last, turning to the queen, who was just as
horror-struck as himself, he said, gasping, staring, and stammering,--

"She _can't_ be ours, queen!"

Now the queen was much cleverer than the king, and had begun already to
suspect that "this effect defective came by cause."

"I am sure she is ours," answered she. "But we ought to have taken
better care of her at the christening. People who were never invited
ought not to have been present."

"Oh, ho!" said the king, tapping his forehead with his forefinger, "I
have it all. I've found her out. Don't you see it, queen? Princess
Makemnoit has bewitched her."

"That's just what I say," answered the queen.

"I beg your pardon, my love; I did not hear you.--John! bring the steps
I get on my throne with."

For he was a little king with a great throne, like many other kings.

The throne-steps were brought, and set upon the dining-table, and John
got upon the top of them. But he could not reach the little princess,
who lay like a baby-laughter-cloud in the air, exploding continuously.

"Take the tongs, John," said his Majesty; and getting up on the table,
he handed them to him.

John could reach the baby now, and the little princess was handed down
by the tongs.






IV. WHERE IS SHE?


One fine summer day, a month after these her first adventures, during
which time she had been very carefully watched, the princess was lying
on the bed in the queen's own chamber, fast asleep. One of the windows
was open, for it was noon, and the day so sultry that the little girl
was wrapped in nothing less ethereal than slumber itself. The queen
came into the room, and not observing that the baby was on the bed,
opened another window. A frolicsome fairy wind, which had been watching
for a chance of mischief, rushed in at the one window, and taking its
way over the bed where the child was lying, caught her up, and rolling
and floating her along like a piece of flue, or a dandelion-seed,
carried her with it through the opposite window, and away. The queen
went down-stairs, quite ignorant of the loss she had herself
occasioned.

When the nurse returned, she supposed that her Majesty had carried her
off, and, dreading a scolding, delayed making inquiry about her. But
hearing nothing, she grew uneasy, and went at length to the queen's
boudoir, where she found her Majesty.

"Please, your Majesty, shall I take the baby?" said she.

"Where is she?" asked the queen.

"Please forgive me. I know it was wrong."

"What do you mean?" said the queen, looking grave.

"Oh! don't frighten me, your Majesty!" exclaimed the nurse, clasping
her hands.

The queen saw that something was amiss, and fell down in a faint. The
nurse rushed about the palace, screaming, "My baby! my baby!"

Every one ran to the queen's room. But the queen could give no orders.
They soon found out, however, that the princess was missing, and in a
moment the palace was like a beehive in a garden; and in one minute
more the queen was brought to herself by a great shout and a clapping
of hands. They had found the princess fast asleep under a rose-bush, to
which the elvish little wind-puff had carried her, finishing its
mischief by shaking a shower of red rose-leaves all over the little
white sleeper. Startled by the noise the servants made, she woke, and,
furious with glee, scattered the rose-leaves in all directions, like a
shower of spray in the sunset.

She was watched more carefully after this, no doubt; yet it would be
endless to relate all the odd incidents resulting from this peculiarity
of the young princess. But there never was a baby in a house, not to
say a palace, that kept the household in such constant good-humour, at
least below-stairs. If it was not easy for her nurses to hold her, at
least she made neither their arms nor their hearts ache. And she was so
nice to play at ball with! There was positively no danger of letting
her fall. They might throw her down, or knock her down, or push her
down, but couldn't _let_ her down. It is true, they might let her fly
into the fire or the coal-hole, or through the window; but none of
these accidents had happened as yet. If you heard peals of laughter
resounding from some unknown region, you might be sure enough of the
cause. Going down into the kitchen, or _the room_, you would find Jane
and Thomas, and Robert and Susan, all and sum, playing at ball with the
little princess. She was the ball herself, and did not enjoy it the
less for that. Away she went, flying from one to another, screeching
with laughter. And the servants loved the ball itself better even than
the game. But they had to take some care how they threw her, for if she
received an upward direction, she would never come down again without
being fetched.






V. WHAT IS TO BE DONE?


But above-stairs it was different. One day, for instance, after
breakfast, the king went into his counting-house, and counted out his
money.

The operation gave him no pleasure.

"To think," said he to himself, "that every one of these gold
sovereigns weighs a quarter of an ounce, and my real, live,
flesh-and-blood princess weighs nothing at all!"

And he hated his gold sovereigns, as they lay with a broad smile of
self-satisfaction all over their yellow faces.

The queen was in the parlour, eating bread and honey. But at the second
mouthful she burst out crying, and could not swallow it. The king heard
her sobbing. Glad of anybody, but especially of his queen, to quarrel
with, he clashed his gold sovereigns into his money-box, clapped his
crown on his head, and rushed into the parlour.

"What is all this about?" exclaimed he. "What are you crying for,
queen?"

"I can't eat it," said the queen, looking ruefully at the honey-pot.

"No wonder!" retorted the king. "You've just eaten your breakfast--two
turkey eggs, and three anchovies."

"Oh, that's not it!" sobbed her Majesty. "It's my child, my child!"

"Well, what's the matter with your child? She's neither up the chimney
nor down the draw-well. Just hear her laughing."

Yet the king could not help a sigh, which he tried to turn into a
cough, saying--

"It is a good thing to be light-hearted, I am sure, whether she be ours
or not."

"It is a bad thing to be light-headed," answered the queen, looking
with prophetic soul far into the future.

"'Tis a good thing to be light-handed," said the king.

"'Tis a bad thing to be light-fingered," answered the queen.

"'Tis a good thing to be light-footed," said the king.

"'Tis a bad thing--" began the queen; but the king interrupted her.

"In fact," said he, with the tone of one who concludes an argument in
which he has had only imaginary opponents, and in which, therefore, he
has come off triumphant--"in fact, it is a good thing altogether to be
light-bodied."

"But it is a bad thing altogether to be light-minded," retorted the
queen, who was beginning to lose her temper.

This last answer quite discomfited his Majesty, who turned on his heel,
and betook himself to his counting-house again. But he was not half-way
towards it, when the voice of his queen overtook him.

"And it's a bad thing to be light-haired," screamed she, determined to
have more last words, now that her spirit was roused.

The queen's hair was black as night; and the king's had been, and his
daughter's was, golden as morning. But it was not this reflection on
his hair that arrested him; it was the double use of the word _light_.
For the king hated all witticisms, and punning especially. And besides,
he could not tell whether the queen meant light-_haired_ or
light-_heired_; for why might she not aspirate her vowels when she was
ex-asperated herself?

He turned upon his other heel, and rejoined her. She looked angry
still, because she knew that she was guilty, or, what was much the
same, knew that he thought so.

"My dear queen," said he, "duplicity of any sort is exceedingly
objectionable between married people of any rank, not to say kings and
queens; and the most objectionable form duplicity can assume is that of
punning."

"There!" said the queen, "I never made a jest, but I broke it in the
making. I am the most unfortunate woman in the world!"

She looked so rueful, that the king took her in his arms; and they sat
down to consult.

"Can you bear this?" said the king.

"No, I can't," said the queen.

"Well, what's to be done?" said the king.

"I'm sure I don't know," said the queen. "But might you not try an
apology?"

"To my old sister, I suppose you mean?" said the king.

"Yes," said the queen.

"Well, I don't mind," said the king.

So he went the next morning to the house of the princess, and, making a
very humble apology, begged her to undo the spell. But the princess
declared, with a grave face, that she knew nothing at all about it. Her
eyes, however, shone pink, which was a sign that she was happy. She
advised the king and queen to have patience, and to mend their ways.
The king returned disconsolate. The queen tried to comfort him.

"We will wait till she is older. She may then be able to suggest
something herself. She will know at least how she feels, and explain
things to us."

"But what if she should marry?" exclaimed the king, in sudden
consternation at the idea.

"Well, what of that?" rejoined the queen. "Just think! If she were to
have children! In the course of a hundred years the air might be as
full of floating children as of gossamers in autumn."

"That is no business of ours," replied the queen. "Besides, by that
time they will have learned to take care of themselves."

A sigh was the king's only answer.

He would have consulted the court physicians; but he was afraid they
would try experiments upon her.






VI. SHE LAUGHS TOO MUCH.


Meantime, notwithstanding awkward occurrences, and griefs that she
brought upon her parents, the little princess laughed and grew--not
fat, but plump and tall. She reached the age of seventeen, without
having fallen into any worse scrape than a chimney; by rescuing her
from which, a little bird-nesting urchin got fame and a black face.
Nor, thoughtless as she was, had she committed anything worse than
laughter at everybody and everything that came in her way. When she was
told, for the sake of experiment, that General Clanrunfort was cut to
pieces with all his troops, she laughed; when she heard that the enemy
was on his way to besiege her papa's capital, she laughed hugely; but
when she was told that the city would certainly be abandoned to the
mercy of the enemy's soldiery--why, then she laughed immoderately. She
never could be brought to see the serious side of anything. When her
mother cried, she said,--

"What queer faces mamma makes! And she squeezes water out of her
cheeks? Funny mamma!"

And when her papa stormed at her, she laughed, and danced round and
round him, clapping her hands, and crying,--

"Do it again, papa. Do it again! It's such fun! Dear, funny papa!"

And if he tried to catch her, she glided from him in an instant, not in
the least afraid of him, but thinking it part of the game not to be
caught. With one push of her foot, she would be floating in the air
above his head; or she would go dancing backwards and forwards and
sideways, like a great butterfly. It happened several times, when her
father and mother were holding a consultation about her in private,
that they were interrupted by vainly repressed outbursts of laughter
over their heads; and looking up with indignation, saw her floating at
full length in the air above them, whence she regarded them with the
most comical appreciation of the position.

One day an awkward accident happened. The princess had come out upon
the lawn with one of her attendants, who held her by the hand. Spying
her father at the other side of the lawn, she snatched her hand from
the maid's, and sped across to him. Now when she wanted to run alone,
her custom was to catch up a stone in each hand, so that she might come
down again after a bound. Whatever she wore as part of her attire had
no effect in this way: even gold, when it thus became as it were a part
of herself, lost all its weight for the time. But whatever she only
held in her hands retained its downward tendency. On this occasion she
could see nothing to catch up but a huge toad, that was walking across
the lawn as if he had a hundred years to do it in. Not knowing what
disgust meant, for this was one of her peculiarities, she snatched up
the toad and bounded away. She had almost reached her father, and he
was holding out his arms to receive her, and take from her lips the
kiss which hovered on them like a butterfly on a rosebud, when a puff
of wind blew her aside into the arms of a young page, who had just been
receiving a message from his Majesty. Now it was no great peculiarity
in the princess that, once she was set agoing, it always cost her time
and trouble to check herself. On this occasion there was no time. She
_must_ kiss--and she kissed the page. She did not mind it much; for she
had no shyness in her composition; and she knew, besides, that she
could not help it. So she only laughed, like a musical box. The poor
page fared the worst. For the princess, trying to correct the
unfortunate tendency of the kiss, put out her hands to keep her off the
page; so that, along with the kiss, he received, on the other cheek, a
slap with the huge black toad, which she poked right into his eye. He
tried to laugh, too, but the attempt resulted in such an odd contortion
of countenance, as showed that there was no danger of his pluming
himself on the kiss. As for the king, his dignity was greatly hurt, and
he did not speak to the page for a whole month.

I may here remark that it was very amusing to see her run, if her mode
of progression could properly be called running. For first she would
make a bound; then, having alighted, she would run a few steps, and
make another bound. Sometimes she would fancy she had reached the
ground before she actually had, and her feet would go backwards and
forwards, running upon nothing at all, like those of a chicken on its
back. Then she would laugh like the very spirit of fun; only in her
laugh there was something missing. What it was, I find myself unable to
describe. I think it was a certain tone, depending upon the possibility
of sorrow--_morbidezza_, perhaps. She never smiled.






VII. TRY METAPHYSICS.


After a long avoidance of the painful subject, the king and queen
resolved to hold a council of three upon it; and so they sent for the
princess. In she came, sliding and flitting and gliding from one piece
of furniture to another, and put herself at last in an armchair, in a
sitting posture. Whether she could be said to _sit_, seeing she
received no support from the seat of the chair, I do not pretend to
determine.

"My dear child," said the king, "you must be aware by this time that
you are not exactly like other people."

"Oh, you dear funny papa! I have got a nose, and two eyes, and all the
rest. So have you. So has mamma."

"Now be serious, my dear, for once," said the queen.

"No, thank you, mamma; I had rather not."

"Would you not like to be able to walk like other people?" said the
king. "No indeed, I should think not. You only crawl. You are such slow
coaches!"

"How do you feel, my child?" he resumed, after a pause of discomfiture.

"Quite well, thank you."

"I mean, what do you feel like?"

"Like nothing at all, that I know of."

"You must feel like something."

"I feel like a princess with such a funny papa, and such a dear pet of
a queen-mamma!"

"Now really!" began the queen; but the princess interrupted her.

"Oh yes," she added, "I remember. I have a curious feeling sometimes,
as if I were the only person that had any sense in the whole world."

She had been trying to behave herself with dignity; but now she burst
into a violent fit of laughter, threw herself backwards over the chair,
and went rolling about the floor in an ecstasy of enjoyment. The king
picked her up easier than one does a down quilt, and replaced her in
her former relation to the chair. The exact preposition expressing this
relation I do not happen to know.

"Is there nothing you wish for?" resumed the king, who had learned by
this time that it was quite useless to be angry with her.

"Oh, you dear papa!--yes," answered she.

"What is it, my darling?"

"I have been longing for it--oh, such a time! Ever since last night."

"Tell me what it is."

"Will you promise to let me have it?"

The king was on the point of saying _Yes_, but the wiser queen checked
him with a single motion of her head.

"Tell me what it is first," said he.

"No no. Promise first."

"I dare not. What is it?"

"Mind, I hold you to your promise.--It is--to be tied to the end of a
string--a very long string indeed, and be flown like a kite. Oh, such
fun! I would rain rose-water, and hail sugar-plums, and snow
whipped-cream, and--and--and--"

A fit of laughing checked her; and she would have been off again over
the floor, had not the king started up and caught her just in time.
Seeing nothing but talk could be got out of her, he rang the bell, and
sent her away with two of her ladies-in-waiting.

"Now, queen," he said, turning to her Majesty, "what _is_ to be done?"

"There is but one thing left," answered she. "Let us consult the
college of Metaphysicians."

"Bravo!" cried the king; "we will."

Now at the head of this college were two very wise Chinese
philosophers--by name, Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck. For them the king sent;
and straightway they came. In a long speech he communicated to them
what they knew very well already--as who did not?--namely, the peculiar
condition of his daughter in relation to the globe on which she dwelt;
and requested them to consult together as to what might be the cause
and probable cure of her _infirmity_. The king laid stress upon the
word, but failed to discover his own pun. The queen laughed; but
Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck heard with humility and retired in silence.

The consultation consisted chiefly in propounding and supporting, for
the thousandth time, each his favourite theories. For the condition of
the princess afforded delightful scope for the discussion of every
question arising from the division of thought--in fact, of all the
Metaphysics of the Chinese Empire. But it is only justice to say that
they did not altogether neglect the discussion of the practical
question, _what was to be done_.

Hum-Drum was a Materialist, and Kopy-Keck was a spiritualist. The
former was slow and sententious; the latter was quick and flighty: the
latter had generally the first word; the former the last.

"I reassert my former assertion," began Kopy-Keck, with a plunge.
"There is not a fault in the princess, body or soul; only they are
wrong put together. Listen to me now, Hum-Drum, and I will tell you in
brief what I think. Don't speak. Don't answer me. I _won't_ hear you
till I have done.-- At that decisive moment, when souls seek their
appointed habitations, two eager souls met, struck, rebounded, lost
their way, and arrived each at the wrong place. The soul of the
princess was one of those, and she went far astray. She does not belong
by rights to this world at all, but to some other planet, probably
Mercury. Her proclivity to her true sphere destroys all the natural
influence which this orb would otherwise possess over her corporeal
frame. She cares for nothing here. There is no relation between her and
this world.

"She must therefore be taught, by the sternest compulsion, to take an
interest in the earth as the earth. She must study every department of
its history--its animal history; its vegetable history; its mineral
history; its social history; its moral history; its political history;
its scientific history; its literary history; its musical history; its
artistical history; above all, its metaphysical history. She must begin
with the Chinese dynasty and end with Japan. But first of all she must
study geology, and especially the history of the extinct races of
animals--their natures, their habits, their loves, their hates, their
revenges. She must--"

"Hold, h-o-o-old!" roared Hum-Drum. "It is certainly my turn now. My
rooted and insubvertible conviction is, that the causes of the
anomalies evident in the princess's condition are strictly and solely
physical. But that is only tantamount to acknowledging that they exist.
Hear my opinion.--From some cause or other, of no importance to our
inquiry, the motion of her heart has been reversed. That remarkable
combination of the suction and the force-pump works the wrong way--I
mean in the case of the princess: it draws in where it should force
out, and forces out where it should draw in. The offices of the
auricles and the ventricles are subverted. The blood is sent forth by
the veins, and returns by the arteries. Consequently it is running the
wrong way through all her corporeal organism--lungs and all. Is it then
at all mysterious, seeing that such is the case, that on the other
particular of gravitation as well, she should differ from normal
humanity? My proposal for the cure is this:--

"Phlebotomize until she is reduced to the last point of safety. Let it
be affected, if necessary, in a warm bath. When she is reduced to a
state of perfect asphyxy, apply a ligature to the left ankle, drawing
it as tight as the bone will bear. Apply, at the same moment, another
of equal tension around the right wrist. By means of plates constructed
for the purpose, place the other foot and hand under the receivers of
two air-pumps. Exhaust the receivers. Exhibit a pint of French brandy,
and await the result."

"Which would presently arrive in the form of grim death," said
Kopy-Keck.

"If it should, she would yet die in doing our duty," retorted Hum-Drum.

But their Majesties had too much tenderness for their volatile
offspring to subject her to either of the schemes of the equally
unscrupulous philosophers. Indeed, the most complete knowledge of the
laws of nature would have been unserviceable in her case; for it was
impossible to classify her. She was a fifth imponderable body, sharing
all the other properties of the ponderable.






VIII. TRY A DROP OF WATER.


Perhaps the best thing for the princess would have been to fall in
love. But how a princess who had no gravity could fall into anything is
a difficulty--perhaps _the_ difficulty. As for her own feelings on the
subject, she did not even know that there was such a beehive of honey
and stings to be fallen into. But now I come to mention another curious
fact about her.

The palace was built on the shore of the loveliest lake in the world;
and the princess loved this lake more than father or mother. The root
of this preference no doubt, although the princess did not recognize it
as such, was, that the moment she got into it, she recovered the
natural right of which she had been so wickedly deprived--namely,
gravity. Whether this was owing to the fact that water had been
employed as the means of conveying the injury, I do not know. But it is
certain that she could swim and dive like the duck that her old nurse
said she was. The manner in which this alleviation of her misfortune
was discovered was as follows:--

One summer evening, during the carnival of the country, she had been
taken upon the lake by the king and queen, in the royal barge. They
were accompanied by many of the courtiers in a fleet of little boats.
In the middle of the lake she wanted to get into the lord chancellor's
barge, for his daughter, who was a great favourite with her, was in it
with her father. Now though the old king rarely condescended to make
light of his misfortune, yet, happening on this occasion to be in a
particularly good humour, as the barges approached each other, he
caught up the princess to throw her into the chancellor's barge. He
lost his balance, however, and, dropping into the bottom of the barge,
lost his hold of his daughter; not, however, before imparting to her
the downward tendency of his own person, though in a somewhat different
direction; for, as the king fell into the boat, she fell into the
water. With a burst of delightful laughter she disappeared in the lake.
A cry of horror ascended from the boats. They had never seen the
princess go down before. Half the men were under water in a moment; but
they had all, one after another, come up to the surface again for
breath, when--tinkle, tinkle, babble, and gush! came the princess's
laugh over the water from far away. There she was, swimming like a
swan. Nor would she come out for king or queen, chancellor or daughter.
She was perfectly obstinate.

But at the same time she seemed more sedate than usual. Perhaps that
was because a great pleasure spoils laughing. At all events, after
this, the passion of her life was to get into the water, and she was
always the better behaved and the more beautiful the more she had of
it. Summer and winter it was quite the same; only she could not stay so
long in the water when they had to break the ice to let her in. Any
day, from morning till evening in summer, she might be descried--a
streak of white in the blue water--lying as still as the shadow of a
cloud, or shooting along like a dolphin; disappearing, and coming up
again far off, just where one did not expect her. She would have been
in the lake of a night, too, if she could have had her way; for the
balcony of her window overhung a deep pool in it; and through a shallow
reedy passage she could have swum out into the wide wet water, and no
one would have been any the wiser. Indeed, when she happened to wake in
the moonlight she could hardly resist the temptation. But there was the
sad difficulty of getting into it. She had as great a dread of the air
as some children have of the water. For the slightest gust of wind
would blow her away; and a gust might arise in the stillest moment. And
if she gave herself a push towards the water and just failed of
reaching it, her situation would be dreadfully awkward, irrespective of
the wind; for at best there she would have to remain, suspended in her
night-gown, till she was seen and angled for by someone from the
window.

"Oh! if I had my gravity," thought she, contemplating the water, "I
would flash off this balcony like a long white sea-bird, headlong into
the darling wetness. Heigh-ho!"

This was the only consideration that made her wish to be like other
people.

Another reason for her being fond of the water was that in it alone she
enjoyed any freedom. For she could not walk out without a _cort�ge_,
consisting in part of a troop of light horse, for fear of the liberties
which the wind might take with her. And the king grew more apprehensive
with increasing years, till at last he would not allow her to walk
abroad at all without some twenty silken cords fastened to as many
parts of her dress, and held by twenty noblemen. Of course horseback
was out of the question. But she bade good-bye to all this ceremony
when she got into the water.

And so remarkable were its effects upon her, especially in restoring
her for the time to the ordinary human gravity, that Hum-Drum and
Kopy-Keck agreed in recommending the king to bury her alive for three
years; in the hope that, as the water did her so much good, the earth
would do her yet more. But the king had some vulgar prejudices against
the experiment, and would not give his consent. Foiled in this, they
yet agreed in another recommendation; which, seeing that the one
imported his opinions from China and the other from Thibet, was very
remarkable indeed. They argued that, if water of external origin and
application could be so efficacious, water from a deeper source might
work a perfect cure; in short, that if the poor afflicted princess
could by any means be made to cry, she might recover her lost gravity.

But how was this to be brought about? Therein lay all the
difficulty--to meet which the philosophers were not wise enough. To
make the princess cry was as impossible as to make her weigh. They sent
for a professional beggar; commanded him to prepare his most touching
oracle of woe; helped him, out of the court charade-box, to whatever he
wanted for dressing up, and promised great rewards in the event of his
success. But it was all in vain. She listened to the mendicant artist's
story, and gazed at his marvellous make-up, till she could contain
herself no longer, and went into the most undignified contortions for
relief, shrieking, positively screeching with laughter.

When she had a little recovered herself, she ordered her attendants to
drive him away, and not give him a single copper; whereupon his look of
mortified discomfiture wrought her punishment and his revenge, for it
sent her into violent hysterics, from which she was with difficulty
recovered.

But so anxious was the king that the suggestion should have a fair
trial, that he put himself in a rage one day, and, rushing up to her
room, gave her an awful whipping. Yet not a tear would flow. She looked
grave, and her laughing sounded uncommonly like screaming--that was
all. The good old tyrant, though he put on his best gold spectacles to
look, could not discover the smallest cloud in the serene blue of her
eyes.






IX. PUT ME IN AGAIN.


It must have been about this time that the son of a king, who lived a
thousand miles from Lagobel, set out to look for the daughter of a
queen. He travelled far and wide, but as sure as he found a princess,
he found some fault in her. Of course he could not marry a mere woman,
however beautiful; and there was no princess to be found worthy of him.
Whether the prince was so near perfection that he had a right to demand
perfection itself, I cannot pretend to say. All I know is, that he was
a fine, handsome, brave, generous, well-bred, and well-behaved youth,
as all princes are.

In his wanderings he had come across some reports about our princess;
but as everybody said she was bewitched, he never dreamed that she
could bewitch him. For what indeed could a prince do with a princess
that had lost her gravity? Who could tell what she might not lose next?
She might lose her visibility, or her tangibility; or, in short, the
power of making impressions upon the radical sensorium; so that he
should never be able to tell whether she was dead or alive. Of course
he made no further inquiries about her.

One day he lost sight of his retinue in a great forest. These forests
are very useful in delivering princes from their courtiers, like a
sieve that keeps back the bran. Then the princes get away to follow
their fortunes. In this they have the advantage of the princesses, who
are forced to marry before they have had a bit of fun. I wish our
princesses got lost in a forest sometimes.

One lovely evening, after wandering about for many days, he found that
he was approaching the outskirts of this forest; for the trees had got
so thin that he could see the sunset through them; and he soon came
upon a kind of heath. Next he came upon signs of human neighbourhood;
but by this time it was getting late, and there was nobody in the
fields to direct him.

After travelling for another hour, his horse, quite worn out with long
labour and lack of food, fell, and was unable to rise again. So he
continued his journey on foot. At length he entered another wood--not a
wild forest, but a civilized wood, through which a footpath led him to
the side of a lake. Along this path the prince pursued his way through
the gathering darkness. Suddenly he paused, and listened. Strange
sounds came across the water. It was, in fact, the princess laughing.
Now there was something odd in her laugh, as I have already hinted, for
the hatching of a real hearty laugh requires the incubation of gravity;
and perhaps this was how the prince mistook the laughter for screaming.
Looking over the lake, he saw something white in the water; and, in an
instant, he had torn off his tunic, kicked off his sandals, and plunged
in. He soon reached the white object, and found that it was a woman.
There was not light enough to show that she was a princess, but quite
enough to show that she was a lady, for it does not want much light to
see that.

Now I cannot tell how it came about,--whether she pretended to be
drowning, or whether he frightened her, or caught her so as to
embarrass her,--but certainly he brought her to shore in a fashion
ignominious to a swimmer, and more nearly drowned than she had ever
expected to be; for the water had got into her throat as often as she
had tried to speak.

At the place to which he bore her, the bank was only a foot or two
above the water, so he gave her a strong lift out of the water, to lay
her on the bank. But, her gravitation ceasing the moment she left the
water, away she went up into the air, scolding and screaming.

"You naughty, _naughty_, NAUGHTY, NAUGHTY man!" she cried.

No one had ever succeeded in putting her into a passion before.--When
the prince saw her ascend, he thought he must have been bewitched, and
have mistaken a great swan for a lady. But the princess caught hold of
the topmost cone upon a lofty fir. This came off; but she caught at
another, and, in fact, stopped herself by gathering cones, dropping
them as the stocks gave way. The prince, meantime, stood in the water,
staring, and forgetting to get out. But the princess disappearing, he
scrambled on shore, and went in the direction of the tree. There he
found her climbing down one of the branches towards the stem. But in
the darkness of the wood, the prince continued in some bewilderment as
to what the phenomenon could be; until, reaching the ground, and seeing
him standing there, she caught hold of him, and said,--

"I'll tell papa."

"Oh no, you won't!" returned the prince.

"Yes, I will," she persisted. "What business had you to pull me down
out of the water, and throw me to the bottom of the air? I never did
you any harm."

"Pardon me. I did not mean to hurt you."

"I don't believe you have any brains; and that is a worse loss that
your wretched gravity. I pity you."

The prince now saw that he had come upon the bewitched princess, and
had already offended her. But before he could think what to say next,
she burst out angrily, giving a stamp with her foot that would have
sent her aloft again but for the hold she had of his arm,--

"Put me up directly."

"Put you up where, you beauty?" asked the prince.

He had fallen in love with her almost, already; for her anger made her
more charming than any one else had ever beheld her; and, as far as he
could see, which certainly was not far, she had not a single fault
about her, except, of course, that she had not any gravity. No prince,
however, would judge of a princess by weight. The loveliness of her
foot he would hardly estimate by the depth of the impression it could
make in the mud.

"Put you up where, you beauty?" asked the prince.

"In the water, you stupid!" answered the princess.

"Come, then," said the prince.

The condition of her dress, increasing her usual difficulty in walking,
compelled her to cling to him; and he could hardly persuade himself
that he was not in a delightful dream, notwithstanding the torrent of
musical abuse with which she overwhelmed him. The prince being
therefore in no hurry, they came upon the lake at quite another part,
where the bank was twenty-five feet high at least; and when they had
reached the edge, he turned towards the princess, and said,--

"How am I to put you in?"

"That is your business," she answered, quite snappishly. "You took me
out--put me in again."

"Very well," said the prince; and, catching her up in his arms, he
sprang with her from the rock. The princess had just time to give one
delighted shriek of laughter before the water closed over them. When
they came to the surface, she found that, for a moment or two, she
could not even laugh, for she had gone down with such a rush, that it
was with difficulty she recovered her breath. The instant they reached
the surface--

"How do you like falling in?" said the prince.

After some effort the princess panted out,--

"Is that what you call _falling in_?"

"Yes," answered the prince, "I should think it a very tolerable
specimen."

"It seemed to me like going up," rejoined she.

"My feeling was certainly one of elevation too," the prince conceded.

The princess did not appear to understand him, for she retorted his
question:--

"How do _you_ like falling in?" said the princess.

"Beyond everything," answered he; "for I have fallen in with the only
perfect creature I ever saw."

"No more of that: I am tired of it," said the princess.

Perhaps she shared her father's aversion to punning.

"Don't you like falling in, then?" said the prince.

"It is the most delightful fun I ever had in my life," answered she. "I
never fell before. I wish I could learn. To think I am the only person
in my father's kingdom that can't fall!"

Here the poor princess looked almost sad.

"I shall be most happy to fall in with you any time you like," said the
prince, devotedly.

"Thank you. I don't know. Perhaps it would not be proper. But I don't
care. At all events, as we have fallen in, let us have a swim
together."

"With all my heart," responded the prince.

And away they went, swimming, and diving, and floating, until at last
they heard cries along the shore, and saw lights glancing in all
directions. It was now quite late, and there was no moon.

"I must go home," said the princess. "I am very sorry, for this is
delightful."

"So am I," returned the prince. "But I am glad I haven't a home to go
to--at least, I don't exactly know where it is."

"I wish I hadn't one either," rejoined the princess; "it is so stupid!
I have a great mind," she continued, "to play them all a trick. Why
couldn't they leave me alone? They won't trust me in the lake for a
single night!--You see where that green light is burning? That is the
window of my room. Now if you would just swim there with me very
quietly, and when we are all but under the balcony, give me such a
push--_up_ you call it--as you did a little while ago, I should be able
to catch hold of the balcony, and get in at the window; and then they
may look for me till to-morrow morning!"

"With more obedience than pleasure," said the prince, gallantly; and
away they swam, very gently.

"Will you be in the lake to-morrow night?" the prince ventured to ask.

"To be sure I will. I don't think so. Perhaps," was the princess's
somewhat strange answer.

But the prince was intelligent enough not to press her further; and
merely whispered, as he gave her the parting lift, "Don't tell." The
only answer the princess returned was a roguish look. She was already a
yard above his head. The look seemed to say, "Never fear. It is too
good fun to spoil that way."

So perfectly like other people had she been in the water, that even yet
the prince could scarcely believe his eyes when he saw her ascend
slowly, grasp the balcony, and disappear through the window. He turned,
almost expecting to see her still by his side. But he was alone in the
water. So he swam away quietly, and watched the lights roving about the
shore for hours after the princess was safe in her chamber. As soon as
they disappeared, he landed in search of his tunic and sword, and,
after some trouble, found them again. Then he made the best of his way
round the lake to the other side. There the wood was wilder, and the
shore steeper--rising more immediately towards the mountains which
surrounded the lake on all sides, and kept sending it messages of
silvery streams from morning to night, and all night long. He soon
found a spot whence he could see the green light in the princess's
room, and where, even in the broad daylight, he would be in no danger
of being discovered from the opposite shore. It was a sort of cave in
the rock, where he provided himself a bed of withered leaves, and lay
down too tired for hunger to keep him awake. All night long he dreamed
that he was swimming with the princess.






X. LOOK AT THE MOON.


Early the next morning the prince set out to look for something to eat,
which he soon found at a forester's hut, where for many following days
he was supplied with all that a brave prince could consider necessary.
And having plenty to keep him alive for the present, he would not think
of wants not yet in existence. Whenever Care intruded, this prince
always bowed him out in the most princely manner.

When he returned from his breakfast to his watch-cave, he saw the
princess already floating about in the lake, attended by the king or
queen--whom he knew by their crowns--and a great company in lovely
little boats, with canopies of all the colours of the rainbow, and
flags and streamers of a great many more. It was a very bright day, and
soon the prince, burned up with the heat, began to long for the cold
water and the cool princess. But he had to endure till twilight; for
the boats had provisions on board, and it was not till the sun went
down that the gay party began to vanish. Boat after boat drew away to
the shore, following that of the king and queen, till only one,
apparently the princess's own boat, remained. But she did not want to
go home even yet, and the prince thought he saw her order the boat to
the shore without her. At all events, it rowed away; and now, of all
the radiant company, only one white speck remained. Then the prince
began to sing.

And this is what he sang:--

   "Lady fair,
    Swan-white,
    Lift thine eyes
    Banish night
    By the might
    Of thine eyes.

    Snowy arms,
    Oars of snow,
    Oar her hither,
    Plashing low.
    Soft and slow,
    Oar her hither.

    Stream behind her
    O'er the lake,
    Radiant whiteness!
    In her wake
    Following, following for her sake,
    Radiant whiteness!

    Cling about her,
    Waters blue;
    Part not from her,
    But renew
    Cold and true
    Kisses round her.

    Lap me round,
    Waters sad
    That have left her;
    Make me glad,
    For ye had
    Kissed her ere ye left her."

Before he had finished his song, the princess was just under the place
where he sat, and looking up to find him. Her ears had led her truly.

"Would you like a fall, princess?" said the prince, looking down.

"Ah! there you are! Yes, if you please, prince," said the princess,
looking up.

"How do you know I am a prince, princess?" said the prince.

"Because you are a very nice young man, prince," said the princess.

"Come up then, princess."

"Fetch me, prince."

The prince took off his scarf, then his sword-belt, then his tunic, and
tied them all together, and let them down. But the line was far too
short. He unwound his turban, and added it to the rest, when it was all
but long enough; and his purse completed it. The princess just managed
to lay hold of the knot of money, and was beside him in a moment. This
rock was much higher than the other, and the splash and the dive were
tremendous. The princess was in ecstasies of delight, and their swim
was delicious.

Night after night they met, and swam about in the dark clear lake;
where such was the prince's gladness, that (whether the princess's way
of looking at things infected him, or he was actually getting
light-headed) he often fancied that he was swimming in the sky instead
of the lake. But when he talked about being in heaven, the princess
laughed at him dreadfully.

When the moon came, she brought them fresh pleasure. Everything looked
strange and new in her light, with an old, withered, yet unfading
newness. When the moon was nearly full, one of their great delights
was, to dive deep in the water, and then, turning round, look up
through it at the great blot of light close above them, shimmering and
trembling and wavering, spreading and contracting, seeming to melt
away, and again grow solid. Then they would shoot up through the blot;
and lo! there was the moon, far off, clear and steady and cold, and
very lovely, at the bottom of a deeper and bluer lake than theirs, as
the princess said.

The prince soon found out that while in the water the princess was very
like other people. And besides this, she was not so forward in her
questions or pert in her replies at sea as on shore. Neither did she
laugh so much; and when she did laugh, it was more gently. She seemed
altogether more modest and maidenly in the water than out of it. But
when the prince, who had really fallen in love when he fell in the
lake, began to talk to her about love, she always turned her head
towards him and laughed. After a while she began to look puzzled, as if
she were trying to understand what he meant, but could not--revealing a
notion that he meant something. But as soon as ever she left the lake,
she was so altered, that the prince said to himself, "If I marry her, I
see no help for it: we must turn merman and mermaid, and go out to sea
at once."






XI. HISS!


The princess's pleasure in the lake had grown to a passion, and she
could scarcely bear to be out of it for an hour. Imagine then her
consternation, when, diving with the prince one night, a sudden
suspicion seized her that the lake was not so deep as it used to be.
The prince could not imagine what had happened. She shot to the
surface, and, without a word, swam at full speed towards the higher
side of the lake. He followed, begging to know if she was ill, or what
was the matter. She never turned her head, or took the smallest notice
of his question. Arrived at the shore, she coasted the rocks with
minute inspection. But she was not able to come to a conclusion, for
the moon was very small, and so she could not see well. She turned
therefore and swam home, without saying a word to explain her conduct
to the prince, of whose presence she seemed no longer conscious. He
withdrew to his cave, in great perplexity and distress.

Next day she made many observations, which, alas! strengthened her
fears. She saw that the banks were too dry; and that the grass on the
shore, and the trailing plants on the rocks, were withering away. She
caused marks to be made along the borders, and examined them, day after
day, in all directions of the wind; till at last the horrible idea
became a certain fact--that the surface of the lake was slowly sinking.

The poor princess nearly went out of the little mind she had. It was
awful to her to see the lake, which she loved more than any living
thing, lie dying before her eyes. It sank away, slowly vanishing. The
tops of rocks that had never been seen till now, began to appear far
down in the clear water. Before long they were dry in the sun. It was
fearful to think of the mud that would soon lie there baking and
festering, full of lovely creatures dying, and ugly creatures coming to
life, like the unmaking of a world. And how hot the sun would be
without any lake! She could not bear to swim in it any more, and began
to pine away. Her life seemed bound up with it; and ever as the lake
sank, she pined. People said she would not live an hour after the lake
was gone.

But she never cried.

Proclamation was made to all the kingdom, that whosoever should
discover the cause of the lake's decrease, would be rewarded after a
princely fashion. Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck applied themselves to their
physics and metaphysics; but in vain. Not even they could suggest a
cause.

Now the fact was that the old princess was at the root of the mischief.
When she heard that her niece found more pleasure in the water than
anyone else out of it, she went into a rage, and cursed herself for her
want of foresight.

"But," said she, "I will soon set all right. The king and the people
shall die of thirst; their brains shall boil and frizzle in their
skulls before I will lose my revenge."

And she laughed a ferocious laugh, that made the hairs on the back of
her black cat stand erect with terror.

Then she went to an old chest in the room, and opening it, took out
what looked like a piece of dried seaweed. This she threw into a tub of
water. Then she threw some powder into the water, and stirred it with
her bare arm, muttering over it words of hideous sound, and yet more
hideous import. Then she set the tub aside, and took from the chest a
huge bunch of a hundred rusty keys, that clattered in her shaking
hands. Then she sat down and proceeded to oil them all. Before she had
finished, out from the tub, the water of which had kept on a slow
motion ever since she had ceased stirring it, came the head and half
the body of a huge gray snake. But the witch did not look round. It
grew out of the tub, waving itself backwards and forwards with a slow
horizontal motion, till it reached the princess, when it laid its head
upon her shoulder, and gave a low hiss in her ear. She started--but
with joy; and seeing the head resting on her shoulder, drew it towards
her and kissed it. Then she drew it all out of the tub, and wound it
round her body. It was one of those dreadful creatures which few have
ever beheld--the White Snakes of Darkness.

Then she took the keys and went down to her cellar; and as she unlocked
the door she said to herself,--

"This _is_ worth living for!"

Locking the door behind her, she descended a few steps into the cellar,
and crossing it, unlocked another door into a dark, narrow passage. She
locked this also behind her, and descended a few more steps. If anyone
had followed the witch-princess, he would have heard her unlock exactly
one hundred doors, and descend a few steps after unlocking each. When
she had unlocked the last, she entered a vast cave, the roof of which
was supported by huge natural pillars of rock. Now this roof was the
under side of the bottom of the lake.

She then untwined the snake from her body, and held it by the tail high
above her. The hideous creature stretched up its head towards the roof
of the cavern, which it was just able to reach. It then began to move
its head backwards and forwards, with a slow oscillating motion, as if
looking for something. At the same moment the witch began to walk round
and round the cavern, coming nearer to the centre every circuit; while
the head of the snake described the same path over the roof that she
did over the floor, for she kept holding it up. And still it kept
slowly oscillating. Round and round the cavern they went, ever
lessening the circuit, till at last the snake made a sudden dart, and
clung to the roof with its mouth.

"That's right, my beauty!" cried the princess; "drain it dry."

She let it go, left it hanging, and sat down on a great stone, with her
black cat, which had followed her all round the cave, by her side. Then
she began to knit and mutter awful words. The snake hung like a huge
leech, sucking at the stone; the cat stood with his back arched, and
his tail like a piece of cable, looking up at the snake; and the old
woman sat and knitted and muttered. Seven days and seven nights they
remained thus; when suddenly the serpent dropped from the roof as if
exhausted, and shrivelled up till it was again like a piece of dried
seaweed. The witch started to her feet, picked it up, put it in her
pocket, and looked up at the roof. One drop of water was trembling on
the spot where the snake had been sucking. As soon as she saw that, she
turned and fled, followed by her cat. Shutting the door in a terrible
hurry, she locked it, and having muttered some frightful words, sped to
the next, which also she locked and muttered over; and so with all the
hundred doors, till she arrived in her own cellar. There she sat down
on the floor ready to faint, but listening with malicious delight to
the rushing of the water, which she could hear distinctly through all
the hundred doors.

But this was not enough. Now that she had tasted revenge, she lost her
patience. Without further measures, the lake would be too long in
disappearing. So the next night, with the last shred of the dying old
moon rising, she took some of the water in which she had revived the
snake, put it in a bottle, and set out, accompanied by her cat. Before
morning she had made the entire circuit of the lake, muttering fearful
words as she crossed every stream, and casting into it some of the
water out of her bottle. When she had finished the circuit she muttered
yet again, and flung a handful of water towards the moon. Thereupon
every spring in the country ceased to throb and bubble, dying away like
the pulse of a dying man. The next day there was no sound of falling
water to be heard along the borders of the lake. The very courses were
dry; and the mountains showed no silvery streaks down their dark sides.
And not alone had the fountains of mother Earth ceased to flow; for all
the babies throughout the country were crying dreadfully--only without
tears.






XII. WHERE IS THE PRINCE?


Never since the night when the princess left him so abruptly had the
prince had a single interview with her. He had seen her once or twice
in the lake; but as far as he could discover, she had not been in it
any more at night. He had sat and sung, and looked in vain for his
Nereid; while she, like a true Nereid, was wasting away with her lake,
sinking as it sank, withering as it dried. When at length he discovered
the change that was taking place in the level of the water, he was in
great alarm and perplexity. He could not tell whether the lake was
dying because the lady had forsaken it; or whether the lady would not
come because the lake had begun to sink. But he resolved to know so
much at least.

He disguised himself, and, going to the palace, requested to see the
lord chamberlain. His appearance at once gained his request; and the
lord chamberlain, being a man of some insight, perceived that there was
more in the prince's solicitation than met the ear. He felt likewise
that no one could tell whence a solution of the present difficulties
might arise. So he granted the prince's prayer to be made shoe-black to
the princess. It was rather cunning in the prince to request such an
easy post, for the princess could not possibly soil as many shoes as
other princesses. He soon learned all that could be learned about the
princess. He went nearly distracted; but after roaming about the lake
for days, and diving in every depth that remained, all that he could do
was to put an extra polish on the dainty pair of boots that was never
called for.

For the princess kept her room, with the curtains drawn to shut out the
dying lake. But she could not shut it out of her mind for a moment. It
haunted her imagination so that she felt as if the lake were her soul,
drying up within her, first to mud, then to madness and death. She thus
brooded over the change, with all its dreadful accompaniments, till she
was nearly distracted. As for the prince, she had forgotten him.
However much she had enjoyed his company in the water, she did not care
for him without it. But she seemed to have forgotten her father and
mother too. The lake went on sinking. Small slimy spots began to
appear, which glittered steadily amidst the changeful shine of the
water. These grew to broad patches of mud, which widened and spread,
with rocks here and there, and floundering fishes and crawling eels
swarming. The people went everywhere catching these, and looking for
anything that might have dropped from the royal boats.

At length the lake was all but gone, only a few of the deepest pools
remaining unexhausted.

It happened one day that a party of youngsters found themselves on the
brink of one of these pools in the very centre of the lake. It was a
rocky basin of considerable depth. Looking in, they saw at the bottom
something that shone yellow in the sun. A little boy jumped in and
dived for it. It was a plate of gold covered with writing. They carried
it to the king.

On one side of it stood these words:--

   "Death alone from death can save.
    Love is death, and so is brave.
    Love can fill the deepest grave.
    Love loves on beneath the wave."

Now this was enigmatical enough to the king and courtiers. But the
reverse of the plate explained it a little. Its writing amounted to
this:--

"If the lake should disappear, they must find the hole through which
the water ran. But it would be useless to try to stop it by any
ordinary means. There was but one effectual mode.--The body of a living
man could alone stanch the flow. The man must give himself of his own
will; and the lake must take his life as it filled. Otherwise the
offering would be of no avail. If the nation could not provide one
hero, it was time it should perish."






XIII. HERE I AM.


This was a very disheartening revelation to the king--not that he was
unwilling to sacrifice a subject, but that he was hopeless of finding a
man willing to sacrifice himself. No time was to be lost, however, for
the princess was lying motionless on her bed, and taking no nourishment
but lake-water, which was now none of the best. Therefore the king
caused the contents of the wonderful plate of gold to be published
throughout the country.

No one, however, came forward.

The prince, having gone several days' journey into the forest, to
consult a hermit whom he had met there on his way to Lagobel, knew
nothing of the oracle till his return.

When he had acquainted himself with all the particulars, he sat down
and thought,--

"She will die if I don't do it, and life would be nothing to me without
her; so I shall lose nothing by doing it. And life will be as pleasant
to her as ever, for she will soon forget me. And there will be so much
more beauty and happiness in the world!--To be sure, I shall not see
it." (Here the poor prince gave a sigh.) "How lovely the lake will be
in the moonlight, with that glorious creature sporting in it like a
wild goddess!--It is rather hard to be drowned by inches, though. Let
me see--that will be seventy inches of me to drown." (Here he tried to
laugh, but could not.) "The longer the better, however," he resumed,
"for can I not bargain that the princess shall be beside me all the
time? So I shall see her once more, kiss her, perhaps,--who knows? and
die looking in her eyes. It will be no death. At least, I shall not
feel it. And to see the lake filling for the beauty again!--All right!
I am ready."

He kissed the princess's boot, laid it down, and hurried to the king's
apartment. But feeling, as he went, that anything sentimental would be
disagreeable, he resolved to carry off the whole affair with
nonchalance. So he knocked at the door of the king's counting-house,
where it was all but a capital crime to disturb him.

When the king heard the knock he started up, and opened the door in a
rage. Seeing only the shoeblack, he drew his sword. This, I am sorry to
say, was his usual mode of asserting his regality, when he thought his
dignity was in danger. But the prince was not in the least alarmed.

"Please your majesty, I'm your butler," said he.

"My butler! you lying rascal? What do you mean?"

"I mean, I will cork your big bottle."

"Is the fellow mad?" bawled the king, raising the point of his sword.

"I will put a stopper--plug--what you call it, in your leaky lake,
grand monarch," said the prince.

The king was in such a rage that before he could speak he had time to
cool, and to reflect that it would be great waste to kill the only man
who was willing to be useful in the present emergency, seeing that in
the end the insolent fellow would be as dead as if he had died by his
majesty's own hand. "Oh!" said he at last, putting up his sword with
difficulty, it was so long; "I am obliged to you, you young fool! Take
a glass of wine?"

"No, thank you," replied the prince.

"Very well," said the king. "Would you like to run and see your parents
before you make your experiment?"

"No, thank you," said the prince.

"Then we will go and look for the hole at once," said his majesty, and
proceeded to call some attendants.

"Stop, please your majesty; I have a condition to make," interposed the
prince.

"What!" exclaimed the king, "a condition! and with me! How dare you?"

"As you please," returned the prince coolly. "I wish your majesty a
good morning."

"You wretch! I will have you put in a sack, and stuck in the hole."

"Very well, your majesty," replied the prince, becoming a little more
respectful, lest the wrath of the king should deprive him of the
pleasure of dying for the princess. "But what good will that do your
majesty? Please to remember that the oracle says the victim must offer
himself."

"Well, you _have_ offered yourself," retorted the king.

"Yes, upon one condition."

"Condition again!" roared the king, once more drawing his sword.
"Begone! Somebody else will be glad enough to take the honour off your
shoulders."

"Your majesty knows it will not be easy to get another to take my
place."

"Well, what is your condition?" growled the king, feeling that the
prince was right.

"Only this," replied the prince: "that, as I must on no account die
before I am fairly drowned, and the waiting will be rather wearisome,
the princess, your daughter, shall go with me, feed me with her own
hands, and look at me now and then, to comfort me; for you must confess
it _is_ rather hard. As soon as the water is up to my eyes, she may go
and be happy, and forget her poor shoeblack."

Here the prince's voice faltered, and he very nearly grew sentimental,
in spite of his resolution.

"Why didn't you tell me before what your condition was? Such a fuss
about nothing!" exclaimed the king.

"Do you grant it?" persisted the prince.

"Of course I do," replied the king.

"Very well. I am ready."

"Go and have some dinner, then, while I set my people to find the
place."

The king ordered out his guards, and gave directions to the officers to
find the hole in the lake at once. So the bed of the lake was marked
out in divisions and thoroughly examined, and in an hour or so the hole
was discovered. It was in the middle of a stone, near the centre of the
lake, in the very pool where the golden plate had been found. It was a
three-cornered hole of no great size. There was water all round the
stone, but very little was flowing through the hole.






XIV. THIS IS VERY KIND OF YOU.


The prince went to dress for the occasion, for he was resolved to die
like a prince.

When the princess heard that a man had offered to die for her, she was
so transported that she jumped off the bed, feeble as she was, and
danced about the room for joy. She did not care who the man was; that
was nothing to her. The hole wanted stopping; and if only a man would
do, why, take one. In an hour or two more everything was ready. Her
maid dressed her in haste, and they carried her to the side of the
lake. When she saw it she shrieked, and covered her face with her
hands. They bore her across to the stone, where they had already placed
a little boat for her. The water was not deep enough to float it, but
they hoped it would be, before long. They laid her on cushions, placed
in the boat wines and fruits and other nice things, and stretched a
canopy over all.

In a few minutes the prince appeared. The princess recognized him at
once, but did not think it worth while to acknowledge him.

"Here I am," said the prince. "Put me in."

"They told me it was a shoeblack," said the princess.

"So I am," said the prince. "I blacked your little boots three times a
day, because they were all I could get of you. Put me in."

The courtiers did not resent his bluntness, except by saying to each
other that he was taking it out in impudence.

But how was he to be put in? The golden plate contained no instructions
on this point. The prince looked at the hole, and saw but one way. He
put both his legs into it, sitting on the stone, and, stooping forward,
covered the corner that remained open with his two hands. In this
uncomfortable position he resolved to abide his fate, and turning to
the people, said,--

"Now you can go."

The king had already gone home to dinner.

"Now you can go," repeated the princess after him, like a parrot.

The people obeyed her and went.

Presently a little wave flowed over the stone, and wetted one of the
prince's knees. But he did not mind it much. He began to sing, and the
song he sung was this:--

   "As a world that has no well,
    Darkly bright in forest dell;
    As a world without the gleam
    Of the downward-going stream;
    As a world without the glance
    Of the ocean's fair expanse;
    As a world where never rain
    Glittered on the sunny plain;--
    Such, my heart, thy world would be,
    If no love did flow in thee.

   "As a world without the sound
    Of the rivulets underground;
    Or the bubbling of the spring
    Out of darkness wandering;
    Or the mighty rush and flowing
    Of the river's downward going;
    Or the music-showers that drop
    On the outspread beech's top;
    Or the ocean's mighty voice,
    When his lifted waves rejoice;--
    Such, my soul, thy world would be,
    If no love did sing in thee.

   "Lady, keep thy world's delight;
    Keep the waters in thy sight.
    Love hath made me strong to go,
    For thy sake, to realms below,
    Where the water's shine and hum
    Through the darkness never come:
    Let, I pray, one thought of me
    Spring, a little well, in thee;
    Lest thy loveless soul be found
    Like a dry and thirsty ground."

"Sing again, prince. It makes it less tedious," said the princess.

But the prince was too much overcome to sing any more, and a long pause
followed.

"This is very kind of you, prince," said the princess at last, quite
coolly, as she lay in the boat with her eyes shut.

"I am sorry I can't return the compliment," thought the prince; "but
you are worth dying for, after all."

Again a wavelet, and another, and another flowed over the stone, and
wetted both the prince's knees; but he did not speak or move.
Two--three--four hours passed in this way, the princess apparently
asleep, and the prince very patient. But he was much disappointed in
his position, for he had none of the consolation he had hoped for.

At last he could bear it no longer.

"Princess!" said he.

But at the moment up started the princess, crying,--

"I'm afloat! I'm afloat!"

And the little boat bumped against the stone.

"Princess!" repeated the prince, encouraged by seeing her wide awake
and looking eagerly at the water.

"Well?" said she, without looking round.

"Your papa promised that you should look at me, and you haven't looked
at me once."

"Did he? Then I suppose I must. But I am so sleepy!"

"Sleep then, darling, and don't mind me," said the poor prince.

"Really, you are very good," replied the princess. "I think I will go
to sleep again."

"Just give me a glass of wine and a biscuit first," said the prince,
very humbly.

"With all my heart," said the princess, and gaped as she said it.

She got the wine and the biscuit, however, and leaning over the side of
the boat towards him, was compelled to look at him.

"Why, prince," she said, "you don't look well! Are you sure you don't
mind it?"

"Not a bit," answered he, feeling very faint in deed. "Only I shall die
before it is of any use to you, unless I have something to eat."

"There, then," said she, holding out the wine to him.

"Ah! you must feed me. I dare not move my hands. The water would run
away directly."

"Good gracious!" said the princess; and she began at once to feed him
with bits of biscuit and sips of wine.

As she fed him, he contrived to kiss the tips of her fingers now and
then. She did not seem to mind it, one way or the other. But the prince
felt better.

"Now for your own sake, princess," said he, "I cannot let you go to
sleep. You must sit and look at me, else I shall not be able to keep
up."

"Well, I will do anything I can to oblige you," answered she, with
condescension; and, sitting down, she did look at him, and kept looking
at him with wonderful steadiness, considering all things.

The sun went down, and the moon rose, and, gush after gush, the waters
were rising up the prince's body. They were up to his waist now.

"Why can't we go and have a swim?" said the princess. "There seems to
be water enough just about here."

"I shall never swim more," said the prince.

"Oh, I forgot," said the princess, and was silent.

So the water grew and grew, and rose up and up on the prince. And the
princess sat and looked at him. She fed him now and then. The night
wore on. The waters rose and rose. The moon rose likewise higher and
higher, and shone full on the face of the dying prince. The water was
up to his neck.

"Will you kiss me, princess?" said he, feebly. The nonchalance was all
gone now.

"Yes, I will," answered the princess, and kissed him with a long,
sweet, cold kiss.

"Now," said he, with a sigh of content, "I die happy."

He did not speak again. The princess gave him some wine for the last
time: he was past eating. Then she sat down again, and looked at him.
The water rose and rose. It touched his chin. It touched his lower lip.
It touched between his lips. He shut them hard to keep it out. The
princess began to feel strange. It touched his upper lip. He breathed
through his nostrils. The princess looked wild. It covered his
nostrils. Her eyes looked scared, and shone strange in the moonlight.
His head fell back; the water closed over it, and the bubbles of his
last breath bubbled up through the water. The princess gave a shriek,
and sprang into the lake.

She laid hold first of one leg, and then of the other, and pulled and
tugged, but she could not move either. She stopped to take breath, and
that made her think that he could not get any breath. She was frantic.
She got hold of him, and held his head above the water, which was
possible now his hands were no longer on the hole. But it was of no
use, for he was past breathing.

Love and water brought back all her strength. She got under the water,
and pulled and pulled with her whole might, till at last she got one
leg out. The other easily followed. How she got him into the boat she
never could tell; but when she did, she fainted away. Coming to
herself, she seized the oars, kept herself steady as best she could,
and rowed and rowed, though she had never rowed before. Round rocks,
and over shallows, and through mud she rowed, till she got to the
landing-stairs of the palace. By this time her people were on the
shore, for they had heard her shriek. She made them carry the prince to
her own room, and lay him in her bed, and light a fire, and send for
the doctors.

"But the lake, your highness!" said the chamberlain, who, roused by the
noise, came in, in his nightcap.

"Go and drown yourself in it!" she said.

This was the last rudeness of which the princess was ever guilty; and
one must allow that she had good cause to feel provoked with the lord
chamberlain.

Had it been the king himself, he would have fared no better. But both
he and the queen were fast asleep. And the chamberlain went back to his
bed. Somehow, the doctors never came. So the princess and her old nurse
were left with the prince. But the old nurse was a wise woman, and knew
what to do.

They tried everything for a long time without success. The princess was
nearly distracted between hope and fear, but she tried on and on, one
thing after another, and everything over and over again.

At last, when they had all but given it up, just as the sun rose, the
prince opened his eyes.






XV. LOOK AT THE RAIN!


The princess burst into a passion of tears, and _fell_ on the floor.
There she lay for an hour and her tears never ceased. All the pent-up
crying of her life was spent now. And a rain came on, such as had never
been seen in that country. The sun shone all the time, and the great
drops, which fell straight to the earth, shone likewise. The palace was
in the heart of a rainbow. It was a rain of rubies, and sapphires, and
emeralds, and topazes. The torrents poured from the mountains like
molten gold; and if it had not been for its subterraneous outlet, the
lake would have overflowed and inundated the country. It was full from
shore to shore.

But the princess did not heed the lake. She lay on the floor and wept.
And this rain within doors was far more wonderful than the rain out of
doors. For when it abated a little, and she proceeded to rise, she
found, to her astonishment, that she could not. At length, after many
efforts, she succeeded in getting upon her feet. But she tumbled down
again directly. Hearing her fall, her old nurse uttered a yell of
delight, and ran to her, screaming,--

"My darling child! she's found her gravity!"

"Oh, that's it! is it?" said the princess, rubbing her shoulder and her
knee alternately. "I consider it very unpleasant. I feel as if I should
be crushed to pieces."

"Hurrah!" cried the prince from the bed. "If you've come round,
princess, so have I. How's the lake?"

"Brimful," answered the nurse.

"Then we're all happy."

"That we are indeed!" answered the princess, sobbing.

And there was rejoicing all over the country that rainy day. Even the
babies forgot their past troubles, and danced and crowed amazingly. And
the king told stories, and the queen listened to them. And he divided
the money in his box, and she the honey in her pot, to all the
children. And there was such jubilation as was never heard of before.

Of course the prince and princess were betrothed at once. But the
princess had to learn to walk, before they could be married with any
propriety. And this was not so easy at her time of life, for she could
walk no more than a baby. She was always falling down and hurting
herself.

"Is this the gravity you used to make so much of?" said she one day to
the prince, as he raised her from the floor. "For my part, I was a
great deal more comfortable without it."

"No, no, that's not it. This is it," replied the prince, as he took her
up, and carried her about like a baby, kissing her all the time. "This
is gravity."

"That's better," said she. "I don't mind that so much."

And she smiled the sweetest, loveliest smile in the prince's face. And
she gave him one little kiss in return for all his; and he thought them
overpaid, for he was beside himself with delight. I fear she complained
of her gravity more than once after this, notwithstanding.

It was a long time before she got reconciled to walking. But the pain
of learning it was quite counterbalanced by two things, either of which
would have been sufficient consolation. The first was, that the prince
himself was her teacher; and the second, that she could tumble into the
lake as often as she pleased. Still, she preferred to have the prince
jump in with her; and the splash they made before was nothing to the
splash they made now.

The lake never sank again. In process of time, it wore the roof of the
cavern quite through, and was twice as deep as before.

The only revenge the princess took upon her aunt was to tread pretty
hard on her gouty toe the next time she saw her. But she was sorry for
it the very next day, when she heard that the water had undermined her
house, and that it had fallen in the night, burying her in its ruins;
whence no one ever ventured to dig up her body. There she lies to this
day.

So the prince and princess lived and were happy; and had crowns of
gold, and clothes of cloth, and shoes of leather, and children of boys
and girls, not one of whom was ever known, on the most critical
occasion, to lose the smallest atom of his or her due proportion of
gravity.






THE GIANT'S HEART.






There was once a giant who lived on the borders of Giantland where it
touched on the country of common people.

Everything in Giantland was so big that the common people saw only a
mass of awful mountains and clouds; and no living man had ever come
from it, as far as anybody knew, to tell what he had seen in it.

Somewhere near these borders, on the other side, by the edge of a great
forest, lived a labourer with his wife and a great many children. One
day Tricksey-Wee, as they called her, teased her brother Buffy-Bob,
till he could not bear it any longer, and gave her a box on the ear.
Tricksey-Wee cried; and Buffy-Bob was so sorry and so ashamed of
himself that he cried too, and ran off into the wood. He was so long
gone that Tricksey-Wee began to be frightened, for she was very fond of
her brother; and she was so distressed that she had first teased him
and then cried, that at last she ran into the wood to look for him,
though there was more chance of losing herself than of finding him.
And, indeed, so it seemed likely to turn out; for, running on without
looking, she at length found herself in a valley she knew nothing
about. And no wonder; for what she thought was a valley with round,
rocky sides, was no other than the space between two of the roots of a
great tree that grew on the borders of Giantland. She climbed over the
side of it, and went towards what she took for a black, round-topped
mountain, far away; but which she soon discovered to be close to her,
and to be a hollow place so great that she could not tell what it was
hollowed out of. Staring at it, she found that it was a doorway; and
going nearer and staring harder, she saw the door, far in, with a
knocker of iron upon it, a great many yards above her head, and as
large as the anchor of a big ship. Now, nobody had ever been unkind to
Tricksey-Wee, and therefore she was not afraid of anybody. For
Buffy-Bob's box on the ear she did not think worth considering. So
spying a little hole at the bottom of the door which had been nibbled
by some giant mouse, she crept through it, and found herself in an
enormous hall. She could not have seen the other end of it at all,
except for the great fire that was burning there, diminished to a spark
in the distance. Towards this fire she ran as fast as she could, and
was not far from it when something fell before her with a great
clatter, over which she tumbled, and went rolling on the floor. She was
not much hurt however, and got up in a moment. Then she saw that what
she had fallen over was not unlike a great iron bucket. When she
examined it more closely, she discovered that it was a thimble; and
looking up to see who had dropped it, beheld a huge face, with
spectacles as big as the round windows in a church, bending over her,
and looking everywhere for the thimble. Tricksey-Wee immediately laid
hold of it in both her arms, and lifted it about an inch nearer to the
nose of the peering giantess. This movement made the old lady see where
it was, and, her finger popping into it, it vanished from the eyes of
Tricksey-Wee, buried in the folds of a white stocking like a cloud in
the sky, which Mrs. Giant was busy darning. For it was Saturday night,
and her husband would wear nothing but white stockings on Sunday. To be
sure he did eat little children, but only _very_ little ones; and if
ever it crossed his mind that it was wrong to do so, he always said to
himself that he wore whiter stockings on Sunday than any other giant in
all Giantland.

At the same instant Tricksey-Wee heard a sound like the wind in a tree
full of leaves, and could not think what it could be; till, looking up,
she found that it was the giantess whispering to her; and when she
tried very hard she could hear what she said well enough.

"Run away, dear little girl," she said, "as fast as you can; for my
husband will be home in a few minutes."

"But I've never been naughty to your husband," said Tricksey-Wee,
looking up in the giantess's face.

"That doesn't matter. You had better go. He is fond of little children,
particularly little girls."

"Oh, then he won't hurt me."

"I am not sure of that. He is so fond of them that he eats them up; and
I am afraid he couldn't help hurting you a little. He's a very good man
though."

"Oh! then--" began Tricksey-Wee, feeling rather frightened; but before
she could finish her sentence she heard the sound of footsteps very far
apart and very heavy. The next moment, who should come running towards
her, full speed, and as pale as death, but Buffy-Bob. She held out her
arms, and he ran into them. But when she tried to kiss him, she only
kissed the back of his head; for his white face and round eyes were
turned to the door.

"Run, children; run and hide!" said the giantess.

"Come, Buffy," said Tricksey; "yonder's a great brake; we'll hide in
it."

The brake was a big broom; and they had just got into the bristles of
it when they heard the door open with a sound of thunder, and in
stalked the giant. You would have thought you saw the whole earth
through the door when he opened it, so wide was it; and when he closed
it, it was like nightfall.

"Where is that little boy?" he cried, with a voice like the bellowing
of a cannon. "He looked a very nice boy indeed. I am almost sure he
crept through the mousehole at the bottom of the door. Where is he, my
dear?"

"I don't know," answered the giantess.

"But you know it is wicked to tell lies; don't you, my dear?" retorted
the giant.

"Now, you ridiculous old Thunderthump!" said his wife, with a smile as
broad as the sea in the sun, "how can I mend your white stockings and
look after little boys? You have got plenty to last you over Sunday, I
am sure. Just look what good little boys they are!"

Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob peered through the bristles, and discovered
a row of little boys, about a dozen, with very fat faces and goggle
eyes, sitting before the fire, and looking stupidly into it.
Thunderthump intended the most of these for pickling, and was feeding
them well before salting them. Now and then, however, he could not keep
his teeth off them, and would eat one by the bye, without salt.

He strode up to the wretched children. Now, what made them very
wretched indeed was, that they knew if they could only keep from
eating, and grow thin, the giant would dislike them, and turn them out
to find their way home; but notwithstanding this, so greedy were they,
that they ate as much as ever they could hold. The giantess, who fed
them, comforted herself with thinking that they were not real boys and
girls, but only little pigs pretending to be boys and girls.

"Now tell me the truth," cried the giant, bending his face down over
them. They shook with terror, and every one hoped it was somebody else
the giant liked best. "Where is the little boy that ran into the hall
just now? Whoever tells me a lie shall be instantly boiled."

"He's in the broom," cried one dough-faced boy. "He's in there, and a
little girl with him."

"The naughty children," cried the giant, "to hide from _me_!" And he
made a stride towards the broom.

"Catch hold of the bristles, Bobby. Get right into a tuft, and hold
on," cried Tricksey-Wee, just in time.

The giant caught up the broom, and seeing nothing under it, set it down
again with a force that threw them both on the floor. He then made two
strides to the boys, caught the dough-faced one by the neck, took the
lid off a great pot that was boiling on the fire, popped him in as if
he had been a trussed chicken, put the lid on again, and saying,
"There, boys! See what comes of lying!" asked no more questions; for,
as he always kept his word, he was afraid he might have to do the same
to them all; and he did not like boiled boys. He like to eat them
crisp, as radishes, whether forked or not, ought to be eaten. He then
sat down, and asked his wife if his supper was ready. She looked into
the pot, and throwing the boy out with the ladle, as if he had been a
black beetle that had tumbled in and had had the worst of it, answered
that she thought it was. Whereupon he rose to help her; and taking the
pot from the fire, poured the whole contents, bubbling and splashing,
into a dish like a vat. Then they sat down to supper. The children in
the broom could not see what they had; but it seemed to agree with
them, for the giant talked like thunder, and the giantess answered like
the sea, and they grew chattier and chattier. At length the giant
said,--

"I don't feel quite comfortable about that heart of mine." And as he
spoke, instead of laying his hand on his bosom, he waved it away
towards the corner where the children were peeping from the
broom-bristles, like frightened little mice.

"Well, you know, my darling Thunderthump," answered his wife, "I always
thought it ought to be nearer home. But you know best, of course."

"Ha! ha! You don't know where it is, wife. I moved it a month ago."

"What a man you are, Thunderthump! You trust any creature alive rather
than your wife."

Here the giantess gave a sob which sounded exactly like a wave going
flop into the mouth of a cave up to the roof.

"Where have you got it now?" she resumed, checking her emotion.

"Well, Doodlem, I don't mind telling _you_," answered the giant,
soothingly. "The great she-eagle has got it for a nest egg. She sits on
it night and day, and thinks she will bring the greatest eagle out of
it that ever sharpened his beak on the rocks of Mount Skycrack. I can
warrant no one else will touch it while she has got it. But she is
rather capricious, and I confess I am not easy about it; for the least
scratch of one of her claws would do for me at once. And she
_has_ claws."

I refer anyone who doubts this part of my story to certain chronicles
of Giantland preserved among the Celtic nations. It was quite a common
thing for a giant to put his heart out to nurse, because he did not
like the trouble and responsibility of doing it himself; although I
must confess it was a dangerous sort of plan to take, especially with
such a delicate viscus as the heart.

All this time Buffy-Bob and Tricksey-Wee were listening with long ears.

"Oh!" thought Tricksey-Wee, "if I could but find the giant's cruel
heart, wouldn't I give it a squeeze!"

The giant and giantess went on talking for a long time. The giantess
kept advising the giant to hide his heart somewhere in the house; but
he seemed afraid of the advantage it would give her over him.

"You could hide it at the bottom of the flour-barrel," said she.

"That would make me feel chokey," answered he.

"Well, in the coal-cellar. Or in the dust-hole--that's the place! No
one would think of looking for your heart in the dust-hole."

"Worse and worse!" cried the giant.

"Well, the water-butt," suggested she.

"No, no; it would grow spongy there," said he.

"Well, what _will_ you do with it?"

"I will leave it a month longer where it is, and then I will give it to
the Queen of the Kangaroos, and she will carry it in her pouch for me.
It is best to change its place, you know, lest my enemies should scent
it out. But, dear Doodlem, it's a fretting care to have a heart of
one's own to look after. The responsibility is too much for me. If it
were not for a bite of a radish now and then, I never could bear it."

Here the giant looked lovingly towards the row of little boys by the
fire, all of whom were nodding, or asleep on the floor.

"Why don't you trust it to me, dear Thunderthump?" said his wife. "I
would take the best possible care of it."

"I don't doubt it, my love. But the responsibility would be too much
for _you_. You would no longer be my darling, light-hearted, airy,
laughing Doodlem. It would transform you into a heavy, oppressed woman,
weary of life--as I am."

The giant closed his eyes and pretended to go to sleep. His wife got
his stockings, and went on with her darning. Soon the giant's pretence
became reality, and the giantess began to nod over her work.

"Now, Buffy," whispered Tricksey-Wee, "now's our time. I think it's
moonlight, and we had better be off. There's a door with a hole for the
cat just behind us."

"All right," said Bob; "I'm ready."

So they got out of the broom-brake and crept to the door. But to their
great disappointment, when they got through it, they found themselves
in a sort of shed. It was full of tubs and things, and, though it was
built of wood only, they could not find a crack.

"Let us try this hole," said Tricksey; for the giant and giantess were
sleeping behind them, and they dared not go back.

"All right," said Bob.

He seldom said anything else than _All right_.

Now this hole was in a mound that came in through the wall of the shed,
and went along the floor for some distance. They crawled into it, and
found it very dark. But groping their way along, they soon came to a
small crack, through which they saw grass, pale in the moonshine. As
they crept on, they found the hole began to get wider and lead upwards.

"What is that noise of rushing?" said Buffy-Bob.

"I can't tell," replied Tricksey; "for, you see, I don't know what we
are in."

The fact was, they were creeping along a channel in the heart of a
giant tree; and the noise they heard was the noise of the sap rushing
along in its wooden pipes. When they laid their ears to the wall, they
heard it gurgling along with a pleasant noise.

"It sounds kind and good," said Tricksey. "It is water running. Now it
must be running from somewhere to somewhere. I think we had better go
on, and we shall come somewhere."

It was now rather difficult to go on, for they had to climb as if they
were climbing a hill; and now the passage was wide. Nearly worn out,
they saw light overhead at last, and creeping through a crack into the
open air, found themselves on the fork of a huge tree. A great, broad,
uneven space lay around them, out of which spread boughs in every
direction, the smallest of them as big as the biggest tree in the
country of common people. Overhead were leaves enough to supply all the
trees they had ever seen. Not much moonlight could come through, but
the leaves would glimmer white in the wind at times. The tree was full
of giant birds. Every now and then, one would sweep through, with a
great noise. But, except an occasional chirp, sounding like a shrill
pipe in a great organ, they made no noise. All at once an owl began to
hoot. He thought he was singing. As soon as he began, other birds
replied, making rare game of him. To their astonishment, the children
found they could understand every word they sang. And what they sang
was something like this:--

  "I will sing a song.
    I'm the Owl."
  "Sing a song, you Sing-song
    Ugly fowl!
   What will you sing about,
   Night in and Day out?"

  "Sing about the night;
    I'm the Owl."
  "You could not see for the light,
    Stupid fowl."
  "Oh! the Moon! and the Dew!
   And the Shadows!--tu-whoo!"

The owl spread out his silent, soft, sly wings, and lighting between
Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob, nearly smothered them, closing up one under
each wing. It was like being buried in a down bed. But the owl did not
like anything between his sides and his wings, so he opened his wings
again, and the children made haste to get out. Tricksey-Wee immediately
went in front of the bird, and looking up into his huge face, which was
as round as the eyes of the giantess's spectacles, and much bigger,
dropped a pretty courtesy, and said,--"Please, Mr. Owl, I want to
whisper to you."

"Very well, small child," answered the owl, looking important, and
stooping his ear towards her. "What is it?"

"Please tell me where the eagle lives that sits on the giant's heart."

"Oh, you naughty child! That's a secret. For shame!"

And with a great hiss that terrified them, the owl flew into the tree.
All birds are fond of secrets; but not many of them can keep them so
well as the owl.

So the children went on because they did not know what else to do. They
found the way very rough and difficult, the tree was so full of humps
and hollows. Now and then they plashed into a pool of rain; now and
then they came upon twigs growing out of the trunk where they had no
business, and they were as large as full-grown poplars. Sometimes they
came upon great cushions of soft moss, and on one of them they lay down
and rested. But they had not lain long before they spied a large
nightingale sitting on a branch, with its bright eyes looking up at the
moon. In a moment more he began to sing, and the birds about him began
to reply, but in a different tone from that in which they had replied
to the owl. Oh, the birds did call the nightingale such pretty names!
The nightingale sang, and the birds replied like this:--

  "I will sing a song.
    I'm the nightingale."
  "Sing a song, long, long,
    Little Neverfail!
   What will you sing about,
    Light in or light out?"

  "Sing about the light
    Gone away;
   Down, away, and out of sight--
    Poor lost Day!
   Mourning for the Day dead,
    O'er his dim bed."

The nightingale sang so sweetly, that the children would have fallen
asleep but for fear of losing any of the song. When the nightingale
stopped they got up and wandered on. They did not know where they were
going, but they thought it best to keep going on, because then they
might come upon something or other. They were very sorry they had
forgotten to ask the nightingale about the eagle's nest, but his music
had put everything else out of their heads. They resolved, however, not
to forget the next time they had a chance. So they went on and on, till
they were both tired, and Tricksey-Wee said at last, trying to laugh,--

"I declare my legs feel just like a Dutch doll's."

"Then here's the place to go to bed in," said Buffy-Bob.

They stood at the edge of a last year's nest, and looked down with
delight into the round, mossy cave. Then they crept gently in, and,
lying down in each other's arms, found it so deep, and warm, and
comfortable, and soft, that they were soon fast asleep.

Now, close beside them, in a hollow, was another nest, in which lay a
lark and his wife; and the children were awakened, very early in the
morning, by a dispute between Mr. and Mrs. Lark.

"Let me up," said the lark.

"It is not time," said the lark's wife.

"It is," said the lark, rather rudely. "The darkness is quite thin. I
can almost see my own beak."

"Nonsense!" said the lark's wife. "You know you came home yesterday
morning quite worn out--you had to fly so very high before you saw him.
I am sure he would not mind if you took it a little easier. Do be quiet
and go to sleep again."

"That's not it at all," said the lark. "He doesn't want me. I want him.
Let me up, I say."

He began to sing; and Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob, having now learned
the way, answered him:--

  "I will sing a song.
    I'm the Lark."
  "Sing, sing, Throat-strong,
    Little Kill-the-dark.
   What will you sing about,
   Now the night is out?"

  "I can only call;
    I can't think.
   Let me up--that's all.
    Let me drink!
   Thirsting all the long night
   For a drink of light."

By this time the lark was standing on the edge of his nest and looking
at the children.

"Poor little things! You can't fly," said the lark.

"No; but we can look up," said Tricksey.

"Ah, you don't know what it is to see the very first of the sun."

"But we know what it is to wait till he comes. He's no worse for your
seeing him first, is he?"

"Oh no, certainly not," answered the lark, with condescension, and
then, bursting into his _Jubilate_, he sprang aloft, clapping his wings
like a clock running down.

"Tell us where--" began Buffy-Bob.

But the lark was out of sight. His song was all that was left of him.
That was everywhere, and he was nowhere.

"Selfish bird!" said Buffy. "It's all very well for larks to go hunting
the sun, but they have no business to despise their neighbours, for all
that."

"Can I be of any use to you?" said a sweet bird-voice out of the nest.

This was the lark's wife, who stayed at home with the young larks while
her husband went to church.

"Oh! thank you. If you please," answered Tricksey-Wee.

And up popped a pretty brown head; and then up came a brown feathery
body; and last of all came the slender legs on to the edge of the nest.
There she turned, and, looking down into the nest, from which came a
whole litany of chirpings for breakfast, said, "Lie still, little
ones." Then she turned to the children.

"My husband is King of the Larks," she said.

Buffy-Bob took off his cap, and Tricksey-Wee courtesied very low.

"Oh, it's not me," said the bird, looking very shy. "I am only his
wife. It's my husband." And she looked up after him into the sky,
whence his song was still falling like a shower of musical hailstones.
Perhaps _she_ could see him.

"He's a splendid bird," said Buffy-Bob; "only you know he _will_ get up
a little too early."

"Oh, no! he doesn't. It's only his way, you know. But tell me what I
can do for you."

"Tell us, please, Lady Lark, where the she-eagle lives that sits on
Giant Thunderthump's heart."

"Oh! that is a secret."

"Did you promise not to tell?"

"No; but larks ought to be discreet. They see more than other birds."

"But you don't fly up high like your husband, do you?"

"Not often. But it's no matter. I come to know things for all that."

"Do tell me, and I will sing you a song," said Tricksey-Wee.

"Can you sing too?--You have got no wings!"

"Yes. And I will sing you a song I learned the other day about a lark
and his wife."

"Please do," said the lark's wife. "Be quiet, children, and listen."

Tricksey-Wee was very glad she happened to know a song which would
please the lark's wife, at least, whatever the lark himself might have
thought of it, if he had heard it. So she sang,--

  "'Good morrow, my lord!' in the sky alone,
   Sang the lark, as the sun ascended his throne.
   'Shine on me, my lord; I only am come,
   Of all your servants, to welcome you home.
   I have flown a whole hour, right up, I swear,
   To catch the first shine of your golden hair!'

  "'Must I thank you, then,' said the king, 'Sir Lark,
   For flying so high, and hating the dark?
   You ask a full cup for half a thirst:
   Half is love of me, and half love to be first.
   There's many a bird that makes no haste,
   But waits till I come. That's as much to my taste.

  "And the king hid his head in a turban of cloud;
   And the lark stopped singing, quite vexed and cowed.
   But he flew up higher, and thought, 'Anon,
   The wrath of the king will be over and gone,
   And his crown, shining out of its cloudy fold,
   Will change my brown feathers to a glory of gold.'

  "So he flew, with the strength of a lark he flew.
   But as he rose, the cloud rose too;
   And not a gleam of the golden hair
   Came through the depth of the misty air;
   Till, weary with flying, with sighing sore,
   The strong sun-seeker could do no more.

  "His wings had had no chrism of gold,
   And his feathers felt withered and worn and old;
   So he quivered and sank, and dropped like a stone.
   And there on his nest, where he left her, alone,
   Sat his little wife on her little eggs,
   Keeping them warm with wings and legs.

  "Did I say alone? Ah, no such thing!
   Full in her face was shining the king.
   'Welcome, Sir Lark! You look tired,' said he.
   '_Up_ is not always the best way to me.
   While you have been singing so high and away,
   I've been shining to your little wife all day.'

  "He had set his crown all about the nest,
   And out of the midst shone her little brown breast;
   And so glorious was she in russet gold,
   That for wonder and awe Sir Lark grew cold.
   He popped his head under her wing, and lay
   As still as a stone, till the king was away."

As soon as Tricksey-Wee had finished her song, the lark's wife began a
low, sweet, modest little song of her own; and after she had piped away
for two or three minutes, she said,--

"You dear children, what can I do for you?"

"Tell us where the she-eagle lives, please," said Tricksey-Wee.

"Well, I don't think there can be much harm in telling such wise, good
children," said Lady Lark; "I am sure you don't want to do any
mischief."

"Oh, no; quite the contrary," said Buffy-Bob.

"Then I'll tell you. She lives on the very topmost peak of Mount
Skycrack; and the only way to get up is to climb on the spiders' webs
that cover it from top to bottom."

"That's rather serious," said Tricksey-Wee.

"But you don't want to go up, you foolish little thing! You can't go.
And what do you want to go up for?"

"That is a secret," said Tricksey-Wee.

"Well, it's no business of mine," rejoined Lady Lark, a little
offended, and quite vexed that she had told them. So she flew away to
find some breakfast for her little ones, who by this time were chirping
very impatiently. The children looked at each other, joined hands, and
walked off.

In a minute more the sun was up, and they soon reached the outside of
the tree. The bark was so knobby and rough, and full of twigs, that
they managed to get down, though not without great difficulty. Then,
far away to the north, they saw a huge peak, like the spire of a
church, going right up into the sky. They thought this must be Mount
Skycrack, and turned their faces towards it. As they went on, they saw
a giant or two, now and then, striding about the fields or through the
woods, but they kept out of their way. Nor were they in much danger;
for it was only one or two of the border giants that were so very fond
of children.

At last they came to the foot of Mount Skycrack. It stood in a plain
alone, and shot right up, I don't know how many thousand feet, into the
air, a long, narrow, spearlike mountain. The whole face of it, from top
to bottom, was covered with a network of spiders' webs, with threads of
various sizes, from that of silk to that of whipcord. The webs shook
and quivered, and waved in the sun, glittering like silver. All about
ran huge greedy spiders, catching huge silly flies, and devouring them.

Here they sat down to consider what could be done. The spiders did not
heed them, but ate away at the flies.--Now, at the foot of the
mountain, and all round it, was a ring of water, not very broad, but
very deep. As they sat watching them, one of the spiders, whose web was
woven across this water, somehow or other lost his hold, and fell in on
his back. Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob ran to his assistance, and laying
hold each of one of his legs, succeeded, with the help of the other
legs, which struggled spiderfully, in getting him out upon dry land. As
soon as he had shaken himself, and dried himself a little, the spider
turned to the children, saying,--

"And now, what can I do for you?"

"Tell us, please," said they, "how we can get up the mountain to the
she-eagle's nest."

"Nothing is easier," answered the spider. "Just run up there, and tell
them all I sent you, and nobody will mind you."

"But we haven't got claws like you, Mr. Spider," said Buffy.

"Ah! no more you have, poor unprovided creatures! Still, I think we can
manage it. Come home with me."

"You won't eat us, will you?" said Buffy.

"My dear child," answered the spider, in a tone of injured dignity, "I
eat nothing but what is mischievous or useless. You have helped me, and
now I will help you."

The children rose at once, and climbing as well as they could, reached
the spider's nest in the centre of the web. Nor did they find it very
difficult; for whenever too great a gap came, the spider spinning a
strong cord stretched it just where they would have chosen to put their
feet next. He left them in his nest, after bringing them two enormous
honey-bags, taken from bees that he had caught; but presently about six
of the wisest of the spiders came back with him. It was rather horrible
to look up and see them all round the mouth of the nest, looking down
on them in contemplation, as if wondering whether they would be nice
eating. At length one of them said,--"Tell us truly what you want with
the eagle, and we will try to help you."

Then Tricksey-Wee told them that there was a giant on the borders who
treated little children no better than radishes, and that they had
narrowly escaped being eaten by him; that they had found out that the
great she-eagle of Mount Skycrack was at present sitting on his heart;
and that, if they could only get hold of the heart, they would soon
teach the giant better behaviour.

"But," said their host, "if you get at the heart of the giant, you will
find it as large as one of your elephants. What can you do with it?"

"The least scratch will kill it," replied Buffy-Bob.

"Ah! but you might do better than that," said the spider.--"Now we have
resolved to help you. Here is a little bag of spider-juice. The giants
cannot bear spiders, and this juice is dreadful poison to them. We are
all ready to go up with you, and drive the eagle away. Then you must
put the heart into this other bag, and bring it down with you; for then
the giant will be in your power."

"But how can we do that?" said Buffy. "The bag is not much bigger than
a pudding-bag."

"But it is as large as you will be able to carry."

"Yes; but what are we to do with the heart?"

"Put it in the bag, to be sure. Only, first, you must squeeze a drop
out of the other bag upon it. You will see what will happen."

"Very well; we will do as you tell us," said Tricksey-Wee. "And now, if
you please, how shall we go?"

"Oh, that's our business," said the first spider. "You come with me,
and my grandfather will take your brother. Get up."

So Tricksey-Wee mounted on the narrow part of the spider's back, and
held fast. And Buffy-Bob got on the grandfather's back. And up they
scrambled, over one web after another, up and up--so fast! And every
spider followed; so that, when Tricksey-Wee looked back, she saw a
whole army of spiders scrambling after them.

"What can we want with so many?" she thought; but she said nothing.

The moon was now up, and it was a splendid sight below and around them.
All Giantland was spread out under them, with its great hills, lakes,
trees, and animals. And all above them was the clear heaven, and Mount
Skycrack rising into it, with its endless ladders of spider-webs,
glittering like cords made of moonbeams. And up the moonbeams went,
crawling, and scrambling, and racing, a huge army of huge spiders.

At length they reached all but the very summit, where they stopped.
Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob could see above them a great globe of
feathers, that finished off the mountain like an ornamental knob.

"But how shall we drive her off?" said Buffy.

"We'll soon manage that," answered the grandfather-spider. "Come on
you, down there."

Up rushed the whole army, past the children, over the edge of the nest,
on to the she-eagle, and buried themselves in her feathers. In a moment
she became very restless, and went pecking about with her beak. All at
once she spread out her wings, with a sound like a whirlwind, and flew
off to bathe in the sea; and then the spiders began to drop from her in
all directions on their gossamer wings. The children had to hold fast
to keep the wind of the eagle's flight from blowing them off. As soon
as it was over, they looked into the nest, and there lay the giant's
heart--an awful and ugly thing.

"Make haste, child!" said Tricksey's spider.

So Tricksey took her bag, and squeezed a drop out of it upon the heart.
She thought she heard the giant give a far-off roar of pain, and she
nearly fell from her seat with terror. The heart instantly began to
shrink. It shrunk and shrivelled till it was nearly gone; and Buffy-Bob
caught it up and put it into his bag. Then the two spiders turned and
went down again as fast as they could. Before they got to the bottom,
they heard the shrieks of the she-eagle over the loss of her egg; but
the spiders told them not to be alarmed, for her eyes were too big to
see them.--By the time they reached the foot of the mountain, all the
spiders had got home, and were busy again catching flies, as if nothing
had happened.

After renewed thanks to their friends, the children set off, carrying
the giant's heart with them.

"If you should find it at all troublesome, just give it a little more
spider-juice directly," said the grandfather, as they took their leave.

Now, the giant had given an awful roar of pain the moment they anointed
his heart, and had fallen down in a fit, in which he lay so long that
all the boys might have escaped if they had not been so fat. One did,
and got home in safety. For days the giant was unable to speak. The
first words he uttered were,--

"Oh, my heart! my heart!"

"Your heart is safe enough, dear Thunderstump," said his wife. "Really,
a man of your size ought not to be so nervous and apprehensive. I am
ashamed of you."

"You have no heart, Doodlem," answered he. "I assure you that at this
moment mine is in the greatest danger. It has fallen into the hands of
foes, though who they are I cannot tell."

Here he fainted again; for Tricksey-Wee, finding the heart begin to
swell a little, had given it the least touch of spider-juice.

Again he recovered, and said,--

"Dear Doodlem, my heart is coming back to me. It is coming nearer and
nearer."

After lying silent for hours, he exclaimed,--

"It is in the house, I know!"

And he jumped up and walked about, looking in every corner.

As he rose, Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob came out of the hole in the
tree-root, and through the cat-hole in the door, and walked boldly
towards the giant. Both kept their eyes busy watching him. Led by the
love of his own heart, the giant soon spied them, and staggered
furiously towards them.

"I will eat you, you vermin!" he cried. "Here with my heart!"

Tricksey gave the heart a sharp pinch. Down fell the giant on his
knees, blubbering, and crying, and begging for his heart.

"You shall have it, if you behave yourself properly," said Tricksey.

"How shall I behave myself properly?" asked he, whimpering.

"Take all those boys and girls, and carry them home at once."

"I'm not able; I'm too ill. I should fall down."

"Take them up directly."

"I can't, till you give me my heart."

"Very well!" said Tricksey; and she gave the heart another pinch.

The giant jumped to his feet, and catching up all the children, thrust
some into his waistcoat pockets, some into his breast pocket, put two
or three into his hat, and took a bundle of them under each arm. Then
he staggered to the door.

All this time poor Doodlem was sitting in her arm-chair, crying, and
mending a white stocking.

The giant led the way to the borders. He could not go so fast but that
Buffy and Tricksey managed to keep up with him. When they reached the
borders, they thought it would be safer to let the children find their
own way home. So they told him to set them down. He obeyed.

"Have you put them all down, Mr. Thunderthump?" asked Tricksey-Wee.

"Yes," said the giant.

"That's a lie!" squeaked a little voice; and out came a head from his
waistcoat pocket.

Tricksey-Wee pinched the heart till the giant roared with pain.

"You're not a gentleman. You tell stories," she said.

"He was the thinnest of the lot," said Thunderthump, crying.

"Are you all there now, children?" asked Tricksey.

"Yes, ma'am," returned they, after counting themselves very carefully,
and with some difficulty; for they were all stupid children.

"Now," said Tricksey-Wee to the giant, "will you promise to carry off
no more children, and never to eat a child again all you life?"

"Yes, yes! I promise," answered Thunderthump, sobbing.

"And you will never cross the borders of Giantland?"

"Never."

"And you shall never again wear white stockings on a Sunday, all your
life long.--Do you promise?"

The giant hesitated at this, and began to expostulate; but
Tricksey-Wee, believing it would be good for his morals, insisted;
and the giant promised.

Then she required of him, that, when she gave him back his heart, he
should give it to his wife to take care of for him for ever after.

The poor giant fell on his knees, and began again to beg. But
Tricksey-Wee giving the heart a slight pinch, he bawled out,--

"Yes, yes! Doodlem shall have it, I swear. Only she must not put it in
the flour-barrel, or in the dust-hole."

"Certainly not. Make your own bargain with her.--And you promise not to
interfere with my brother and me, or to take any revenge for what we
have done?"

"Yes, yes, my dear children; I promise everything. Do, pray, make haste
and give me back my poor heart."

"Wait there, then, till I bring it to you."

"Yes, yes. Only make haste, for I feel very faint."

Tricksey-Wee began to undo the mouth of the bag. But Buffy-Bob, who had
got very knowing on his travels, took out his knife with the pretence
of cutting the string; but, in reality, to be prepared for any
emergency.

No sooner was the heart out of the bag, than it expanded to the size of
a bullock; and the giant, with a yell of rage and vengeance, rushed on
the two children, who had stepped sideways from the terrible heart. But
Buffy-Bob was too quick for Thunderthump. He sprang to the heart, and
buried his knife in it, up to the hilt. A fountain of blood spouted
from it; and with a dreadful groan the giant fell dead at the feet of
little Tricksey-Wee, who could not help being sorry for him after all.






THE GOLDEN KEY.






There was a boy who used to sit in the twilight and listen to his
great-aunt's stories.

She told him that if he could reach the place where the end of the
rainbow stands he would find there a golden key.

"And what is the key for?" the boy would ask. "What is it the key of?
What will it open?"

"That nobody knows," his aunt would reply. "He has to find that out."

"I suppose, being gold," the boy once said, thoughtfully, "that I could
get a good deal of money for it if I sold it."

"Better never find it than sell it," returned his aunt. And then the
boy went to bed and dreamed about the golden key.

Now, all that his great-aunt told the boy about the golden key would
have been nonsense, had it not been that their little house stood on
the borders of Fairyland. For it is perfectly well known that out of
Fairyland nobody ever can find where the rainbow stands. The creature
takes such good care of its golden key, always flitting from place to
place, lest anyone should find it! But in Fairyland it is quite
different. Things that look real in this country look very thin indeed
in Fairyland, while some of the things that here cannot stand still for
a moment, will not move there. So it was not in the least absurd of the
old lady to tell her nephew such things about the golden key.

"Did you ever know anybody find it?" he asked one evening.

"Yes. Your father, I believe, found it."

"And what did he do with it, can you tell me?"

"He never told me."

"What was it like?"

"He never showed it to me."

"How does a new key come there always?"

"I don't know. There it is."

"Perhaps it is the rainbow's egg."

"Perhaps it is. You will be a happy boy if you find the nest."

"Perhaps it comes tumbling down the rainbow from the sky."

"Perhaps it does."

One evening, in summer, he went into his own room, and stood at the
lattice-window, and gazed into the forest which fringed the outskirts
of Fairyland. It came close up to his great-aunt's garden, and, indeed,
sent some straggling trees into it. The forest lay to the east, and the
sun, which was setting behind the cottage, looked straight into the
dark wood with his level red eye. The trees were all old, and had few
branches below, so that the sun could see a great way into the forest;
and the boy, being keen-sighted, could see almost as far as the sun.
The trunks stood like rows of red columns in the shine of the red sun,
and he could see down aisle after aisle in the vanishing distance. And
as he gazed into the forest he began to feel as if the trees were all
waiting for him, and had something they could not go on with till he
came to them. But he was hungry, and wanted his supper. So he lingered.

Suddenly, far among the trees, as far as the sun could shine, he saw a
glorious thing. It was the end of a rainbow, large and brilliant. He
could count all the seven colours, and could see shade after shade
beyond the violet; while before the red stood a colour more gorgeous
and mysterious still. It was a colour he had never seen before. Only
the spring of the rainbow-arch was visible. He could see nothing of it
above the trees.

"The golden key!" he said to himself, and darted out of the house, and
into the wood.

He had not gone far before the sun set. But the rainbow only glowed the
brighter: for the rainbow of Fairyland is not dependent upon the sun as
ours is. The trees welcomed him. The bushes made way for him. The
rainbow grew larger and brighter; and at length he found himself within
two trees of it.

It was a grand sight, burning away there in silence, with its gorgeous,
its lovely, its delicate colours, each distinct, all combining. He
could now see a great deal more of it. It rose high into the blue
heavens, but bent so little that he could not tell how high the crown
of the arch must reach. It was still only a small portion of a huge
bow.

He stood gazing at it till he forgot himself with delight--even forgot
the key which he had come to seek. And as he stood it grew more
wonderful still. For in each of the colours, which was as large as the
column of a church, he could faintly see beautiful forms slowly
ascending as if by the steps of a winding stair. The forms appeared
irregularly--now one, now many, now several, now none--men and women
and children--all different, all beautiful.

He drew nearer to the rainbow. It vanished. He started back a step in
dismay. It was there again, as beautiful as ever. So he contented
himself with standing as near it as he might, and watching the forms
that ascended the glorious colours towards the unknown height of the
arch, which did not end abruptly, but faded away in the blue air, so
gradually that he could not say where it ceased.

When the thought of the golden key returned, the boy very wisely
proceeded to mark out in his mind the space covered by the foundation
of the rainbow, in order that he might know where to search, should the
rainbow disappear. It was based chiefly upon a bed of moss.

Meantime it had grown quite dark in the wood. The rainbow alone was
visible by its own light. But the moment the moon rose the rainbow
vanished. Nor could any change of place restore the vision to the boy's
eyes. So he threw himself down upon the mossy bed, to wait till the
sunlight would give him a chance of finding the key. There he fell fast
asleep.

When he woke in the morning the sun was looking straight into his eyes.
He turned away from it, and the same moment saw a brilliant little
thing lying on the moss within a foot of his face. It was the golden
key. The pipe of it was of plain gold, as bright as gold could be. The
handle was curiously wrought and set with sapphires. In a terror of
delight he put out his hand and took it, and had it.

He lay for a while, turning it over and over, and feeding his eyes upon
its beauty. Then he jumped to his feet, remembering that the pretty
thing was of no use to him yet. Where was the lock to which the key
belonged? It must be somewhere, for how could anybody be so silly as
make a key for which there was no lock? Where should he go to look for
it? He gazed about him, up into the air, down to the earth, but saw no
keyhole in the clouds, in the grass, or in the trees.

Just as he began to grow disconsolate, however, he saw something
glimmering in the wood. It was a mere glimmer that he saw, but he took
it for a glimmer of rainbow, and went towards it.--And now I will go
back to the borders of the forest.

Not far from the house where the boy had lived there was another house,
the owner of which was a merchant, who was much away from home. He had
lost his wife some years before, and had only one child, a little girl,
whom he left to the charge of two servants, who were very idle and
careless. So she was neglected and left untidy, and was sometimes
ill-used besides.

Now, it is well known that the little creatures commonly called
fairies, though there are many different kinds of fairies in Fairyland,
have an exceeding dislike to untidiness. Indeed, they are quite
spiteful to slovenly people. Being used to all the lovely ways of the
trees and flowers, and to the neatness of the birds and all woodland
creatures, it makes them feel miserable, even in their deep woods and
on their grassy carpets, to think that within the same moonlight lies a
dirty, uncomfortable, slovenly house. And this makes them angry with
the people that live in it, and they would gladly drive them out of the
world if they could. They want the whole earth nice and clean. So they
pinch the maids black and blue, and play them all manner of
uncomfortable tricks.

But this house was quite a shame, and the fairies in the forest could
not endure it. They tried everything on the maids without effect, and
at last resolved upon making a clean riddance, beginning with the
child. They ought to have known that it was not her fault, but they
have little principle and much mischief in them, and they thought that
if they got rid of her the maids would be sure to be turned away.

So one evening, the poor little girl having been put to bed early,
before the sun was down, the servants went off to the village, locking
the door behind them. The child did not know she was alone, and lay
contentedly looking out of her window towards the forest, of which,
however, she could not see much, because of the ivy and other creeping
plants which had straggled across her window. All at once she saw an
ape making faces at her out of the mirror, and the heads carved upon a
great old wardrobe grinning fearfully. Then two old spider-legged
chairs came forward into the middle of the room, and began to dance a
queer, old-fashioned dance. This set her laughing, and she forgot the
ape and the grinning heads. So the fairies saw they had made a mistake,
and sent the chairs back to their places. But they knew that she had
been reading the story of Silverhair all day. So the next moment she
heard the voices of the three bears upon the stair, big voice, middle
voice, and little voice, and she heard their soft, heavy tread, as if
they had had stockings over their boots, coming nearer and nearer to
the door of her room, till she could bear it no longer. She did just as
Silverhair did, and as the fairies wanted her to do: she darted to the
window, pulled it open, got upon the ivy, and so scrambled to the
ground. She then fled to the forest as fast as she could run.

Now, although she did not know it, this was the very best way she could
have gone; for nothing is ever so mischievous in its own place as it is
out of it; and, besides, these mischievous creatures were only the
children of Fairyland, as it were, and there are many other beings
there as well; and if a wanderer gets in among them, the good ones will
always help him more than the evil ones will be able to hurt him.

The sun was now set, and the darkness coming on, but the child thought
of no danger but the bears behind her. If she had looked round,
however, she would have seen that she was followed by a very different
creature from a bear. It was a curious creature, made like a fish, but
covered, instead of scales, with feathers of all colours, sparkling
like those of a humming-bird. It had fins, not wings, and swam through
the air as a fish does through the water. Its head was like the head of
a small owl.

After running a long way, and as the last of the light was
disappearing, she passed under a tree with drooping branches. It
dropped its branches to the ground all about her, and caught her as in
a trap. She struggled to get out, but the branches pressed her closer
and closer to the trunk. She was in great terror and distress, when the
air-fish, swimming into the thicket of branches, began tearing them
with its beak. They loosened their hold at once, and the creature went
on attacking them, till at length they let the child go. Then the
air-fish came from behind her, and swam on in front, glittering and
sparkling all lovely colours; and she followed.

It led her gently along till all at once it swam in at a cottage-door.
The child followed still. There was a bright fire in the middle of the
floor, upon which stood a pot without a lid, full of water that boiled
and bubbled furiously. The air-fish swam straight to the pot and into
the boiling water, where it lay quiet. A beautiful woman rose from the
opposite side of the fire and came to meet the girl. She took her up in
her arms, and said,--

"Ah, you are come at last! I have been looking for you a long time."

She sat down with her on her lap, and there the girl sat staring at
her. She had never seen anything so beautiful. She was tall and strong,
with white arms and neck, and a delicate flush on her face. The child
could not tell what was the colour of her hair, but could not help
thinking it had a tinge of dark green. She had not one ornament upon
her, but she looked as if she had just put off quantities of diamonds
and emeralds. Yet here she was in the simplest, poorest little cottage,
where she was evidently at home. She was dressed in shining green.

The girl looked at the lady, and the lady looked at the girl.

"What is your name?" asked the lady.

"The servants always call me Tangle."

"Ah, that was because your hair was so untidy. But that was their
fault, the naughty women! Still it is a pretty name, and I will call
you Tangle too. You must not mind my asking you questions, for you may
ask me the same questions, every one of them, and any others that you
like. How old are you?"

"Ten," answered Tangle.

"You don't look like it," said the lady.

"How old are you, please?" returned Tangle.

"Thousands of years old," answered the lady.

"You don't look like it," said Tangle.

"Don't I? I think I do. Don't you see how beautiful I am?"

And her great blue eyes looked down on the little Tangle, as if all the
stars in the sky were melted in them to make their brightness.

"Ah! but," said Tangle, "when people live long they grow old. At least
I always thought so."

"I have no time to grow old," said the lady. "I am too busy for that.
It is very idle to grow old.--But I cannot have my little girl so
untidy. Do you know I can't find a clean spot on your face to kiss?"

"Perhaps," suggested Tangle, feeling ashamed, but not too much so to
say a word for herself--"perhaps that is because the tree made me cry
so."

"My poor darling!" said the lady, looking now as if the moon were
melted in her eyes, and kissing her little face, dirty as it was, "the
naughty tree must suffer for making a girl cry."

"And what is your name, please?" asked Tangle.

"Grandmother," answered the lady.

"Is it really?"

"Yes, indeed. I never tell stories, even in fun."

"How good of you!"

"I couldn't if I tried. It would come true if I said it, and then I
should be punished enough." And she smiled like the sun through a
summer-shower.

"But now," she went on, "I must get you washed and dressed, and then we
shall have some supper."

"Oh! I had supper long ago," said Tangle.

"Yes, indeed you had," answered the lady--"three years ago. You don't
know that it is three years since you ran away from the bears. You are
thirteen and more now."

Tangle could only stare. She felt quite sure it was true.

"You will not be afraid of anything I do with you--will you?" said the
lady.

"I will try very hard not to be; but I can't be certain, you know,"
replied Tangle.

"I like your saying so, and I shall be quite satisfied," answered the
lady.

She took off the girl's night-gown, rose with her in her arms, and
going to the wall of the cottage, opened a door. Then Tangle saw a deep
tank, the sides of which were filled with green plants, which had
flowers of all colours. There was a roof over it like the roof of the
cottage. It was filled with beautiful clear water, in which swam a
multitude of such fishes as the one that had led her to the cottage. It
was the light their colours gave that showed the place in which they
were.

The lady spoke some words Tangle could not understand, and threw her
into the tank.

The fishes came crowding about her. Two or three of them got under her
head and kept it up. The rest of them rubbed themselves all over her,
and with their wet feathers washed her quite clean. Then the lady, who
had been looking on all the time, spoke again; whereupon some thirty or
forty of the fishes rose out of the water underneath Tangle, and so
bore her up to the arms the lady held out to take her. She carried her
back to the fire, and, having dried her well, opened a chest, and
taking out the finest linen garments, smelling of grass and lavender,
put them upon her, and over all a green dress, just like her own,
shining like hers, and soft like hers, and going into just such lovely
folds from the waist, where it was tied with a brown cord, to her bare
feet.

"Won't you give me a pair of shoes too, Grandmother?" said Tangle.

"No, my dear; no shoes. Look here. I wear no shoes."

So saying she lifted her dress a little, and there were the loveliest
white feet, but no shoes. Then Tangle was content to go without shoes
too. And the lady sat down with her again, and combed her hair, and
brushed it, and then left it to dry while she got the supper.

First she got bread out of one hole in the wall; then milk out of
another; then several kinds of fruit out of a third; and then she went
to the pot on the fire, and took out the fish, now nicely cooked, and,
as soon as she had pulled off its feathered skin, ready to be eaten.

"But," exclaimed Tangle. And she stared at the fish, and could say no
more.

"I know what you mean," returned the lady. "You do not like to eat the
messenger that brought you home. But it is the kindest return you can
make. The creature was afraid to go until it saw me put the pot on, and
heard me promise it should be boiled the moment it returned with you.
Then it darted out of the door at once. You saw it go into the pot of
itself the moment it entered, did you not?"

"I did," answered Tangle, "and I thought it very strange; but then I
saw you, and forgot all about the fish."

"In Fairyland," resumed the lady, as they sat down to the table, "the
ambition of the animals is to be eaten by the people; for that is their
highest end in that condition. But they are not therefore destroyed.
Out of that pot comes something more than the dead fish, you will see."

Tangle now remarked that the lid was on the pot. But the lady took no
further notice of it till they had eaten the fish, which Tangle found
nicer than any fish she had ever tasted before. It was as white as
snow, and as delicate as cream. And the moment she had swallowed a
mouthful of it, a change she could not describe began to take place in
her. She heard a murmuring all about her, which became more and more
articulate, and at length, as she went on eating, grew intelligible. By
the time she had finished her share, the sounds of all the animals in
the forest came crowding through the door to her ears; for the door
still stood wide open, though it was pitch dark outside; and they were
no longer sounds only; they were speech, and speech that she could
understand. She could tell what the insects in the cottage were saying
to each other too. She had even a suspicion that the trees and flowers
all about the cottage were holding midnight communications with each
other; but what they said she could not hear.

As soon as the fish was eaten, the lady went to the fire and took the
lid off the pot. A lovely little creature in human shape, with large
white wings, rose out of it, and flew round and round the roof of the
cottage; then dropped, fluttering, and nestled in the lap of the lady.
She spoke to it some strange words, carried it to the door, and threw
it out into the darkness. Tangle heard the flapping of its wings die
away in the distance.

"Now have we done the fish any harm?" she said, returning.

"No," answered Tangle, "I do not think we have. I should not mind
eating one every day."

"They must wait their time, like you and me too, my little Tangle."

And she smiled a smile which the sadness in it made more lovely.

"But," she continued, "I think we may have one for supper to-morrow."

So saying she went to the door of the tank, and spoke; and now Tangle
understood her perfectly.

"I want one of you," she said,--"the wisest."

Thereupon the fishes got together in the middle of the tank, with their
heads forming a circle above the water, and their tails a larger circle
beneath it. They were holding a council, in which their relative wisdom
should be determined. At length one of them flew up into the lady's
hand, looking lively and ready.

"You know where the rainbow stands?" she asked.

"Yes, Mother, quite well," answered the fish.

"Bring home a young man you will find there, who does not know where to
go."

The fish was out of the door in a moment. Then the lady told Tangle it
was time to go to bed; and, opening another door in the side of the
cottage, showed her a little arbour, cool and green, with a bed of
purple heath growing in it, upon which she threw a large wrapper made
of the feathered skins of the wise fishes, shining gorgeous in the
firelight.

Tangle was soon lost in the strangest, loveliest dreams. And the
beautiful lady was in every one of her dreams.

In the morning she woke to the rustling of leaves over her head, and
the sound of running water. But, to her surprise, she could find no
door--nothing but the moss-grown wall of the cottage. So she crept
through an opening in the arbour, and stood in the forest. Then she
bathed in a stream that ran merrily through the trees, and felt
happier; for having once been in her grandmother's pond, she must be
clean and tidy ever after; and, having put on her green dress, felt
like a lady.

She spent that day in the wood, listening to the birds and beasts and
creeping things. She understood all that they said, though she could
not repeat a word of it; and every kind had a different language, while
there was a common though more limited understanding between all the
inhabitants of the forest. She saw nothing of the beautiful lady, but
she felt that she was near her all the time; and she took care not to
go out of sight of the cottage. It was round, like a snow-hut or a
wigwam; and she could see neither door nor window in it. The fact was,
it had no windows; and though it was full of doors, they all opened
from the inside, and could not even be seen from the outside.

She was standing at the foot of a tree in the twilight, listening to a
quarrel between a mole and a squirrel, in which the mole told the
squirrel that the tail was the best of him, and the squirrel called the
mole Spade-fists, when, the darkness having deepened around her, she
became aware of something shining in her face, and looking round, saw
that the door of the cottage was open, and the red light of the fire
flowing from it like a river through the darkness. She left Mole and
Squirrel to settle matters as they might, and darted off to the
cottage. Entering, she found the pot boiling on the fire, and the
grand, lovely lady sitting on the other side of it.

"I've been watching you all day," said the lady. "You shall have
something to eat by and by, but we must wait till our supper comes
home."

She took Tangle on her knee, and began to sing to her--such songs as
made her wish she could listen to them for ever. But at length in
rushed the shining fish, and snuggled down in the pot. It was followed
by a youth who had outgrown his worn garments. His face was ruddy with
health, and in his hand he carried a little jewel, which sparkled in
the firelight.

The first words the lady said were,--

"What is that in your hand, Mossy?"

Now Mossy was the name his companions had given him, because he had a
favourite stone covered with moss, on which he used to sit whole days
reading; and they said the moss had begun to grow upon him too.

Mossy held out his hand. The moment the lady saw that it was the golden
key, she rose from her chair, kissed Mossy on the forehead, made him
sit down on her seat, and stood before him like a servant. Mossy could
not bear this, and rose at once. But the lady begged him, with tears in
her beautiful eyes, to sit, and let her wait on him.

"But you are a great, splendid, beautiful lady," said Mossy.

"Yes, I am. But I work all day long--that is my pleasure; and you will
have to leave me so soon!"

"How do you know that, if you please, madam?" asked Mossy.

"Because you have got the golden key."

"But I don't know what it is for. I can't find the key-hole. Will you
tell me what to do?"

"You must look for the key-hole. That is your work. I cannot help you.
I can only tell you that if you look for it you will find it."

"What kind of box will it open? What is there inside?"

"I do not know. I dream about it, but I know nothing."

"Must I go at once?"

"You may stop here to-night, and have some of my supper. But you must
go in the morning. All I can do for you is to give you clothes. Here is
a girl called Tangle, whom you must take with you."

"That _will_ be nice," said Mossy.

"No, no!" said Tangle. "I don't want to leave you, please,
Grandmother."

"You must go with him, Tangle. I am sorry to lose you, but it will be
the best thing for you. Even the fishes, you see, have to go into the
pot, and then out into the dark. If you fall in with the Old Man of the
Sea, mind you ask him whether he has not got some more fishes ready for
me. My tank is getting thin."

So saying, she took the fish from the pot, and put the lid on as
before. They sat down and ate the fish, and then the winged creature
rose from the pot, circled the roof, and settled on the lady's lap. She
talked to it, carried it to the door, and threw it out into the dark.
They heard the flap of its wings die away in the distance.

The lady then showed Mossy into just such another chamber as that of
Tangle; and in the morning he found a suit of clothes laid beside him.
He looked very handsome in them. But the wearer of Grandmother's
clothes never thinks about how he or she looks, but thinks always how
handsome other people are.

Tangle was very unwilling to go.

"Why should I leave you? I don't know the young man," she said to the
lady.

"I am never allowed to keep my children long. You need not go with him
except you please, but you must go some day; and I should like you to
go with him, for he has the golden key. No girl need be afraid to go
with a youth that has the golden key. You will take care of her, Mossy,
will you not?"

"That I will," said Mossy.

And Tangle cast a glance at him, and thought she should like to go with
him.

"And," said the lady, "if you should lose each other as you go through
the--the--I never can remember the name of that country,--do not be
afraid, but go on and on."

She kissed Tangle on the mouth and Mossy on the forehead, led them to
the door, and waved her hand eastward. Mossy and Tangle took each
other's hand and walked away into the depth of the forest. In his right
hand Mossy held the golden key.

They wandered thus a long way, with endless amusement from the talk of
the animals. They soon learned enough of their language to ask them
necessary questions. The squirrels were always friendly, and gave them
nuts out of their own hoards; but the bees were selfish and rude,
justifying themselves on the ground that Tangle and Mossy were not
subjects of their queen, and charity must begin at home, though indeed
they had not one drone in their poorhouse at the time. Even the
blinking moles would fetch them an earth-nut or a truffle now and then,
talking as if their mouths, as well as their eyes and ears, were full
of cotton wool, or their own velvety fur. By the time they got out of
the forest they were very fond of each other, and Tangle was not in the
least sorry that her grandmother had sent her away with Mossy.

At length the trees grew smaller, and stood farther apart, and the
ground began to rise, and it got more and more steep, till the trees
were all left behind, and the two were climbing a narrow path with
rocks on each side. Suddenly they came upon a rude doorway, by which
they entered a narrow gallery cut in the rock. It grew darker and
darker, till it was pitch-dark, and they had to feel their way. At
length the light began to return, and at last they came out upon a
narrow path on the face of a lofty precipice. This path went winding
down the rock to a wide plain, circular in shape, and surrounded on all
sides by mountains. Those opposite to them were a great way off, and
towered to an awful height, shooting up sharp, blue, ice-enamelled
pinnacles. An utter silence reigned where they stood. Not even the
sound of water reached them.

Looking down, they could not tell whether the valley below was a grassy
plain or a great still lake. They had never seen any space look like
it. The way to it was difficult and dangerous, but down the narrow path
they went, and reached the bottom in safety. They found it composed of
smooth, light-coloured sandstone, undulating in parts, but mostly
level. It was no wonder to them now that they had not been able to tell
what it was, for this surface was everywhere crowded with shadows. The
mass was chiefly made up of the shadows of leaves innumerable, of all
lovely and imaginative forms, waving to and fro, floating and quivering
in the breath of a breeze whose motion was unfelt, whose sound was
unheard. No forests clothed the mountain-sides, no trees were anywhere
to be seen, and yet the shadows of the leaves, branches, and stems of
all various trees covered the valley as far as their eyes could reach.
They soon spied the shadows of flowers mingled with those of the
leaves, and now and then the shadow of a bird with open beak, and
throat distended with song. At times would appear the forms of strange,
graceful creatures, running up and down the shadow-boles and along the
branches, to disappear in the wind-tossed foliage. As they walked they
waded knee-deep in the lovely lake. For the shadows were not merely
lying on the surface of the ground, but heaped up above it like
substantial forms of darkness, as if they had been cast upon a thousand
different planes of the air. Tangle and Mossy often lifted their heads
and gazed upwards to discry whence the shadows came; but they could see
nothing more than a bright mist spread above them, higher than the tops
of the mountains, which stood clear against it. No forests, no leaves,
no birds were visible.

After a while, they reached more open spaces, where the shadows were
thinner; and came even to portions over which shadows only flitted,
leaving them clear for such as might follow. Now a wonderful form, half
bird-like half human, would float across on outspread sailing pinions.
Anon an exquisite shadow group of gambolling children would be followed
by the loveliest female form, and that again by the grand stride of a
Titanic shape, each disappearing in the surrounding press of shadowy
foliage. Sometimes a profile of unspeakable beauty or grandeur would
appear for a moment and vanish. Sometimes they seemed lovers that
passed linked arm in arm, sometimes father and son, sometimes brothers
in loving contest, sometimes sisters entwined in gracefullest community
of complex form. Sometimes wild horses would tear across, free, or
bestrode by noble shadows of ruling men. But some of the things which
pleased them most they never knew how to describe.

About the middle of the plain they sat down to rest in the heart of a
heap of shadows. After sitting for a while, each, looking up, saw the
other in tears: they were each longing after the country whence the
shadows fell.

"We _must_ find the country from which the shadows come," said Mossy.

"We must, dear Mossy," responded Tangle. "What if your golden key
should be the key to _it_?"

"Ah! that would be grand," returned Mossy.--"But we must rest here for
a little, and then we shall be able to cross the plain before night."

So he lay down on the ground, and about him on every side, and over his
head, was the constant play of the wonderful shadows. He could look
through them, and see the one behind the other, till they mixed in a
mass of darkness. Tangle, too, lay admiring, and wondering, and longing
after the country whence the shadows came. When they were rested they
rose and pursued their journey.

How long they were in crossing this plain I cannot tell; but before
night Mossy's hair was streaked with gray, and Tangle had got wrinkles
on her forehead.

As evening grew on, the shadows fell deeper and rose higher. At length
they reached a place where they rose above their heads, and made all
dark around them. Then they took hold of each other's hand, and walked
on in silence and in some dismay. They felt the gathering darkness, and
something strangely solemn besides, and the beauty of the shadows
ceased to delight them. All at once Tangle found that she had not a
hold of Mossy's hand, though when she lost it she could not tell.

"Mossy, Mossy!" she cried aloud in terror.

But no Mossy replied.

A moment after, the shadows sank to her feet, and down under her feet,
and the mountains rose before her. She turned towards the gloomy region
she had left, and called once more upon Mossy. There the gloom lay
tossing and heaving, a dark, stormy, foamless sea of shadows, but no
Mossy rose out of it, or came climbing up the hill on which she stood.
She threw herself down and wept in despair.

Suddenly she remembered that the beautiful lady had told them, if they
lost each other in a country of which she could not remember the name,
they were not to be afraid, but to go straight on.

"And besides," she said to herself, "Mossy has the golden key, and so
no harm will come to him, I do believe."

She rose from the ground, and went on.

Before long she arrived at a precipice, in the face of which a stair
was cut. When she had ascended half-way, the stair ceased, and the path
led straight into the mountain. She was afraid to enter, and turning
again towards the stair, grew giddy at sight of the depth beneath her,
and was forced to throw herself down in the mouth of the cave.

When she opened her eyes, she saw a beautiful little figure with wings
standing beside her, waiting.

"I know you," said Tangle. "You are my fish."

"Yes. But I am a fish no longer. I am an a�ranth now."

"What is that?" asked Tangle.

"What you see I am," answered the shape. "And I am come to lead you
through the mountain."

"Oh! thank you, dear fish--a�ranth, I mean," returned Tangle, rising.

Thereupon the a�ranth took to his wings, and flew on through the long,
narrow passage, reminding Tangle very much of the way he had swum on
before her when he was a fish. And the moment his white wings moved,
they began to throw off a continuous shower of sparks of all colours,
which lighted up the passage before them.--All at once he vanished, and
Tangle heard a low, sweet sound, quite different from the rush and
crackle of his wings. Before her was an open arch, and through it came
light, mixed with the sound of sea-waves.

She hurried out, and fell, tired and happy, upon the yellow sand of the
shore. There she lay, half asleep with weariness and rest, listening to
the low plash and retreat of the tiny waves, which seemed ever enticing
the land to leave off being land, and become sea. And as she lay, her
eyes were fixed upon the foot of a great rainbow standing far away
against the sky on the other side of the sea. At length she fell fast
asleep.

When she awoke, she saw an old man with long white hair down to his
shoulders, leaning upon a stick covered with green buds, and so bending
over her.

"What do you want here, beautiful woman?" he said.

"Am I beautiful? I am so glad!" said Tangle, rising. "My grandmother is
beautiful."

"Yes. But what do you want?" he repeated, kindly.

"I think I want you. Are not you the Old Man of the Sea?"

"I am."

"Then Grandmother says, have you any more fishes ready for her?"

"We will go and see, my dear," answered the old man, speaking yet more
kindly than before. "And I can do something for you, can I not?"

"Yes--show me the way up to the country from which the shadows fall,"
said Tangle.

For there she hoped to find Mossy again.

"Ah! indeed, that would be worth doing," said the old man. "But I
cannot, for I do not know the way myself. But I will send you to the
Old Man of the Earth. Perhaps he can tell you. He is much older than I
am."

Leaning on his staff, he conducted her along the shore to a steep rock,
that looked like a petrified ship turned upside down. The door of it
was the rudder of a great vessel, ages ago at the bottom of the sea.
Immediately within the door was a stair in the rock, down which the old
man went, and Tangle followed. At the bottom the old man had his house,
and there he lived.

As soon as she entered it, Tangle heard a strange noise, unlike
anything she had ever heard before. She soon found that it was the
fishes talking. She tried to understand what they said; but their
speech was so old-fashioned, and rude, and undefined, that she could
not make much of it.

"I will go and see about those fishes for my daughter," said the Old
Man of the Sea.

And moving a slide in the wall of his house, he first looked out, and
then tapped upon a thick piece of crystal that filled the round
opening. Tangle came up behind him, and peeping through the window into
the heart of the great deep green ocean, saw the most curious
creatures, some very ugly, all very odd, and with especially queer
mouths, swimming about everywhere, above and below, but all coming
towards the window in answer to the tap of the Old Man of the Sea. Only
a few could get their mouths against the glass; but those who were
floating miles away yet turned their heads towards it. The old man
looked through the whole flock carefully for some minutes, and then
turning to Tangle, said,--

"I am sorry I have not got one ready yet. I want more time than she
does. But I will send some as soon as I can."

He then shut the slide.

Presently a great noise arose in the sea. The old man opened the slide
again, and tapped on the glass, whereupon the fishes were all as still
as sleep.

"They were only talking about you," he said. "And they do speak such
nonsense!--To-morrow," he continued, "I must show you the way to the
Old Man of the Earth. He lives a long way from here."

"Do let me go at once," said Tangle.

"No. That is not possible. You must come this way first."

He led her to a hole in the wall, which she had not observed before. It
was covered with the green leaves and white blossoms of a creeping
plant.

"Only white-blossoming plants can grow under the sea," said the old
man. "In there you will find a bath, in which you must lie till I call
you."

Tangle went in, and found a smaller room or cave, in the further corner
of which was a great basin hollowed out of a rock, and half-full of the
clearest sea-water. Little streams were constantly running into it from
cracks in the wall of the cavern. It was polished quite smooth inside,
and had a carpet of yellow sand in the bottom of it. Large green leaves
and white flowers of various plants crowded up and over it, draping and
covering it almost entirely.

No sooner was she undressed and lying in the bath, than she began to
feel as if the water were sinking into her, and she were receiving all
the good of sleep without undergoing its forgetfulness. She felt the
good coming all the time. And she grew happier and more hopeful than
she had been since she lost Mossy. But she could not help thinking how
very sad it was for a poor old man to live there all alone, and have to
take care of a whole seaful of stupid and riotous fishes.

After about an hour, as she thought, she heard his voice calling her,
and rose out of the bath. All the fatigue and aching of her long
journey had vanished. She was as whole, and strong, and well as if she
had slept for seven days.

Returning to the opening that led into the other part of the house, she
started back with amazement, for through it she saw the form of a grand
man, with a majestic and beautiful face, waiting for her.

"Come," he said; "I see you are ready."

She entered with reverence.

"Where is the Old Man of the Sea?" she asked, humbly.

"There is no one here but me," he answered, smiling. "Some people call
me the Old Man of the Sea. Others have another name for me, and are
terribly frightened when they meet me taking a walk by the shore.
Therefore I avoid being seen by them, for they are so afraid, that they
never see what I really am. You see me now.--But I must show you the
way to the Old Man of the Earth."

He led her into the cave where the bath was, and there she saw, in the
opposite corner, a second opening in the rock.

"Go down that stair, and it will bring you to him," said the Old Man of
the Sea.

With humble thanks Tangle took her leave. She went down the winding
stair, till she began to fear there was no end to it. Still down and
down it went, rough and broken, with springs of water bursting out of
the rocks and running down the steps beside her. It was quite dark
about her, and yet she could see. For after being in that bath,
people's eyes always give out a light they can see by. There were no
creeping things in the way. All was safe and pleasant though so dark
and damp and deep.

At last there was not one step more, and she found herself in a
glimmering cave. On a stone in the middle of it sat a figure with its
back towards her--the figure of an old man bent double with age. From
behind she could see his white beard spread out on the rocky floor in
front of him. He did not move as she entered, so she passed round that
she might stand before him and speak to him.

The moment she looked in his face, she saw that he was a youth of
marvellous beauty. He sat entranced with the delight of what he beheld
in a mirror of something like silver, which lay on the floor at his
feet, and which from behind she had taken for his white beard. He sat
on, heedless of her presence, pale with the joy of his vision. She
stood and watched him. At length, all trembling, she spoke. But her
voice made no sound. Yet the youth lifted up his head. He showed no
surprise, however, at seeing her--only smiled a welcome.

"Are you the Old Man of the Earth?" Tangle had said.

And the youth answered, and Tangle heard him, though not with her
ears:--

"I am. What can I do for you?"

"Tell me the way to the country whence the shadows fall."

"Ah! that I do not know. I only dream about it myself. I see its
shadows sometimes in my mirror: the way to it I do not know. But I
think the Old Man of the Fire must know. He is much older than I am. He
is the oldest man of all."

"Where does he live?"

"I will show you the way to his place. I never saw him myself."

So saying, the young man rose, and then stood for a while gazing at
Tangle.

"I wish I could see that country too," he said. "But I must mind my
work."

He led her to the side of the cave, and told her to lay her ear against
the wall.

"What do you hear?" he asked.

"I hear," answered Tangle, "the sound of a great water running inside
the rock."

"That river runs down to the dwelling of the oldest man of all--the Old
Man of the Fire. I wish I could go to see him. But I must mind my work.
That river is the only way to him."

Then the Old Man of the Earth stooped over the floor of the cave,
raised a huge stone from it, and left it leaning. It disclosed a great
hole that went plumb-down.

"That is the way," he said.

"But there are no stairs."

"You must throw yourself in. There is no other way."

She turned and looked him full in the face--stood so for a whole
minute, as she thought: it was a whole year--then threw herself
headlong into the hole.

When she came to herself, she found herself gliding down fast and deep.
Her head was under water, but that did not signify, for, when she
thought about it, she could not remember that she had breathed once
since her bath in the cave of the Old Man of the Sea. When she lifted
up her head a sudden and fierce heat struck her, and she sank it again
instantly, and went sweeping on.

Gradually the stream grew shallower. At length she could hardly keep
her head under. Then the water could carry her no farther. She rose
from the channel, and went step for step down the burning descent. The
water ceased altogether. The heat was terrible. She felt scorched to
the bone, but it did not touch her strength. It grew hotter and hotter.
She said, "I can bear it no longer." Yet she went on.

At the long last, the stair ended at a rude archway in an all but
glowing rock. Through this archway Tangle fell exhausted into a cool
mossy cave. The floor and walls were covered with moss--green, soft,
and damp. A little stream spouted from a rent in the rock and fell into
a basin of moss. She plunged her face into it and drank. Then she
lifted her head and looked around. Then she rose and looked again. She
saw no one in the cave. But the moment she stood upright she had a
marvellous sense that she was in the secret of the earth and all its
ways. Everything she had seen, or learned from books; all that her
grandmother had said or sung to her; all the talk of the beasts, birds,
and fishes; all that had happened to her on her journey with Mossy, and
since then in the heart of the earth with the Old man and the Older
man--all was plain: she understood it all, and saw that everything
meant the same thing, though she could not have put it into words
again.

The next moment she descried, in a corner of the cave, a little naked
child sitting on the moss. He was playing with balls of various colours
and sizes, which he disposed in strange figures upon the floor beside
him. And now Tangle felt that there was something in her knowledge
which was not in her understanding. For she knew there must be an
infinite meaning in the change and sequence and individual forms of the
figures into which the child arranged the balls, as well as in the
varied harmonies of their colours, but what it all meant she could not
tell.* He went on busily, tirelessly, playing his solitary game,
without looking up, or seeming to know that there was a stranger in his
deep-withdrawn cell. Diligently as a lace-maker shifts her bobbins, he
shifted and arranged his balls. Flashes of meaning would now pass from
them to Tangle, and now again all would be not merely obscure, but
utterly dark. She stood looking for a long time, for there was
fascination in the sight; and the longer she looked the more an
indescribable vague intelligence went on rousing itself in her mind.
For seven years she had stood there watching the naked child with his
coloured balls, and it seemed to her like seven hours, when all at once
the shape the balls took, she knew not why, reminded her of the Valley
of Shadows, and she spoke:--

"Where is the Old Man of the Fire?" she said.

* I think I must be indebted to Novalis for these geometrical figures.

"Here I am," answered the child, rising and leaving his balls on the
moss. "What can I do for you?"

There was such an awfulness of absolute repose on the face of the child
that Tangle stood dumb before him. He had no smile, but the love in his
large gray eyes was deep as the centre. And with the repose there lay
on his face a shimmer as of moonlight, which seemed as if any moment it
might break into such a ravishing smile as would cause the beholder to
weep himself to death. But the smile never came, and the moonlight lay
there unbroken. For the heart of the child was too deep for any smile
to reach from it to his face.

"Are you the oldest man of all?" Tangle at length, although filled with
awe, ventured to ask.

"Yes, I am. I am very, very old. I am able to help you, I know. I can
help everybody." And the child drew near and looked up in her face so
that she burst into tears.

"Can you tell me the way to the country the shadows fall from?" she
sobbed.

"Yes. I know the way quite well. I go there myself sometimes. But you
could not go my way; you are not old enough. I will show you how you
can go."

"Do not send me out into the great heat again," prayed Tangle.

"I will not," answered the child.

And he reached up, and put his little cool hand on her heart.

"Now," he said, "you can go. The fire will not burn you. Come."

He led her from the cave, and following him through another archway,
she found herself in a vast desert of sand and rock. The sky of it was
of rock, lowering over them like solid thunderclouds; and the whole
place was so hot that she saw, in bright rivulets, the yellow gold and
white silver and red copper trickling molten from the rocks. But the
heat never came near her.

When they had gone some distance, the child turned up a great stone,
and took something like an egg from under it. He next drew a long
curved line in the sand with his finger, and laid the egg in it. He
then spoke something Tangle could not understand. The egg broke, a
small snake came out, and, lying in the line in the sand, grew and grew
till he filled it. The moment he was thus full-grown, he began to glide
away, undulating like a sea-wave.

"Follow that serpent," said the child. "He will lead you the right
way."

Tangle followed the serpent. But she could not go far without looking
back at the marvellous child. He stood alone in the midst of the
glowing desert, beside a fountain of red flame that had burst forth at
his feet, his naked whiteness glimmering a pale rosy red in the torrid
fire. There he stood, looking after her, till, from the lengthening
distance, she could see him no more. The serpent went straight on,
turning neither to the right nor left.


Meantime Mossy had got out of the Lake of Shadows, and, following his
mournful, lonely way, had reached the sea-shore. It was a dark, stormy
evening. The sun had set. The wind was blowing from the sea. The waves
had surrounded the rock within which lay the old man's house. A deep
water rolled between it and the shore, upon which a majestic figure was
walking alone.

Mossy went up to him and said,--

"Will you tell me where to find the Old Man of the Sea?"

"I am the Old Man of the Sea," the figure answered.

"I see a strong kingly man of middle age," returned Mossy.

Then the old man looked at him more intently, and said,--

"Your sight, young man, is better than that of most who take this way.
The night is stormy: come to my house and tell me what I can do for
you."

Mossy followed him. The waves flew from before the footsteps of the Old
Man of the Sea, and Mossy followed upon dry sand.

When they had reached the cave, they sat down and gazed at each other.

Now Mossy was an old man by this time. He looked much older than the
Old Man of the Sea, and his feet were very weary.

After looking at him for a moment, the old man took him by the hand and
led him into his inner cave. There he helped him to undress, and laid
him in the bath. And he saw that one of his hands Mossy did not open.

"What have you in that hand?" he asked.

Mossy opened his hand, and there lay the golden key.

"Ah!" said the old man, "that accounts for your knowing me. And I know
the way you have to go."

"I want to find the country whence the shadows fall," said Mossy.

"I dare say you do. So do I. But meantime, one thing is certain.--What
is that key for, do you think?"

"For a key-hole somewhere. But I don't know why I keep it. I never
could find the key-hole. And I have lived a good while, I believe,"
said Mossy, sadly. "I'm not sure that I'm not old. I know my feet
ache."

"Do they?" said the old man, as if he really meant to ask the question;
and Mossy, who was still lying in the bath, watched his feet for a
moment before he replied,--"No, they do not. Perhaps I am not old
either."

"Get up and look at yourself in the water."

He rose and looked at himself in the water, and there was not a gray
hair on his head or a wrinkle on his skin.

"You have tasted of death now," said the old man. "Is it good?"

"It is good," said Mossy. "It is better than life."

"No, said the old man: it is only more life.--Your feet will make no
holes in the water now."

"What do you mean?"

"I will show you that presently."

They returned to the outer cave, and sat and talked together for a long
time. At length the Old Man of the Sea rose, and said to Mossy,--

"Follow me."

He led him up the stair again, and opened another door. They stood on
the level of the raging sea, looking towards the east. Across the waste
of waters, against the bosom of a fierce black cloud, stood the foot of
a rainbow, glowing in the dark.

"This indeed is my way," said Mossy, as soon as he saw the rainbow, and
stepped out upon the sea. His feet made no holes in the water. He
fought the wind, and clomb the waves, and went on towards the rainbow.

The storm died away. A lovely day and a lovelier night followed. A cool
wind blew over the wide plain of the quiet ocean. And still Mossy
journeyed eastward. But the rainbow had vanished with the storm.

Day after day he held on, and he thought he had no guide. He did not
see how a shining fish under the water directed his steps. He crossed
the sea, and came to a great precipice of rock, up which he could
discover but one path. Nor did this lead him farther than half-way up
the rock, where it ended on a platform. Here he stood and pondered.--It
could not be that the way stopped here, else what was the path for? It
was a rough path, not very plain, yet certainly a path.--He examined
the face of the rock. It was smooth as glass. But as his eyes kept
roving hopelessly over it, something glittered, and he caught sight of
a row of small sapphires. They bordered a little hole in the rock.

"The key-hole!" he cried.

He tried the key. It fitted. It turned. A great clang and clash, as of
iron bolts on huge brazen caldrons, echoed thunderously within. He drew
out the key. The rock in front of him began to fall. He retreated from
it as far as the breadth of the platform would allow. A great slab fell
at his feet. In front was still the solid rock, with this one slab
fallen forward out of it. But the moment he stepped upon it, a second
fell, just short of the edge of the first, making the next step of a
stair, which thus kept dropping itself before him as he ascended into
the heart of the precipice. It led him into a hall fit for such an
approach--irregular and rude in formation, but floor, sides, pillars,
and vaulted roof, all one mass of shining stones of every colour that
light can show. In the centre stood seven columns, ranged from red to
violet. And on the pedestal of one of them sat a woman, motionless,
with her face bowed upon her knees. Seven years had she sat there
waiting. She lifted her head as Mossy drew near. It was Tangle. Her
hair had grown to her feet, and was rippled like the windless sea on
broad sands. Her face was beautiful, like her grandmother's, and as
still and peaceful as that of the Old Man of the Fire. Her form was
tall and noble. Yet Mossy knew her at once.

"How beautiful you are, Tangle!" he said, in delight and astonishment.

"Am I?" she returned. "Oh, I have waited for you so long! But you, you
are like the Old Man of the Sea. No. You are like the Old Man of the
Earth. No, no. You are like the oldest man of all. You are like them
all. And yet you are my own old Mossy! How did you come here? What did
you do after I lost you? Did you find the key-hole? Have you got the
key still?"

She had a hundred questions to ask him, and he a hundred more to ask
her. They told each other all their adventures, and were as happy as
man and woman could be. For they were younger and better, and stronger
and wiser, than they had ever been before.

It began to grow dark. And they wanted more than ever to reach the
country whence the shadows fall. So they looked about them for a way
out of the cave. The door by which Mossy entered had closed again, and
there was half a mile of rock between them and the sea. Neither could
Tangle find the opening in the floor by which the serpent had led her
thither. They searched till it grew so dark that they could see
nothing, and gave it up.

After a while, however, the cave began to glimmer again. The light came
from the moon, but it did not look like moonlight, for it gleamed
through those seven pillars in the middle, and filled the place with
all colours. And now Mossy saw that there was a pillar beside the red
one, which he had not observed before. And it was of the same new
colour that he had seen in the rainbow when he saw it first in the
fairy forest. And on it he saw a sparkle of blue. It was the sapphires
round the key-hole.

He took his key. It turned in the lock to the sound of Aeolian music. A
door opened upon slow hinges, and disclosed a winding stair within. The
key vanished from his fingers. Tangle went up. Mossy followed. The door
closed behind them. They climbed out of the earth; and, still climbing,
rose above it. They were in the rainbow. Far abroad, over ocean and
land, they could see through its transparent walls the earth beneath
their feet. Stairs beside stairs wound up together, and beautiful
beings of all ages climbed along with them.

They knew that they were going up to the country whence the shadows
fall.

And by this time I think they must have got there.



﻿


I took a walk on Spaulding’s Farm the other afternoon. I saw the setting
sun lighting up the opposite side of a stately pine wood. Its golden
rays straggled into the aisles of the wood as into some noble hall. I
was impressed as if some ancient and altogether admirable and shining
family had settled there in that part of the land called Concord,
unknown to me,--to whom the sun was servant,--who had not gone into
society in the village,--who had not been called on. I saw their
park, their pleasure-ground, beyond through the wood, in Spaulding’s
cranberry-meadow. The pines furnished them with gables as they grew.
Their house was not obvious to vision; their trees grew through it. I
do not know whether I heard the sounds of a suppressed hilarity or not.
They seemed to recline on the sunbeams. They have sons and daughters.
They are quite well. The farmer’s cart-path, which leads directly
through their hall, does not in the least put them out,--as the muddy
bottom of a pool is sometimes seen through the reflected skies.
They never heard of Spaulding, and do not know that he is their
neighbor,--notwithstanding I heard him whistle as he drove his team
through the house. Nothing can equal the serenity of their lives. Their
coat of arms is simply a lichen. I saw it painted on the pines and oaks.
Their attics were in the tops of the trees. They are of no politics.
There was no noise of labor. I did not perceive that they were weaving
or spinning. Yet I did detect, when the wind lulled and hearing was done
away, the finest imaginable sweet musical hum,--as of a distant hive in
May, which perchance was the sound of their thinking. They had no idle
thoughts, and no one without could see their work, for their industry
was not as in knots and excrescences embayed.

But I find it difficult to remember them. They fade irrevocably out
of my mind even now while I speak and endeavor to recall them, and
recollect myself. It is only after a long and serious effort to
recollect my best thoughts that I become again aware of their
cohabitancy. If it were not for such families as this, I think I should
move out of Concord.

Thoreau: “WALKING.”




CHAPTER I. THE LIBRARY

I had just finished my studies at Oxford, and was taking a brief holiday
from work before assuming definitely the management of the estate. My
father died when I was yet a child; my mother followed him within a
year; and I was nearly as much alone in the world as a man might find
himself.

I had made little acquaintance with the history of my ancestors. Almost
the only thing I knew concerning them was, that a notable number of them
had been given to study. I had myself so far inherited the tendency as
to devote a good deal of my time, though, I confess, after a somewhat
desultory fashion, to the physical sciences. It was chiefly the wonder
they woke that drew me. I was constantly seeing, and on the outlook to
see, strange analogies, not only between the facts of different sciences
of the same order, or between physical and metaphysical facts, but
between physical hypotheses and suggestions glimmering out of the
metaphysical dreams into which I was in the habit of falling. I was at
the same time much given to a premature indulgence of the impulse to
turn hypothesis into theory. Of my mental peculiarities there is no
occasion to say more.

The house as well as the family was of some antiquity, but no
description of it is necessary to the understanding of my narrative.
It contained a fine library, whose growth began before the invention
of printing, and had continued to my own time, greatly influenced, of
course, by changes of taste and pursuit. Nothing surely can more impress
upon a man the transitory nature of possession than his succeeding to
an ancient property! Like a moving panorama mine has passed from before
many eyes, and is now slowly flitting from before my own.

The library, although duly considered in many alterations of the house
and additions to it, had nevertheless, like an encroaching state,
absorbed one room after another until it occupied the greater part of
the ground floor. Its chief room was large, and the walls of it were
covered with books almost to the ceiling; the rooms into which it
overflowed were of various sizes and shapes, and communicated in modes
as various--by doors, by open arches, by short passages, by steps up and
steps down.

In the great room I mainly spent my time, reading books of science,
old as well as new; for the history of the human mind in relation to
supposed knowledge was what most of all interested me. Ptolemy, Dante,
the two Bacons, and Boyle were even more to me than Darwin or Maxwell,
as so much nearer the vanished van breaking into the dark of ignorance.

In the evening of a gloomy day of August I was sitting in my usual
place, my back to one of the windows, reading. It had rained the greater
part of the morning and afternoon, but just as the sun was setting, the
clouds parted in front of him, and he shone into the room. I rose and
looked out of the window. In the centre of the great lawn the feathering
top of the fountain column was filled with his red glory. I turned to
resume my seat, when my eye was caught by the same glory on the one
picture in the room--a portrait, in a sort of niche or little shrine
sunk for it in the expanse of book-filled shelves. I knew it as the
likeness of one of my ancestors, but had never even wondered why it hung
there alone, and not in the gallery, or one of the great rooms, among
the other family portraits. The direct sunlight brought out the painting
wonderfully; for the first time I seemed to see it, and for the first
time it seemed to respond to my look. With my eyes full of the light
reflected from it, something, I cannot tell what, made me turn and cast
a glance to the farther end of the room, when I saw, or seemed to see,
a tall figure reaching up a hand to a bookshelf. The next instant, my
vision apparently rectified by the comparative dusk, I saw no one,
and concluded that my optic nerves had been momentarily affected from
within.

I resumed my reading, and would doubtless have forgotten the vague,
evanescent impression, had it not been that, having occasion a moment
after to consult a certain volume, I found but a gap in the row where it
ought to have stood, and the same instant remembered that just there I
had seen, or fancied I saw, the old man in search of a book. I looked
all about the spot but in vain. The next morning, however, there it
was, just where I had thought to find it! I knew of no one in the house
likely to be interested in such a book.

Three days after, another and yet odder thing took place.

In one of the walls was the low, narrow door of a closet, containing
some of the oldest and rarest of the books. It was a very thick door,
with a projecting frame, and it had been the fancy of some ancestor to
cross it with shallow shelves, filled with book-backs only. The harmless
trick may be excused by the fact that the titles on the sham backs
were either humorously original, or those of books lost beyond hope of
recovery. I had a great liking for the masked door.

To complete the illusion of it, some inventive workman apparently had
shoved in, on the top of one of the rows, a part of a volume thin enough
to lie between it and the bottom of the next shelf: he had cut away
diagonally a considerable portion, and fixed the remnant with one of
its open corners projecting beyond the book-backs. The binding of the
mutilated volume was limp vellum, and one could open the corner far
enough to see that it was manuscript upon parchment.

Happening, as I sat reading, to raise my eyes from the page, my glance
fell upon this door, and at once I saw that the book described, if
book it may be called, was gone. Angrier than any worth I knew in it
justified, I rang the bell, and the butler appeared. When I asked him if
he knew what had befallen it, he turned pale, and assured me he did not.
I could less easily doubt his word than my own eyes, for he had been all
his life in the family, and a more faithful servant never lived. He left
on me the impression, nevertheless, that he could have said something
more.

In the afternoon I was again reading in the library, and coming to a
point which demanded reflection, I lowered the book and let my eyes go
wandering. The same moment I saw the back of a slender old man, in a
long, dark coat, shiny as from much wear, in the act of disappearing
through the masked door into the closet beyond. I darted across the
room, found the door shut, pulled it open, looked into the closet,
which had no other issue, and, seeing nobody, concluded, not without
uneasiness, that I had had a recurrence of my former illusion, and sat
down again to my reading.

Naturally, however, I could not help feeling a little nervous, and
presently glancing up to assure myself that I was indeed alone,
started again to my feet, and ran to the masked door--for there was
the mutilated volume in its place! I laid hold of it and pulled: it was
firmly fixed as usual!

I was now utterly bewildered. I rang the bell; the butler came; I told
him all I had seen, and he told me all he knew.

He had hoped, he said, that the old gentleman was going to be forgotten;
it was well no one but myself had seen him. He had heard a good deal
about him when first he served in the house, but by degrees he had
ceased to be mentioned, and he had been very careful not to allude to
him.

“The place was haunted by an old gentleman, was it?” I said.

He answered that at one time everybody believed it, but the fact that I
had never heard of it seemed to imply that the thing had come to an end
and was forgotten.

I questioned him as to what he had seen of the old gentleman.

He had never seen him, he said, although he had been in the house from
the day my father was eight years old. My grandfather would never hear
a word on the matter, declaring that whoever alluded to it should be
dismissed without a moment’s warning: it was nothing but a pretext of
the maids, he said, for running into the arms of the men! but old Sir
Ralph believed in nothing he could not see or lay hold of. Not one of
the maids ever said she had seen the apparition, but a footman had left
the place because of it.

An ancient woman in the village had told him a legend concerning a Mr.
Raven, long time librarian to “that Sir Upward whose portrait hangs
there among the books.” Sir Upward was a great reader, she said--not
of such books only as were wholesome for men to read, but of strange,
forbidden, and evil books; and in so doing, Mr. Raven, who was probably
the devil himself, encouraged him. Suddenly they both disappeared, and
Sir Upward was never after seen or heard of, but Mr. Raven continued to
show himself at uncertain intervals in the library. There were some who
believed he was not dead; but both he and the old woman held it easier
to believe that a dead man might revisit the world he had left, than
that one who went on living for hundreds of years should be a man at
all.

He had never heard that Mr. Raven meddled with anything in the house,
but he might perhaps consider himself privileged in regard to the books.
How the old woman had learned so much about him he could not tell; but
the description she gave of him corresponded exactly with the figure I
had just seen.

“I hope it was but a friendly call on the part of the old gentleman!” he
concluded, with a troubled smile.

I told him I had no objection to any number of visits from Mr. Raven,
but it would be well he should keep to his resolution of saying nothing
about him to the servants. Then I asked him if he had ever seen the
mutilated volume out of its place; he answered that he never had, and
had always thought it a fixture. With that he went to it, and gave it a
pull: it seemed immovable.




CHAPTER II. THE MIRROR

Nothing more happened for some days. I think it was about a week after,
when what I have now to tell took place.

I had often thought of the manuscript fragment, and repeatedly tried
to discover some way of releasing it, but in vain: I could not find out
what held it fast.

But I had for some time intended a thorough overhauling of the books in
the closet, its atmosphere causing me uneasiness as to their condition.
One day the intention suddenly became a resolve, and I was in the act of
rising from my chair to make a beginning, when I saw the old librarian
moving from the door of the closet toward the farther end of the room.
I ought rather to say only that I caught sight of something shadowy from
which I received the impression of a slight, stooping man, in a shabby
dress-coat reaching almost to his heels, the tails of which, disparting
a little as he walked, revealed thin legs in black stockings, and large
feet in wide, slipper-like shoes.

At once I followed him: I might be following a shadow, but I never
doubted I was following something. He went out of the library into the
hall, and across to the foot of the great staircase, then up the stairs
to the first floor, where lay the chief rooms. Past these rooms, I
following close, he continued his way, through a wide corridor, to the
foot of a narrower stair leading to the second floor. Up that he went
also, and when I reached the top, strange as it may seem, I found myself
in a region almost unknown to me. I never had brother or sister to
incite to such romps as make children familiar with nook and cranny; I
was a mere child when my guardian took me away; and I had never seen the
house again until, about a month before, I returned to take possession.

Through passage after passage we came to a door at the bottom of a
winding wooden stair, which we ascended. Every step creaked under my
foot, but I heard no sound from that of my guide. Somewhere in the
middle of the stair I lost sight of him, and from the top of it the
shadowy shape was nowhere visible. I could not even imagine I saw him.
The place was full of shadows, but he was not one of them.

I was in the main garret, with huge beams and rafters over my head,
great spaces around me, a door here and there in sight, and long vistas
whose gloom was thinned by a few lurking cobwebbed windows and small
dusky skylights. I gazed with a strange mingling of awe and pleasure:
the wide expanse of garret was my own, and unexplored!

In the middle of it stood an unpainted inclosure of rough planks, the
door of which was ajar. Thinking Mr. Raven might be there, I pushed the
door, and entered.

The small chamber was full of light, but such as dwells in places
deserted: it had a dull, disconsolate look, as if it found itself of no
use, and regretted having come. A few rather dim sunrays, marking their
track through the cloud of motes that had just been stirred up,
fell upon a tall mirror with a dusty face, old-fashioned and rather
narrow--in appearance an ordinary glass. It had an ebony frame, on the
top of which stood a black eagle, with outstretched wings, in his beak a
golden chain, from whose end hung a black ball.

I had been looking at rather than into the mirror, when suddenly I
became aware that it reflected neither the chamber nor my own person. I
have an impression of having seen the wall melt away, but what followed
is enough to account for any uncertainty:--could I have mistaken for a
mirror the glass that protected a wonderful picture?

I saw before me a wild country, broken and heathy. Desolate hills of
no great height, but somehow of strange appearance, occupied the middle
distance; along the horizon stretched the tops of a far-off mountain
range; nearest me lay a tract of moorland, flat and melancholy.

Being short-sighted, I stepped closer to examine the texture of a stone
in the immediate foreground, and in the act espied, hopping toward me
with solemnity, a large and ancient raven, whose purply black was here
and there softened with gray. He seemed looking for worms as he came.
Nowise astonished at the appearance of a live creature in a picture,
I took another step forward to see him better, stumbled over
something--doubtless the frame of the mirror--and stood nose to beak
with the bird: I was in the open air, on a houseless heath!




CHAPTER III. THE RAVEN

I turned and looked behind me: all was vague and uncertain, as when
one cannot distinguish between fog and field, between cloud and
mountain-side. One fact only was plain--that I saw nothing I knew.
Imagining myself involved in a visual illusion, and that touch would
correct sight, I stretched my arms and felt about me, walking in this
direction and that, if haply, where I could see nothing, I might yet
come in contact with something; but my search was vain. Instinctively
then, as to the only living thing near me, I turned to the raven,
which stood a little way off, regarding me with an expression at once
respectful and quizzical. Then the absurdity of seeking counsel from
such a one struck me, and I turned again, overwhelmed with bewilderment,
not unmingled with fear. Had I wandered into a region where both the
material and psychical relations of our world had ceased to hold? Might
a man at any moment step beyond the realm of order, and become the sport
of the lawless? Yet I saw the raven, felt the ground under my feet, and
heard a sound as of wind in the lowly plants around me!

“How DID I get here?” I said--apparently aloud, for the question was
immediately answered.

“You came through the door,” replied an odd, rather harsh voice.

I looked behind, then all about me, but saw no human shape. The terror
that madness might be at hand laid hold upon me: must I henceforth place
no confidence either in my senses or my consciousness? The same instant
I knew it was the raven that had spoken, for he stood looking up at me
with an air of waiting. The sun was not shining, yet the bird seemed to
cast a shadow, and the shadow seemed part of himself.

I beg my reader to aid me in the endeavour to make myself
intelligible--if here understanding be indeed possible between us. I was
in a world, or call it a state of things, an economy of conditions, an
idea of existence, so little correspondent with the ways and modes of
this world--which we are apt to think the only world, that the best
choice I can make of word or phrase is but an adumbration of what
I would convey. I begin indeed to fear that I have undertaken an
impossibility, undertaken to tell what I cannot tell because no speech
at my command will fit the forms in my mind. Already I have set down
statements I would gladly change did I know how to substitute a truer
utterance; but as often as I try to fit the reality with nearer words, I
find myself in danger of losing the things themselves, and feel like one
in process of awaking from a dream, with the thing that seemed familiar
gradually yet swiftly changing through a succession of forms until its
very nature is no longer recognisable.

I bethought me that a bird capable of addressing a man must have the
right of a man to a civil answer; perhaps, as a bird, even a greater
claim.

A tendency to croak caused a certain roughness in his speech, but his
voice was not disagreeable, and what he said, although conveying little
enlightenment, did not sound rude.

“I did not come through any door,” I rejoined.

“I saw you come through it!--saw you with my own ancient eyes!” asserted
the raven, positively but not disrespectfully.

“I never saw any door!” I persisted.

“Of course not!” he returned; “all the doors you had yet seen--and you
haven’t seen many--were doors in; here you came upon a door out! The
strange thing to you,” he went on thoughtfully, “will be, that the more
doors you go out of, the farther you get in!”

“Oblige me by telling me where I am.”

“That is impossible. You know nothing about whereness. The only way to
come to know where you are is to begin to make yourself at home.”

“How am I to begin that where everything is so strange?”

“By doing something.”

“What?”

“Anything; and the sooner you begin the better! for until you are at
home, you will find it as difficult to get out as it is to get in.”

“I have, unfortunately, found it too easy to get in; once out I shall
not try again!”

“You have stumbled in, and may, possibly, stumble out again. Whether you
have got in UNFORTUNATELY remains to be seen.”

“Do you never go out, sir?”

“When I please I do, but not often, or for long. Your world is such
a half-baked sort of place, it is at once so childish and so
self-satisfied--in fact, it is not sufficiently developed for an old
raven--at your service!”

“Am I wrong, then, in presuming that a man is superior to a bird?”

“That is as it may be. We do not waste our intellects in generalising,
but take man or bird as we find him.--I think it is now my turn to ask
you a question!”

“You have the best of rights,” I replied, “in the fact that you CAN do
so!”

“Well answered!” he rejoined. “Tell me, then, who you are--if you happen
to know.”

“How should I help knowing? I am myself, and must know!”

“If you know you are yourself, you know that you are not somebody else;
but do you know that you are yourself? Are you sure you are not your own
father?--or, excuse me, your own fool?--Who are you, pray?”

I became at once aware that I could give him no notion of who I was.
Indeed, who was I? It would be no answer to say I was who! Then I
understood that I did not know myself, did not know what I was, had no
grounds on which to determine that I was one and not another. As for the
name I went by in my own world, I had forgotten it, and did not care to
recall it, for it meant nothing, and what it might be was plainly of
no consequence here. I had indeed almost forgotten that there it was a
custom for everybody to have a name! So I held my peace, and it was my
wisdom; for what should I say to a creature such as this raven, who saw
through accident into entity?

“Look at me,” he said, “and tell me who I am.”

As he spoke, he turned his back, and instantly I knew him. He was no
longer a raven, but a man above the middle height with a stoop, very
thin, and wearing a long black tail-coat. Again he turned, and I saw him
a raven.

“I have seen you before, sir,” I said, feeling foolish rather than
surprised.

“How can you say so from seeing me behind?” he rejoined. “Did you ever
see yourself behind? You have never seen yourself at all!--Tell me now,
then, who I am.”

“I humbly beg your pardon,” I answered: “I believe you were once the
librarian of our house, but more WHO I do not know.”

“Why do you beg my pardon?”

“Because I took you for a raven,” I said--seeing him before me as
plainly a raven as bird or man could look.

“You did me no wrong,” he returned. “Calling me a raven, or thinking me
one, you allowed me existence, which is the sum of what one can
demand of his fellow-beings. Therefore, in return, I will give you a
lesson:--No one can say he is himself, until first he knows that he IS,
and then what HIMSELF is. In fact, nobody is himself, and himself is
nobody. There is more in it than you can see now, but not more than you
need to see. You have, I fear, got into this region too soon, but none
the less you must get to be at home in it; for home, as you may or
may not know, is the only place where you can go out and in. There are
places you can go into, and places you can go out of; but the one place,
if you do but find it, where you may go out and in both, is home.”

He turned to walk away, and again I saw the librarian. He did not appear
to have changed, only to have taken up his shadow. I know this seems
nonsense, but I cannot help it.

I gazed after him until I saw him no more; but whether distance hid him,
or he disappeared among the heather, I cannot tell.

Could it be that I was dead, I thought, and did not know it? Was I in
what we used to call the world beyond the grave? and must I wander about
seeking my place in it? How was I to find myself at home? The raven
said I must do something: what could I do here?--And would that make me
somebody? for now, alas, I was nobody!

I took the way Mr. Raven had gone, and went slowly after him. Presently
I saw a wood of tall slender pine-trees, and turned toward it. The odour
of it met me on my way, and I made haste to bury myself in it.

Plunged at length in its twilight glooms, I spied before me something
with a shine, standing between two of the stems. It had no colour,
but was like the translucent trembling of the hot air that rises, in a
radiant summer noon, from the sun-baked ground, vibrant like the smitten
chords of a musical instrument. What it was grew no plainer as I went
nearer, and when I came close up, I ceased to see it, only the form
and colour of the trees beyond seemed strangely uncertain. I would have
passed between the stems, but received a slight shock, stumbled,
and fell. When I rose, I saw before me the wooden wall of the garret
chamber. I turned, and there was the mirror, on whose top the black
eagle seemed but that moment to have perched.

Terror seized me, and I fled. Outside the chamber the wide garret
spaces had an UNCANNY look. They seemed to have long been waiting for
something; it had come, and they were waiting again! A shudder went
through me on the winding stair: the house had grown strange to me!
something was about to leap upon me from behind! I darted down the
spiral, struck against the wall and fell, rose and ran. On the next
floor I lost my way, and had gone through several passages a second time
ere I found the head of the stair. At the top of the great stair I had
come to myself a little, and in a few moments I sat recovering my breath
in the library.

Nothing should ever again make me go up that last terrible stair!
The garret at the top of it pervaded the whole house! It sat upon it,
threatening to crush me out of it! The brooding brain of the building,
it was full of mysterious dwellers, one or other of whom might any
moment appear in the library where I sat! I was nowhere safe! I would
let, I would sell the dreadful place, in which an aërial portal stood
ever open to creatures whose life was other than human! I would purchase
a crag in Switzerland, and thereon build a wooden nest of one story with
never a garret above it, guarded by some grand old peak that would send
down nothing worse than a few tons of whelming rock!

I knew all the time that my thinking was foolish, and was even aware of
a certain undertone of contemptuous humour in it; but suddenly it was
checked, and I seemed again to hear the croak of the raven.

“If I know nothing of my own garret,” I thought, “what is there
to secure me against my own brain? Can I tell what it is even now
generating?--what thought it may present me the next moment, the next
month, or a year away? What is at the heart of my brain? What is behind
my THINK? Am I there at all?--Who, what am I?”

I could no more answer the question now than when the raven put it to
me in--at--“Where in?--where at?” I said, and gave myself up as knowing
anything of myself or the universe.

I started to my feet, hurried across the room to the masked door, where
the mutilated volume, sticking out from the flat of soulless, bodiless,
non-existent books, appeared to beckon me, went down on my knees, and
opened it as far as its position would permit, but could see nothing. I
got up again, lighted a taper, and peeping as into a pair of reluctant
jaws, perceived that the manuscript was verse. Further I could not carry
discovery. Beginnings of lines were visible on the left-hand page,
and ends of lines on the other; but I could not, of course, get at the
beginning and end of a single line, and was unable, in what I could
read, to make any guess at the sense. The mere words, however, woke in
me feelings which to describe was, from their strangeness, impossible.
Some dreams, some poems, some musical phrases, some pictures, wake
feelings such as one never had before, new in colour and form--spiritual
sensations, as it were, hitherto unproved: here, some of the phrases,
some of the senseless half-lines, some even of the individual words
affected me in similar fashion--as with the aroma of an idea, rousing
in me a great longing to know what the poem or poems might, even yet in
their mutilation, hold or suggest.

I copied out a few of the larger shreds attainable, and tried hard to
complete some of the lines, but without the least success. The only
thing I gained in the effort was so much weariness that, when I went to
bed, I fell asleep at once and slept soundly.

In the morning all that horror of the empty garret spaces had left me.




CHAPTER IV. SOMEWHERE OR NOWHERE?

The sun was very bright, but I doubted if the day would long be fine,
and looked into the milky sapphire I wore, to see whether the star in it
was clear. It was even less defined than I had expected. I rose from the
breakfast-table, and went to the window to glance at the stone again.
There had been heavy rain in the night, and on the lawn was a thrush
breaking his way into the shell of a snail.

As I was turning my ring about to catch the response of the star to the
sun, I spied a keen black eye gazing at me out of the milky misty blue.
The sight startled me so that I dropped the ring, and when I picked it
up the eye was gone from it. The same moment the sun was obscured;
a dark vapour covered him, and in a minute or two the whole sky was
clouded. The air had grown sultry, and a gust of wind came suddenly.
A moment more and there was a flash of lightning, with a single sharp
thunder-clap. Then the rain fell in torrents.

I had opened the window, and stood there looking out at the precipitous
rain, when I descried a raven walking toward me over the grass, with
solemn gait, and utter disregard of the falling deluge. Suspecting who
he was, I congratulated myself that I was safe on the ground-floor. At
the same time I had a conviction that, if I were not careful, something
would happen.

He came nearer and nearer, made a profound bow, and with a sudden winged
leap stood on the window-sill. Then he stepped over the ledge, jumped
down into the room, and walked to the door. I thought he was on his way
to the library, and followed him, determined, if he went up the stair,
not to take one step after him. He turned, however, neither toward the
library nor the stair, but to a little door that gave upon a grass-patch
in a nook between two portions of the rambling old house. I made haste
to open it for him. He stepped out into its creeper-covered porch, and
stood looking at the rain, which fell like a huge thin cataract; I stood
in the door behind him. The second flash came, and was followed by a
lengthened roll of more distant thunder. He turned his head over his
shoulder and looked at me, as much as to say, “You hear that?” then
swivelled it round again, and anew contemplated the weather, apparently
with approbation. So human were his pose and carriage and the way he
kept turning his head, that I remarked almost involuntarily,

“Fine weather for the worms, Mr. Raven!”

“Yes,” he answered, in the rather croaky voice I had learned to know,
“the ground will be nice for them to get out and in!--It must be a
grand time on the steppes of Uranus!” he added, with a glance upward; “I
believe it is raining there too; it was, all the last week!”

“Why should that make it a grand time?” I asked.

“Because the animals there are all burrowers,” he answered, “--like the
field-mice and the moles here.--They will be, for ages to come.”

“How do you know that, if I may be so bold?” I rejoined.

“As any one would who had been there to see,” he replied. “It is a great
sight, until you get used to it, when the earth gives a heave, and
out comes a beast. You might think it a hairy elephant or a
deinotherium--but none of the animals are the same as we have ever
had here. I was almost frightened myself the first time I saw the
dry-bog-serpent come wallowing out--such a head and mane! and SUCH
eyes!--but the shower is nearly over. It will stop directly after the
next thunder-clap. There it is!”

A flash came with the words, and in about half a minute the thunder.
Then the rain ceased.

“Now we should be going!” said the raven, and stepped to the front of
the porch.

“Going where?” I asked.

“Going where we have to go,” he answered. “You did not surely think you
had got home? I told you there was no going out and in at pleasure until
you were at home!”

“I do not want to go,” I said.

“That does not make any difference--at least not much,” he answered.
“This is the way!”

“I am quite content where I am.”

“You think so, but you are not. Come along.”

He hopped from the porch onto the grass, and turned, waiting.

“I will not leave the house to-day,” I said with obstinacy.

“You will come into the garden!” rejoined the raven.

“I give in so far,” I replied, and stepped from the porch.

The sun broke through the clouds, and the raindrops flashed and sparkled
on the grass. The raven was walking over it.

“You will wet your feet!” I cried.

“And mire my beak,” he answered, immediately plunging it deep in the
sod, and drawing out a great wriggling red worm. He threw back his head,
and tossed it in the air. It spread great wings, gorgeous in red and
black, and soared aloft.

“Tut! tut!” I exclaimed; “you mistake, Mr. Raven: worms are not the
larvæ of butterflies!”

“Never mind,” he croaked; “it will do for once! I’m not a reading man
at present, but sexton at the--at a certain graveyard--cemetery, more
properly--in--at--no matter where!”

“I see! you can’t keep your spade still: and when you have nothing to
bury, you must dig something up! Only you should mind what it is before
you make it fly! No creature should be allowed to forget what and where
it came from!”

“Why?” said the raven.

“Because it will grow proud, and cease to recognise its superiors.”

No man knows it when he is making an idiot of himself.

“Where DO the worms come from?” said the raven, as if suddenly grown
curious to know.

“Why, from the earth, as you have just seen!” I answered.

“Yes, last!” he replied. “But they can’t have come from it first--for
that will never go back to it!” he added, looking up.

I looked up also, but could see nothing save a little dark cloud, the
edges of which were red, as if with the light of the sunset.

“Surely the sun is not going down!” I exclaimed, struck with amazement.

“Oh, no!” returned the raven. “That red belongs to the worm.”

“You see what comes of making creatures forget their origin!” I cried
with some warmth.

“It is well, surely, if it be to rise higher and grow larger!” he
returned. “But indeed I only teach them to find it!”

“Would you have the air full of worms?”

“That is the business of a sexton. If only the rest of the clergy
understood it as well!”

In went his beak again through the soft turf, and out came the wriggling
worm. He tossed it in the air, and away it flew.

I looked behind me, and gave a cry of dismay: I had but that moment
declared I would not leave the house, and already I was a stranger in
the strange land!

“What right have you to treat me so, Mr. Raven?” I said with deep
offence. “Am I, or am I not, a free agent?”

“A man is as free as he chooses to make himself, never an atom freer,”
 answered the raven.

“You have no right to make me do things against my will!”

“When you have a will, you will find that no one can.”

“You wrong me in the very essence of my individuality!” I persisted.

“If you were an individual I could not, therefore now I do not. You are
but beginning to become an individual.”

All about me was a pine-forest, in which my eyes were already searching
deep, in the hope of discovering an unaccountable glimmer, and so
finding my way home. But, alas! how could I any longer call that house
HOME, where every door, every window opened into OUT, and even the
garden I could not keep inside!

I suppose I looked discomfited.

“Perhaps it may comfort you,” said the raven, “to be told that you have
not yet left your house, neither has your house left you. At the same
time it cannot contain you, or you inhabit it!”

“I do not understand you,” I replied. “Where am I?”

“In the region of the seven dimensions,” he answered, with a curious
noise in his throat, and a flutter of his tail. “You had better follow
me carefully now for a moment, lest you should hurt some one!”

“There is nobody to hurt but yourself, Mr. Raven! I confess I should
rather like to hurt you!”

“That you see nobody is where the danger lies. But you see that large
tree to your left, about thirty yards away?”

“Of course I do: why should I not?” I answered testily.

“Ten minutes ago you did not see it, and now you do not know where it
stands!”

“I do.”

“Where do you think it stands?”

“Why THERE, where you know it is!”

“Where is THERE?”

“You bother me with your silly questions!” I cried. “I am growing tired
of you!”

“That tree stands on the hearth of your kitchen, and grows nearly
straight up its chimney,” he said.

“Now I KNOW you are making game of me!” I answered, with a laugh of
scorn.

“Was I making game of you when you discovered me looking out of your
star-sapphire yesterday?”

“That was this morning--not an hour ago!”

“I have been widening your horizon longer than that, Mr. Vane; but never
mind!”

“You mean you have been making a fool of me!” I said, turning from him.

“Excuse me: no one can do that but yourself!”

“And I decline to do it.”

“You mistake.”

“How?”

“In declining to acknowledge yourself one already. You make yourself
such by refusing what is true, and for that you will sorely punish
yourself.”

“How, again?”

“By believing what is not true.”

“Then, if I walk to the other side of that tree, I shall walk through
the kitchen fire?”

“Certainly. You would first, however, walk through the lady at the piano
in the breakfast-room. That rosebush is close by her. You would give her
a terrible start!”

“There is no lady in the house!”

“Indeed! Is not your housekeeper a lady? She is counted such in a
certain country where all are servants, and the liveries one and
multitudinous!”

“She cannot use the piano, anyhow!”

“Her niece can: she is there--a well-educated girl and a capital
musician.”

“Excuse me; I cannot help it: you seem to me to be talking sheer
nonsense!”

“If you could but hear the music! Those great long heads of wild
hyacinth are inside the piano, among the strings of it, and give that
peculiar sweetness to her playing!--Pardon me: I forgot your deafness!”

“Two objects,” I said, “cannot exist in the same place at the same
time!”

“Can they not? I did not know!--I remember now they do teach that with
you. It is a great mistake--one of the greatest ever wiseacre made! No
man of the universe, only a man of the world could have said so!”

“You a librarian, and talk such rubbish!” I cried. “Plainly, you did not
read many of the books in your charge!”

“Oh, yes! I went through all in your library--at the time, and came out
at the other side not much the wiser. I was a bookworm then, but when I
came to know it, I woke among the butterflies. To be sure I have given
up reading for a good many years--ever since I was made sexton.--There!
I smell Grieg’s Wedding March in the quiver of those rose-petals!”

I went to the rose-bush and listened hard, but could not hear the
thinnest ghost of a sound; I only smelt something I had never before
smelt in any rose. It was still rose-odour, but with a difference,
caused, I suppose, by the Wedding March.

When I looked up, there was the bird by my side.

“Mr. Raven,” I said, “forgive me for being so rude: I was irritated.
Will you kindly show me my way home? I must go, for I have an
appointment with my bailiff. One must not break faith with his
servants!”

“You cannot break what was broken days ago!” he answered.

“Do show me the way,” I pleaded.

“I cannot,” he returned. “To go back, you must go through yourself, and
that way no man can show another.”

Entreaty was vain. I must accept my fate! But how was life to be lived
in a world of which I had all the laws to learn? There would, however,
be adventure! that held consolation; and whether I found my way home or
not, I should at least have the rare advantage of knowing two worlds!

I had never yet done anything to justify my existence; my former world
was nothing the better for my sojourn in it: here, however, I must earn,
or in some way find, my bread! But I reasoned that, as I was not to
blame in being here, I might expect to be taken care of here as well as
there! I had had nothing to do with getting into the world I had just
left, and in it I had found myself heir to a large property! If that
world, as I now saw, had a claim upon me because I had eaten, and could
eat again, upon this world I had a claim because I must eat--when it
would in return have a claim on me!

“There is no hurry,” said the raven, who stood regarding me; “we do not
go much by the clock here. Still, the sooner one begins to do what has
to be done, the better! I will take you to my wife.”

“Thank you. Let us go!” I answered, and immediately he led the way.




CHAPTER V. THE OLD CHURCH

I followed him deep into the pine-forest. Neither of us said much while
yet the sacred gloom of it closed us round. We came to larger and yet
larger trees--older, and more individual, some of them grotesque with
age. Then the forest grew thinner.

“You see that hawthorn?” said my guide at length, pointing with his
beak.

I looked where the wood melted away on the edge of an open heath.

“I see a gnarled old man, with a great white head,” I answered.

“Look again,” he rejoined: “it is a hawthorn.”

“It seems indeed an ancient hawthorn; but this is not the season for the
hawthorn to blossom!” I objected.

“The season for the hawthorn to blossom,” he replied, “is when the
hawthorn blossoms. That tree is in the ruins of the church on your
home-farm. You were going to give some directions to the bailiff about
its churchyard, were you not, the morning of the thunder?”

“I was going to tell him I wanted it turned into a wilderness of
rose-trees, and that the plough must never come within three yards of
it.”

“Listen!” said the raven, seeming to hold his breath.

I listened, and heard--was it the sighing of a far-off musical wind--or
the ghost of a music that had once been glad? Or did I indeed hear
anything?

“They go there still,” said the raven.

“Who goes there? and where do they go?” I asked.

“Some of the people who used to pray there, go to the ruins still,” he
replied. “But they will not go much longer, I think.”

“What makes them go now?”

“They need help from each other to get their thinking done, and their
feelings hatched, so they talk and sing together; and then, they say,
the big thought floats out of their hearts like a great ship out of the
river at high water.”

“Do they pray as well as sing?”

“No; they have found that each can best pray in his own silent
heart.--Some people are always at their prayers.--Look! look! There goes
one!”

He pointed right up into the air. A snow-white pigeon was mounting, with
quick and yet quicker wing-flap, the unseen spiral of an ethereal stair.
The sunshine flashed quivering from its wings.

“I see a pigeon!” I said.

“Of course you see a pigeon,” rejoined the raven, “for there is the
pigeon! I see a prayer on its way.--I wonder now what heart is that
dove’s mother! Some one may have come awake in my cemetery!”

“How can a pigeon be a prayer?” I said. “I understand, of course, how
it should be a fit symbol or likeness for one; but a live pigeon to come
out of a heart!”

“It MUST puzzle you! It cannot fail to do so!”

“A prayer is a thought, a thing spiritual!” I pursued.

“Very true! But if you understood any world besides your own, you would
understand your own much better.--When a heart is really alive, then it
is able to think live things. There is one heart all whose thoughts
are strong, happy creatures, and whose very dreams are lives. When some
pray, they lift heavy thoughts from the ground, only to drop them on it
again; others send up their prayers in living shapes, this or that, the
nearest likeness to each. All live things were thoughts to begin with,
and are fit therefore to be used by those that think. When one says to
the great Thinker:--‘Here is one of thy thoughts: I am thinking it now!’
that is a prayer--a word to the big heart from one of its own little
hearts.--Look, there is another!”

This time the raven pointed his beak downward--to something at the foot
of a block of granite. I looked, and saw a little flower. I had never
seen one like it before, and cannot utter the feeling it woke in me by
its gracious, trusting form, its colour, and its odour as of a new world
that was yet the old. I can only say that it suggested an anemone, was
of a pale rose-hue, and had a golden heart.

“That is a prayer-flower,” said the raven.

“I never saw such a flower before!” I rejoined.

“There is no other such. Not one prayer-flower is ever quite like
another,” he returned.

“How do you know it a prayer-flower?” I asked.

“By the expression of it,” he answered. “More than that I cannot tell
you. If you know it, you know it; if you do not, you do not.”

“Could you not teach me to know a prayer-flower when I see it?” I said.

“I could not. But if I could, what better would you be? you would not
know it of YOURSELF and ITself! Why know the name of a thing when the
thing itself you do not know? Whose work is it but your own to open your
eyes? But indeed the business of the universe is to make such a fool of
you that you will know yourself for one, and so begin to be wise!”

But I did see that the flower was different from any flower I had ever
seen before; therefore I knew that I must be seeing a shadow of the
prayer in it; and a great awe came over me to think of the heart
listening to the flower.




CHAPTER VI. THE SEXTON’S COTTAGE

We had been for some time walking over a rocky moorland covered with
dry plants and mosses, when I descried a little cottage in the farthest
distance. The sun was not yet down, but he was wrapt in a gray cloud.
The heath looked as if it had never been warm, and the wind blew
strangely cold, as if from some region where it was always night.

“Here we are at last!” said the raven. “What a long way it is! In half
the time I could have gone to Paradise and seen my cousin--him, you
remember, who never came back to Noah! Dear! dear! it is almost winter!”

“Winter!” I cried; “it seems but half a day since we left home!”

“That is because we have travelled so fast,” answered the raven. “In
your world you cannot pull up the plumb-line you call gravitation, and
let the world spin round under your feet! But here is my wife’s house!
She is very good to let me live with her, and call it the sexton’s
cottage!”

“But where is your churchyard--your cemetery--where you make your
graves, I mean?” said I, seeing nothing but the flat heath.

The raven stretched his neck, held out his beak horizontally, turned it
slowly round to all the points of the compass, and said nothing.

I followed the beak with my eyes, and lo, without church or graves, all
was a churchyard! Wherever the dreary wind swept, there was the raven’s
cemetery! He was sexton of all he surveyed! lord of all that was laid
aside! I stood in the burial-ground of the universe; its compass the
unenclosed heath, its wall the gray horizon, low and starless! I had
left spring and summer, autumn and sunshine behind me, and come to the
winter that waited for me! I had set out in the prime of my youth, and
here I was already!--But I mistook. The day might well be long in that
region, for it contained the seasons. Winter slept there, the night
through, in his winding-sheet of ice; with childlike smile, Spring came
awake in the dawn; at noon, Summer blazed abroad in her gorgeous beauty;
with the slow-changing afternoon, old Autumn crept in, and died at the
first breath of the vaporous, ghosty night.

As we drew near the cottage, the clouded sun was rushing down the
steepest slope of the west, and he sank while we were yet a few yards
from the door. The same instant I was assailed by a cold that seemed
almost a material presence, and I struggled across the threshold as if
from the clutches of an icy death. A wind swelled up on the moor, and
rushed at the door as with difficulty I closed it behind me. Then all
was still, and I looked about me.

A candle burned on a deal table in the middle of the room, and the first
thing I saw was the lid of a coffin, as I thought, set up against the
wall; but it opened, for it was a door, and a woman entered. She was all
in white--as white as new-fallen snow; and her face was as white as her
dress, but not like snow, for at once it suggested warmth. I thought her
features were perfect, but her eyes made me forget them. The life of
her face and her whole person was gathered and concentrated in her eyes,
where it became light. It might have been coming death that made her
face luminous, but the eyes had life in them for a nation--large, and
dark with a darkness ever deepening as I gazed. A whole night-heaven
lay condensed in each pupil; all the stars were in its blackness, and
flashed; while round it for a horizon lay coiled an iris of the eternal
twilight. What any eye IS, God only knows: her eyes must have been
coming direct out of his own! the still face might be a primeval
perfection; the live eyes were a continuous creation.

“Here is Mr. Vane, wife!” said the raven.

“He is welcome,” she answered, in a low, rich, gentle voice. Treasures
of immortal sound seemed to be buried in it.

I gazed, and could not speak.

“I knew you would be glad to see him!” added the raven.

She stood in front of the door by which she had entered, and did not
come nearer.

“Will he sleep?” she asked.

“I fear not,” he replied; “he is neither weary nor heavy laden.”

“Why then have you brought him?”

“I have my fears it may prove precipitate.”

“I do not quite understand you,” I said, with an uneasy foreboding as to
what she meant, but a vague hope of some escape. “Surely a man must do a
day’s work first!”

I gazed into the white face of the woman, and my heart fluttered. She
returned my gaze in silence.

“Let me first go home,” I resumed, “and come again after I have found or
made, invented, or at least discovered something!”

“He has not yet learned that the day begins with sleep!” said the
woman, turning to her husband. “Tell him he must rest before he can do
anything!”

“Men,” he answered, “think so much of having done, that they fall asleep
upon it. They cannot empty an egg but they turn into the shell, and lie
down!”

The words drew my eyes from the woman to the raven.

I saw no raven, but the librarian--the same slender elderly man, in a
rusty black coat, large in the body and long in the tails. I had seen
only his back before; now for the first time I saw his face. It was
so thin that it showed the shape of the bones under it, suggesting the
skulls his last-claimed profession must have made him familiar with. But
in truth I had never before seen a face so alive, or a look so keen or
so friendly as that in his pale blue eyes, which yet had a haze about
them as if they had done much weeping.

“You knew I was not a raven!” he said with a smile.

“I knew you were Mr. Raven,” I replied; “but somehow I thought you a
bird too!”

“What made you think me a bird?”

“You looked a raven, and I saw you dig worms out of the earth with your
beak.”

“And then?”

“Toss them in the air.” “And then?”

“They grew butterflies, and flew away.”

“Did you ever see a raven do that? I told you I was a sexton!”

“Does a sexton toss worms in the air, and turn them into butterflies?”

“Yes.”

“I never saw one do it!”

“You saw me do it!--But I am still librarian in your house, for I never
was dismissed, and never gave up the office. Now I am librarian here as
well.”

“But you have just told me you were sexton here!”

“So I am. It is much the same profession. Except you are a true sexton,
books are but dead bodies to you, and a library nothing but a catacomb!”

“You bewilder me!”

“That’s all right!”

A few moments he stood silent. The woman, moveless as a statue, stood
silent also by the coffin-door.

“Upon occasion,” said the sexton at length, “it is more convenient to
put one’s bird-self in front. Every one, as you ought to know, has a
beast-self--and a bird-self, and a stupid fish-self, ay, and a creeping
serpent-self too--which it takes a deal of crushing to kill! In truth
he has also a tree-self and a crystal-self, and I don’t know how many
selves more--all to get into harmony. You can tell what sort a man is by
his creature that comes oftenest to the front.”

He turned to his wife, and I considered him more closely. He was above
the ordinary height, and stood more erect than when last I saw him. His
face was, like his wife’s, very pale; its nose handsomely encased the
beak that had retired within it; its lips were very thin, and even they
had no colour, but their curves were beautiful, and about them quivered
a shadowy smile that had humour in it as well as love and pity.

“We are in want of something to eat and drink, wife,” he said; “we have
come a long way!”

“You know, husband,” she answered, “we can give only to him that asks.”

She turned her unchanging face and radiant eyes upon mine.

“Please give me something to eat, Mrs. Raven,” I said, “and
something--what you will--to quench my thirst.”

“Your thirst must be greater before you can have what will quench it,”
 she replied; “but what I can give you, I will gladly.”

She went to a cupboard in the wall, brought from it bread and wine, and
set them on the table.

We sat down to the perfect meal; and as I ate, the bread and wine
seemed to go deeper than the hunger and thirst. Anxiety and discomfort
vanished; expectation took their place.

I grew very sleepy, and now first felt weary.

“I have earned neither food nor sleep, Mrs. Raven,” I said, “but you
have given me the one freely, and now I hope you will give me the other,
for I sorely need it.”

“Sleep is too fine a thing ever to be earned,” said the sexton; “it must
be given and accepted, for it is a necessity. But it would be perilous
to use this house as a half-way hostelry--for the repose of a night,
that is, merely.”

A wild-looking little black cat jumped on his knee as he spoke. He
patted it as one pats a child to make it go to sleep: he seemed to me
patting down the sod upon a grave--patting it lovingly, with an inward
lullaby.

“Here is one of Mara’s kittens!” he said to his wife: “will you give it
something and put it out? she may want it!”

The woman took it from him gently, gave it a little piece of bread, and
went out with it, closing the door behind her.

“How then am I to make use of your hospitality?” I asked.

“By accepting it to the full,” he answered.

“I do not understand.”

“In this house no one wakes of himself.”

“Why?”

“Because no one anywhere ever wakes of himself. You can wake yourself no
more than you can make yourself.”

“Then perhaps you or Mrs. Raven would kindly call me!” I said, still
nowise understanding, but feeling afresh that vague foreboding.

“We cannot.”

“How dare I then go to sleep?” I cried.

“If you would have the rest of this house, you must not trouble yourself
about waking. You must go to sleep heartily, altogether and outright.”
 My soul sank within me.

The sexton sat looking me in the face. His eyes seemed to say, “Will you
not trust me?” I returned his gaze, and answered,

“I will.”

“Then come,” he said; “I will show you your couch.”

As we rose, the woman came in. She took up the candle, turned to the
inner door, and led the way. I went close behind her, and the sexton
followed.




CHAPTER VII. THE CEMETERY

The air as of an ice-house met me crossing the threshold. The door
fell-to behind us. The sexton said something to his wife that made her
turn toward us.--What a change had passed upon her! It was as if the
splendour of her eyes had grown too much for them to hold, and, sinking
into her countenance, made it flash with a loveliness like that of
Beatrice in the white rose of the redeemed. Life itself, life eternal,
immortal, streamed from it, an unbroken lightning. Even her hands
shone with a white radiance, every “pearl-shell helmet” gleaming like
a moonstone. Her beauty was overpowering; I was glad when she turned it
from me.

But the light of the candle reached such a little way, that at first I
could see nothing of the place. Presently, however, it fell on something
that glimmered, a little raised from the floor. Was it a bed? Could
live thing sleep in such a mortal cold? Then surely it was no wonder
it should not wake of itself! Beyond that appeared a fainter shine; and
then I thought I descried uncertain gleams on every side.

A few paces brought us to the first; it was a human form under a sheet,
straight and still--whether of man or woman I could not tell, for the
light seemed to avoid the face as we passed.

I soon perceived that we were walking along an aisle of couches, on
almost every one of which, with its head to the passage, lay something
asleep or dead, covered with a sheet white as snow. My soul grew
silent with dread. Through aisle after aisle we went, among couches
innumerable. I could see only a few of them at once, but they were on
all sides, vanishing, as it seemed, in the infinite.--Was it here lay my
choice of a bed? Must I go to sleep among the unwaking, with no one to
rouse me? Was this the sexton’s library? were these his books? Truly it
was no half-way house, this chamber of the dead!

“One of the cellars I am placed to watch!” remarked Mr. Raven--in a low
voice, as if fearing to disturb his silent guests. “Much wine is set
here to ripen!--But it is dark for a stranger!” he added.

“The moon is rising; she will soon be here,” said his wife, and her
clear voice, low and sweet, sounded of ancient sorrow long bidden adieu.

Even as she spoke the moon looked in at an opening in the wall, and a
thousand gleams of white responded to her shine. But not yet could I
descry beginning or end of the couches. They stretched away and away, as
if for all the disparted world to sleep upon. For along the far receding
narrow ways, every couch stood by itself, and on each slept a lonely
sleeper. I thought at first their sleep was death, but I soon saw it was
something deeper still--a something I did not know.

The moon rose higher, and shone through other openings, but I could
never see enough of the place at once to know its shape or character;
now it would resemble a long cathedral nave, now a huge barn made into
a dwelling of tombs. She looked colder than any moon in the frostiest
night of the world, and where she shone direct upon them, cast a bluish,
icy gleam on the white sheets and the pallid countenances--but it might
be the faces that made the moon so cold!

Of such as I could see, all were alike in the brotherhood of death, all
unlike in the character and history recorded upon them. Here lay a man
who had died--for although this was not death, I have no other name to
give it--in the prime of manly strength; his dark beard seemed to flow
like a liberated stream from the glacier of his frozen countenance; his
forehead was smooth as polished marble; a shadow of pain lingered about
his lips, but only a shadow. On the next couch lay the form of a girl,
passing lovely to behold. The sadness left on her face by parting was
not yet absorbed in perfect peace, but absolute submission possessed the
placid features, which bore no sign of wasting disease, of “killing care
or grief of heart”: if pain had been there, it was long charmed asleep,
never again to wake. Many were the beautiful that there lay very
still--some of them mere children; but I did not see one infant. The
most beautiful of all was a lady whose white hair, and that alone,
suggested her old when first she fell asleep. On her stately countenance
rested--not submission, but a right noble acquiescence, an assurance,
firm as the foundations of the universe, that all was as it should
be. On some faces lingered the almost obliterated scars of strife, the
marrings of hopeless loss, the fading shadows of sorrows that had seemed
inconsolable: the aurora of the great morning had not yet quite melted
them away; but those faces were few, and every one that bore such brand
of pain seemed to plead, “Pardon me: I died only yesterday!” or, “Pardon
me: I died but a century ago!” That some had been dead for ages I knew,
not merely by their unutterable repose, but by something for which I
have neither word nor symbol.

We came at last to three empty couches, immediately beyond which lay the
form of a beautiful woman, a little past the prime of life. One of her
arms was outside the sheet, and her hand lay with the palm upward, in
its centre a dark spot. Next to her was the stalwart figure of a man of
middle age. His arm too was outside the sheet, the strong hand almost
closed, as if clenched on the grip of a sword. I thought he must be a
king who had died fighting for the truth.

“Will you hold the candle nearer, wife?” whispered the sexton, bending
down to examine the woman’s hand.

“It heals well,” he murmured to himself: “the nail found in her nothing
to hurt!”

At last I ventured to speak.

“Are they not dead?” I asked softly.

“I cannot answer you,” he replied in a subdued voice. “I almost forget
what they mean by DEAD in the old world. If I said a person was dead, my
wife would understand one thing, and you would imagine another.--This is
but one of my treasure vaults,” he went on, “and all my guests are not
laid in vaults: out there on the moor they lie thick as the leaves of a
forest after the first blast of your winter--thick, let me say rather,
as if the great white rose of heaven had shed its petals over it. All
night the moon reads their faces, and smiles.”

“But why leave them in the corrupting moonlight?” I asked.

“Our moon,” he answered, “is not like yours--the old cinder of a
burnt-out world; her beams embalm the dead, not corrupt them. You
observe that here the sexton lays his dead on the earth; he buries very
few under it! In your world he lays huge stones on them, as if to keep
them down; I watch for the hour to ring the resurrection-bell, and wake
those that are still asleep. Your sexton looks at the clock to know when
to ring the dead-alive to church; I hearken for the cock on the spire to
crow; ‘AWAKE, THOU THAT SLEEPEST, AND ARISE FROM THE DEAD!’”

I began to conclude that the self-styled sexton was in truth an insane
parson: the whole thing was too mad! But how was I to get away from it?
I was helpless! In this world of the dead, the raven and his wife were
the only living I had yet seen: whither should I turn for help? I was
lost in a space larger than imagination; for if here two things, or
any parts of them, could occupy the same space, why not twenty or ten
thousand?--But I dared not think further in that direction.

“You seem in your dead to see differences beyond my perception!” I
ventured to remark.

“None of those you see,” he answered, “are in truth quite dead yet, and
some have but just begun to come alive and die. Others had begun to die,
that is to come alive, long before they came to us; and when such are
indeed dead, that instant they will wake and leave us. Almost every
night some rise and go. But I will not say more, for I find my words
only mislead you!--This is the couch that has been waiting for you,” he
ended, pointing to one of the three.

“Why just this?” I said, beginning to tremble, and anxious by parley to
delay.

“For reasons which one day you will be glad to know,” he answered.

“Why not know them now?”

“That also you will know when you wake.”

“But these are all dead, and I am alive!” I objected, shuddering.

“Not much,” rejoined the sexton with a smile, “--not nearly enough!
Blessed be the true life that the pauses between its throbs are not
death!”

“The place is too cold to let one sleep!” I said.

“Do these find it so?” he returned. “They sleep well--or will soon. Of
cold they feel not a breath: it heals their wounds.--Do not be a coward,
Mr. Vane. Turn your back on fear, and your face to whatever may come.
Give yourself up to the night, and you will rest indeed. Harm will not
come to you, but a good you cannot foreknow.”

The sexton and I stood by the side of the couch, his wife, with the
candle in her hand, at the foot of it. Her eyes were full of light, but
her face was again of a still whiteness; it was no longer radiant.

“Would they have me make of a charnel-house my bed-chamber?” I cried
aloud. “I will not. I will lie abroad on the heath; it cannot be colder
there!”

“I have just told you that the dead are there also,

     ‘Thick as autumnal leaves that strow the brooks
      In Vallombrosa,’”

said the librarian.

“I will NOT,” I cried again; and in the compassing dark, the two gleamed
out like spectres that waited on the dead; neither answered me; each
stood still and sad, and looked at the other.

“Be of good comfort; we watch the flock of the great shepherd,” said the
sexton to his wife.

Then he turned to me.

“Didst thou not find the air of the place pure and sweet when thou
enteredst it?” he asked.

“Yes; but oh, so cold!” I answered.

“Then know,” he returned, and his voice was stern, “that thou who
callest thyself alive, hast brought into this chamber the odours of
death, and its air will not be wholesome for the sleepers until thou art
gone from it!”

They went farther into the great chamber, and I was left alone in the
moonlight with the dead.

I turned to escape.

What a long way I found it back through the dead! At first I was too
angry to be afraid, but as I grew calm, the still shapes grew terrible.
At last, with loud offence to the gracious silence, I ran, I fled
wildly, and, bursting out, flung-to the door behind me. It closed with
an awful silence.

I stood in pitch-darkness. Feeling about me, I found a door, opened it,
and was aware of the dim light of a lamp. I stood in my library, with
the handle of the masked door in my hand.

Had I come to myself out of a vision?--or lost myself by going back to
one? Which was the real--what I now saw, or what I had just ceased to
see? Could both be real, interpenetrating yet unmingling?

I threw myself on a couch, and fell asleep.

In the library was one small window to the east, through which, at this
time of the year, the first rays of the sun shone upon a mirror whence
they were reflected on the masked door: when I woke, there they shone,
and thither they drew my eyes. With the feeling that behind it must lie
the boundless chamber I had left by that door, I sprang to my feet,
and opened it. The light, like an eager hound, shot before me into the
closet, and pounced upon the gilded edges of a large book.

“What idiot,” I cried, “has put that book in the shelf the wrong way?”

But the gilded edges, reflecting the light a second time, flung it on
a nest of drawers in a dark corner, and I saw that one of them was half
open.

“More meddling!” I cried, and went to close the drawer.

It contained old papers, and seemed more than full, for it would
not close. Taking the topmost one out, I perceived that it was in my
father’s writing and of some length. The words on which first my eyes
fell, at once made me eager to learn what it contained. I carried it
to the library, sat down in one of the western windows, and read what
follows.




CHAPTER VIII. MY FATHER’S MANUSCRIPT

I am filled with awe of what I have to write. The sun is shining golden
above me; the sea lies blue beneath his gaze; the same world sends its
growing things up to the sun, and its flying things into the air which
I have breathed from my infancy; but I know the outspread splendour a
passing show, and that at any moment it may, like the drop-scene of a
stage, be lifted to reveal more wonderful things.

Shortly after my father’s death, I was seated one morning in the
library. I had been, somewhat listlessly, regarding the portrait that
hangs among the books, which I knew only as that of a distant ancestor,
and wishing I could learn something of its original. Then I had taken a
book from the shelves and begun to read.

Glancing up from it, I saw coming toward me--not between me and the
door, but between me and the portrait--a thin pale man in rusty black.
He looked sharp and eager, and had a notable nose, at once reminding me
of a certain jug my sisters used to call Mr. Crow.

“Finding myself in your vicinity, Mr. Vane, I have given myself the
pleasure of calling,” he said, in a peculiar but not disagreeable
voice. “Your honoured grandfather treated me--I may say it without
presumption--as a friend, having known me from childhood as his father’s
librarian.”

It did not strike me at the time how old the man must be.

“May I ask where you live now, Mr. Crow?” I said.

He smiled an amused smile.

“You nearly hit my name,” he rejoined, “which shows the family insight.
You have seen me before, but only once, and could not then have heard
it!”

“Where was that?”

“In this very room. You were quite a child, however!”

I could not be sure that I remembered him, but for a moment I fancied I
did, and I begged him to set me right as to his name.

“There is such a thing as remembering without recognising the memory in
it,” he remarked. “For my name--which you have near enough--it used to
be Raven.”

I had heard the name, for marvellous tales had brought it me.

“It is very kind of you to come and see me,” I said. “Will you not sit
down?”

He seated himself at once.

“You knew my father, then, I presume?”

“I knew him,” he answered with a curious smile, “but he did not care
about my acquaintance, and we never met.--That gentleman, however,” he
added, pointing to the portrait,--“old Sir Up’ard, his people called
him,--was in his day a friend of mine yet more intimate than ever your
grandfather became.”

Then at length I began to think the interview a strange one. But in
truth it was hardly stranger that my visitor should remember Sir Upward,
than that he should have been my great-grandfather’s librarian!

“I owe him much,” he continued; “for, although I had read many more
books than he, yet, through the special direction of his studies, he was
able to inform me of a certain relation of modes which I should never
have discovered of myself, and could hardly have learned from any one
else.”

“Would you mind telling me all about that?” I said.

“By no means--as much at least as I am able: there are not such things
as wilful secrets,” he answered--and went on.

“That closet held his library--a hundred manuscripts or so, for printing
was not then invented. One morning I sat there, working at a catalogue
of them, when he looked in at the door, and said, ‘Come.’ I laid down my
pen and followed him--across the great hall, down a steep rough descent,
and along an underground passage to a tower he had lately built,
consisting of a stair and a room at the top of it. The door of this room
had a tremendous lock, which he undid with the smallest key I ever saw.
I had scarcely crossed the threshold after him, when, to my eyes, he
began to dwindle, and grew less and less. All at once my vision seemed
to come right, and I saw that he was moving swiftly away from me. In a
minute more he was the merest speck in the distance, with the tops
of blue mountains beyond him, clear against a sky of paler blue. I
recognised the country, for I had gone there and come again many a time,
although I had never known this way to it.

“Many years after, when the tower had long disappeared, I taught one of
his descendants what Sir Upward had taught me; and now and then to this
day I use your house when I want to go the nearest way home. I must
indeed--without your leave, for which I ask your pardon--have by this
time well established a right of way through it--not from front to back,
but from bottom to top!”

“You would have me then understand, Mr. Raven,” I said, “that you go
through my house into another world, heedless of disparting space?”

“That I go through it is an incontrovertible acknowledgement of space,”
 returned the old librarian.

“Please do not quibble, Mr. Raven,” I rejoined. “Please to take my
question as you know I mean it.”

“There is in your house a door, one step through which carries me into a
world very much another than this.”

“A better?”

“Not throughout; but so much another that most of its physical, and many
of its mental laws are different from those of this world. As for moral
laws, they must everywhere be fundamentally the same.”

“You try my power of belief!” I said.

“You take me for a madman, probably?”

“You do not look like one.”

“A liar then?”

“You give me no ground to think you such.”

“Only you do not believe me?”

“I will go out of that door with you if you like: I believe in you
enough to risk the attempt.”

“The blunder all my children make!” he murmured. “The only door out is
the door in!”

I began to think he must be crazy. He sat silent for a moment, his head
resting on his hand, his elbow on the table, and his eyes on the books
before him.

“A book,” he said louder, “is a door in, and therefore a door out.--I
see old Sir Up’ard,” he went on, closing his eyes, “and my heart swells
with love to him:--what world is he in?”

“The world of your heart!” I replied; “--that is, the idea of him is
there.”

“There is one world then at least on which your hall-door does not
open?”

“I grant you so much; but the things in that world are not things to
have and to hold.”

“Think a little farther,” he rejoined: “did anything ever become yours,
except by getting into that world?--The thought is beyond you, however,
at present!--I tell you there are more worlds, and more doors to them,
than you will think of in many years!”

He rose, left the library, crossed the hall, and went straight up to
the garret, familiar evidently with every turn. I followed, studying his
back. His hair hung down long and dark, straight and glossy. His coat
was wide and reached to his heels. His shoes seemed too large for him.

In the garret a light came through at the edges of the great roofing
slabs, and showed us parts where was no flooring, and we must step from
joist to joist: in the middle of one of these spaces rose a partition,
with a door: through it I followed Mr. Raven into a small, obscure
chamber, whose top contracted as it rose, and went slanting through the
roof.

“That is the door I spoke of,” he said, pointing to an oblong mirror
that stood on the floor and leaned against the wall. I went in front
of it, and saw our figures dimly reflected in its dusty face. There
was something about it that made me uneasy. It looked old-fashioned and
neglected, but, notwithstanding its ordinary seeming, the eagle, perched
with outstretched wings on the top, appeared threatful.

“As a mirror,” said the librarian, “it has grown dingy with age; but
that is no matter: its clearness depends on the light.”

“Light!” I rejoined; “there is no light here!”

He did not answer me, but began to pull at a little chain on the
opposite wall. I heard a creaking: the top of the chamber was turning
slowly round. He ceased pulling, looked at his watch, and began to pull
again.

“We arrive almost to the moment!” he said; “it is on the very stroke of
noon!”

The top went creaking and revolving for a minute or so. Then he pulled
two other chains, now this, now that, and returned to the first. A
moment more and the chamber grew much clearer: a patch of sunlight had
fallen upon a mirror on the wall opposite that against which the other
leaned, and on the dust I saw the path of the reflected rays to the
mirror on the ground. But from the latter none were returned; they
seemed to go clean through; there was nowhere in the chamber a second
patch of light!

“Where are the sunrays gone?” I cried.

“That I cannot tell,” returned Mr. Raven; “--back, perhaps, to where
they came from first. They now belong, I fancy, to a sense not yet
developed in us.”

He then talked of the relations of mind to matter, and of senses to
qualities, in a way I could only a little understand, whence he went
on to yet stranger things which I could not at all comprehend. He spoke
much about dimensions, telling me that there were many more than three,
some of them concerned with powers which were indeed in us, but of which
as yet we knew absolutely nothing. His words, however, I confess, took
little more hold of me than the light did of the mirror, for I thought
he hardly knew what he was saying.

Suddenly I was aware that our forms had gone from the mirror, which
seemed full of a white mist. As I gazed I saw, growing gradually visible
beyond the mist, the tops of a range of mountains, which became clearer
and clearer. Soon the mist vanished entirely, uncovering the face of a
wide heath, on which, at some distance, was the figure of a man moving
swiftly away. I turned to address my companion; he was no longer by my
side. I looked again at the form in the mirror, and recognised the wide
coat flying, the black hair lifting in a wind that did not touch me. I
rushed in terror from the place.




CHAPTER IX. I REPENT

I laid the manuscript down, consoled to find that my father had had a
peep into that mysterious world, and that he knew Mr. Raven.

Then I remembered that I had never heard the cause or any circumstance
of my father’s death, and began to believe that he must at last have
followed Mr. Raven, and not come back; whereupon I speedily grew ashamed
of my flight. What wondrous facts might I not by this time have gathered
concerning life and death, and wide regions beyond ordinary perception!
Assuredly the Ravens were good people, and a night in their house would
nowise have hurt me! They were doubtless strange, but it was faculty
in which the one was peculiar, and beauty in which the other was
marvellous! And I had not believed in them! had treated them as unworthy
of my confidence, as harbouring a design against me! The more I thought
of my behaviour to them, the more disgusted I became with myself. Why
should I have feared such dead? To share their holy rest was an honour
of which I had proved myself unworthy! What harm could that sleeping
king, that lady with the wound in her palm, have done me? I fell a
longing after the sweet and stately stillness of their two countenances,
and wept. Weeping I threw myself on a couch, and suddenly fell asleep.

As suddenly I woke, feeling as if some one had called me. The house was
still as an empty church. A blackbird was singing on the lawn. I said to
myself, “I will go and tell them I am ashamed, and will do whatever
they would have me do!” I rose, and went straight up the stairs to the
garret.

The wooden chamber was just as when first I saw it, the mirror dimly
reflecting everything before it. It was nearly noon, and the sun would
be a little higher than when first I came: I must raise the hood a
little, and adjust the mirrors accordingly! If I had but been in time to
see Mr. Raven do it!

I pulled the chains, and let the light fall on the first mirror.
I turned then to the other: there were the shapes of the former
vision--distinguishable indeed, but tremulous like a landscape in a
pool ruffled by “a small pipling wind!” I touched the glass; it was
impermeable.

Suspecting polarisation as the thing required, I shifted and shifted the
mirrors, changing their relation, until at last, in a great degree, so
far as I was concerned, by chance, things came right between them, and
I saw the mountains blue and steady and clear. I stepped forward, and my
feet were among the heather.

All I knew of the way to the cottage was that we had gone through a
pine-forest. I passed through many thickets and several small fir-woods,
continually fancying afresh that I recognised something of the country;
but I had come upon no forest, and now the sun was near the horizon,
and the air had begun to grow chill with the coming winter, when, to my
delight, I saw a little black object coming toward me: it was indeed the
raven!

I hastened to meet him.

“I beg your pardon, sir, for my rudeness last night,” I said. “Will you
take me with you now? I heartily confess I do not deserve it.”

“Ah!” he returned, and looked up. Then, after a brief pause, “My wife
does not expect you to-night,” he said. “She regrets that we at all
encouraged your staying last week.”

“Take me to her that I may tell her how sorry I am,” I begged humbly.

“It is of no use,” he answered. “Your night was not come then, or you
would not have left us. It is not come now, and I cannot show you the
way. The dead were rejoicing under their daisies--they all lie among the
roots of the flowers of heaven--at the thought of your delight when the
winter should be past, and the morning with its birds come: ere you
left them, they shivered in their beds. When the spring of the universe
arrives,--but that cannot be for ages yet! how many, I do not know--and
do not care to know.”

“Tell me one thing, I beg of you, Mr. Raven: is my father with you? Have
you seen him since he left the world?”

“Yes; he is with us, fast asleep. That was he you saw with his arm on
the coverlet, his hand half closed.”

“Why did you not tell me? That I should have been so near him, and not
know!”

“And turn your back on him!” corrected the raven.

“I would have lain down at once had I known!”

“I doubt it. Had you been ready to lie down, you would have known
him!--Old Sir Up’ard,” he went on, “and your twice great-grandfather,
both are up and away long ago. Your great-grandfather has been with us
for many a year; I think he will soon begin to stir. You saw him last
night, though of course you did not know him.”

“Why OF COURSE?”

“Because he is so much nearer waking than you. No one who will not sleep
can ever wake.”

“I do not at all understand you!”

“You turned away, and would not understand!” I held my peace.--But if I
did not say something, he would go!

“And my grandfather--is he also with you?” I asked.

“No; he is still in the Evil Wood, fighting the dead.”

“Where is the Evil Wood, that I may find him?”

“You will not find him; but you will hardly miss the wood. It is the
place where those who will not sleep, wake up at night, to kill their
dead and bury them.”

“I cannot understand you!”

“Naturally not. Neither do I understand you; I can read neither your
heart nor your face. When my wife and I do not understand our children,
it is because there is not enough of them to be understood. God alone
can understand foolishness.”

“Then,” I said, feeling naked and very worthless, “will you be so good
as show me the nearest way home? There are more ways than one, I know,
for I have gone by two already.”

“There are indeed many ways.”

“Tell me, please, how to recognise the nearest.”

“I cannot,” answered the raven; “you and I use the same words with
different meanings. We are often unable to tell people what they NEED to
know, because they WANT to know something else, and would therefore only
misunderstand what we said. Home is ever so far away in the palm of your
hand, and how to get there it is of no use to tell you. But you will get
there; you must get there; you have to get there. Everybody who is not
at home, has to go home. You thought you were at home where I found you:
if that had been your home, you could not have left it. Nobody can leave
home. And nobody ever was or ever will be at home without having gone
there.”

“Enigma treading on enigma!” I exclaimed. “I did not come here to be
asked riddles.”

“No; but you came, and found the riddles waiting for you! Indeed you
are yourself the only riddle. What you call riddles are truths, and seem
riddles because you are not true.”

“Worse and worse!” I cried.

“And you MUST answer the riddles!” he continued. “They will go on asking
themselves until you understand yourself. The universe is a riddle
trying to get out, and you are holding your door hard against it.”

“Will you not in pity tell me what I am to do--where I must go?”

“How should I tell YOUR to-do, or the way to it?”

“If I am not to go home, at least direct me to some of my kind.”

“I do not know of any. The beings most like you are in that direction.”

He pointed with his beak. I could see nothing but the setting sun, which
blinded me.

“Well,” I said bitterly, “I cannot help feeling hardly treated--taken
from my home, abandoned in a strange world, and refused instruction as
to where I am to go or what I am to do!”

“You forget,” said the raven, “that, when I brought you and you declined
my hospitality, you reached what you call home in safety: now you are
come of yourself! Good night.”

He turned and walked slowly away, with his beak toward the ground. I
stood dazed. It was true I had come of myself, but had I not come with
intent of atonement? My heart was sore, and in my brain was neither
quest nor purpose, hope nor desire. I gazed after the raven, and would
have followed him, but felt it useless.

All at once he pounced on a spot, throwing the whole weight of his body
on his bill, and for some moments dug vigorously. Then with a flutter of
his wings he threw back his head, and something shot from his bill, cast
high in the air. That moment the sun set, and the air at once grew very
dusk, but the something opened into a soft radiance, and came pulsing
toward me like a fire-fly, but with a much larger and a yellower light.
It flew over my head. I turned and followed it.

Here I interrupt my narrative to remark that it involves a constant
struggle to say what cannot be said with even an approach to precision,
the things recorded being, in their nature and in that of the creatures
concerned in them, so inexpressibly different from any possible events
of this economy, that I can present them only by giving, in the forms
and language of life in this world, the modes in which they affected
me--not the things themselves, but the feelings they woke in me. Even
this much, however, I do with a continuous and abiding sense of
failure, finding it impossible to present more than one phase of a
multitudinously complicated significance, or one concentric sphere of a
graduated embodiment. A single thing would sometimes seem to be and mean
many things, with an uncertain identity at the heart of them, which kept
constantly altering their look. I am indeed often driven to set down
what I know to be but a clumsy and doubtful representation of the mere
feeling aimed at, none of the communicating media of this world being
fit to convey it, in its peculiar strangeness, with even an approach
to clearness or certainty. Even to one who knew the region better than
myself, I should have no assurance of transmitting the reality of
my experience in it. While without a doubt, for instance, that I was
actually regarding a scene of activity, I might be, at the same moment,
in my consciousness aware that I was perusing a metaphysical argument.




CHAPTER X. THE BAD BURROW

As the air grew black and the winter closed swiftly around me, the
fluttering fire blazed out more luminous, and arresting its flight,
hovered waiting. So soon as I came under its radiance, it flew slowly
on, lingering now and then above spots where the ground was rocky. Every
time I looked up, it seemed to have grown larger, and at length gave me
an attendant shadow. Plainly a bird-butterfly, it flew with a certain
swallowy double. Its wings were very large, nearly square, and flashed
all the colours of the rainbow. Wondering at their splendour, I became
so absorbed in their beauty that I stumbled over a low rock, and lay
stunned. When I came to myself, the creature was hovering over my head,
radiating the whole chord of light, with multitudinous gradations and
some kinds of colour I had never before seen. I rose and went on, but,
unable to take my eyes off the shining thing to look to my steps, I
struck my foot against a stone. Fearing then another fall, I sat down to
watch the little glory, and a great longing awoke in me to have it in my
hand. To my unspeakable delight, it began to sink toward me. Slowly at
first, then swiftly it sank, growing larger as it came nearer. I felt
as if the treasure of the universe were giving itself to me--put out my
hand, and had it. But the instant I took it, its light went out; all was
dark as pitch; a dead book with boards outspread lay cold and heavy in
my hand. I threw it in the air--only to hear it fall among the heather.
Burying my face in my hands, I sat in motionless misery.

But the cold grew so bitter that, fearing to be frozen, I got up. The
moment I was on my feet, a faint sense of light awoke in me. “Is it
coming to life?” I cried, and a great pang of hope shot through me.
Alas, no! it was the edge of a moon peering up keen and sharp over a
level horizon! She brought me light--but no guidance! SHE would not
hover over me, would not wait on my faltering steps! She could but offer
me an ignorant choice!

With a full face she rose, and I began to see a little about me.
Westward of her, and not far from me, a range of low hills broke the
horizon-line: I set out for it.

But what a night I had to pass ere I reached it! The moon seemed to know
something, for she stared at me oddly. Her look was indeed icy-cold, but
full of interest, or at least curiosity. She was not the same moon I
had known on the earth; her face was strange to me, and her light yet
stranger. Perhaps it came from an unknown sun! Every time I looked up,
I found her staring at me with all her might! At first I was annoyed,
as at the rudeness of a fellow creature; but soon I saw or fancied a
certain wondering pity in her gaze: why was I out in her night? Then
first I knew what an awful thing it was to be awake in the universe: I
WAS, and could not help it!

As I walked, my feet lost the heather, and trod a bare spongy soil,
something like dry, powdery peat. To my dismay it gave a momentary heave
under me; then presently I saw what seemed the ripple of an earthquake
running on before me, shadowy in the low moon. It passed into the
distance; but, while yet I stared after it, a single wave rose up, and
came slowly toward me. A yard or two away it burst, and from it, with a
scramble and a bound, issued an animal like a tiger. About his mouth and
ears hung clots of mould, and his eyes winked and flamed as he rushed
at me, showing his white teeth in a soundless snarl. I stood fascinated,
unconscious of either courage or fear. He turned his head to the ground,
and plunged into it.

“That moon is affecting my brain,” I said as I resumed my journey. “What
life can be here but the phantasmic--the stuff of which dreams are made?
I am indeed walking in a vain show!”

Thus I strove to keep my heart above the waters of fear, nor knew that
she whom I distrusted was indeed my defence from the realities I took
for phantoms: her light controlled the monsters, else had I scarce taken
a second step on the hideous ground. “I will not be appalled by that
which only seems!” I said to myself, yet felt it a terrible thing to
walk on a sea where such fishes disported themselves below. With that, a
step or two from me, the head of a worm began to come slowly out of the
earth, as big as that of a polar bear and much resembling it, with a
white mane to its red neck. The drawing wriggles with which its huge
length extricated itself were horrible, yet I dared not turn my eyes
from them. The moment its tail was free, it lay as if exhausted,
wallowing in feeble effort to burrow again.

“Does it live on the dead,” I wondered, “and is it unable to hurt the
living? If they scent their prey and come out, why do they leave me
unharmed?”

I know now it was that the moon paralysed them.

All the night through as I walked, hideous creatures, no two alike,
threatened me. In some of them, beauty of colour enhanced loathliness
of shape: one large serpent was covered from head to distant tail with
feathers of glorious hues.

I became at length so accustomed to their hurtless menaces that I
fell to beguiling the way with the invention of monstrosities, never
suspecting that I owed each moment of life to the staring moon. Though
hers was no primal radiance, it so hampered the evil things, that I
walked in safety. For light is yet light, if but the last of a countless
series of reflections! How swiftly would not my feet have carried me
over the restless soil, had I known that, if still within their range
when her lamp ceased to shine on the cursed spot, I should that moment
be at the mercy of such as had no mercy, the centre of a writhing heap
of hideousness, every individual of it as terrible as before it had but
seemed! Fool of ignorance, I watched the descent of the weary, solemn,
anxious moon down the widening vault above me, with no worse uneasiness
than the dread of losing my way--where as yet I had indeed no way to
lose.

I was drawing near the hills I had made my goal, and she was now not far
from their sky-line, when the soundless wallowing ceased, and the burrow
lay motionless and bare. Then I saw, slowly walking over the light soil,
the form of a woman. A white mist floated about her, now assuming, now
losing to reassume the shape of a garment, as it gathered to her or was
blown from her by a wind that dogged her steps.

She was beautiful, but with such a pride at once and misery on her
countenance that I could hardly believe what yet I saw. Up and down she
walked, vainly endeavouring to lay hold of the mist and wrap it around
her. The eyes in the beautiful face were dead, and on her left side was
a dark spot, against which she would now and then press her hand, as
if to stifle pain or sickness. Her hair hung nearly to her feet, and
sometimes the wind would so mix it with the mist that I could not
distinguish the one from the other; but when it fell gathering together
again, it shone a pale gold in the moonlight.

Suddenly pressing both hands on her heart, she fell to the ground, and
the mist rose from her and melted in the air. I ran to her. But she
began to writhe in such torture that I stood aghast. A moment more
and her legs, hurrying from her body, sped away serpents. From her
shoulders fled her arms as in terror, serpents also. Then something
flew up from her like a bat, and when I looked again, she was gone. The
ground rose like the sea in a storm; terror laid hold upon me; I turned
to the hills and ran.

I was already on the slope of their base, when the moon sank behind one
of their summits, leaving me in its shadow. Behind me rose a waste and
sickening cry, as of frustrate desire--the only sound I had heard since
the fall of the dead butterfly; it made my heart shake like a flag in
the wind. I turned, saw many dark objects bounding after me, and made
for the crest of a ridge on which the moon still shone. She seemed to
linger there that I might see to defend myself. Soon I came in sight of
her, and climbed the faster.

Crossing the shadow of a rock, I heard the creatures panting at my
heels. But just as the foremost threw himself upon me with a snarl of
greedy hate, we rushed into the moon together. She flashed out an angry
light, and he fell from me a bodiless blotch. Strength came to me, and
I turned on the rest. But one by one as they darted into the light, they
dropped with a howl; and I saw or fancied a strange smile on the round
face above me.

I climbed to the top of the ridge: far away shone the moon, sinking to
a low horizon. The air was pure and strong. I descended a little way,
found it warmer, and sat down to wait the dawn.

The moon went below, and the world again was dark.




CHAPTER XI. THE EVIL WOOD

I fell fast asleep, and when I woke the sun was rising. I went to the
top again, and looked back: the hollow I had crossed in the moonlight
lay without sign of life. Could it be that the calm expanse before me
swarmed with creatures of devouring greed?

I turned and looked over the land through which my way must lie. It
seemed a wide desert, with a patch of a different colour in the
distance that might be a forest. Sign of presence, human or animal, was
none--smoke or dust or shadow of cultivation. Not a cloud floated in
the clear heaven; no thinnest haze curtained any segment of its circling
rim.

I descended, and set out for the imaginable forest: something alive
might be there; on this side of it could not well be anything!

When I reached the plain, I found it, as far as my sight could go, of
rock, here flat and channeled, there humped and pinnacled--evidently the
wide bed of a vanished river, scored by innumerable water-runs, without
a trace of moisture in them. Some of the channels bore a dry moss, and
some of the rocks a few lichens almost as hard as themselves. The air,
once “filled with pleasant noise of waters,” was silent as death.
It took me the whole day to reach the patch,--which I found indeed a
forest--but not a rudiment of brook or runnel had I crossed! Yet through
the glowing noon I seemed haunted by an aural mirage, hearing so plainly
the voice of many waters that I could hardly believe the opposing
testimony of my eyes.

The sun was approaching the horizon when I left the river-bed, and
entered the forest. Sunk below the tree-tops, and sending his rays
between their pillar-like boles, he revealed a world of blessed shadows
waiting to receive me. I had expected a pine-wood, but here were trees
of many sorts, some with strong resemblances to trees I knew, others
with marvellous differences from any I had ever seen. I threw myself
beneath the boughs of what seemed a eucalyptus in blossom: its flowers
had a hard calyx much resembling a skull, the top of which rose like a
lid to let the froth-like bloom-brain overfoam its cup. From beneath
the shadow of its falchion-leaves my eyes went wandering into deep after
deep of the forest.

Soon, however, its doors and windows began to close, shutting up aisle
and corridor and roomier glade. The night was about me, and instant
and sharp the cold. Again what a night I found it! How shall I make my
reader share with me its wild ghostiness?

The tree under which I lay rose high before it branched, but the boughs
of it bent so low that they seemed ready to shut me in as I leaned
against the smooth stem, and let my eyes wander through the brief
twilight of the vanishing forest. Presently, to my listless roving
gaze, the varied outlines of the clumpy foliage began to assume or
imitate--say rather SUGGEST other shapes than their own. A light wind
began to blow; it set the boughs of a neighbour tree rocking, and all
their branches aswing, every twig and every leaf blending its individual
motion with the sway of its branch and the rock of its bough. Among
its leafy shapes was a pack of wolves that struggled to break from
a wizard’s leash: greyhounds would not have strained so savagely! I
watched them with an interest that grew as the wind gathered force, and
their motions life.

Another mass of foliage, larger and more compact, presented my fancy
with a group of horses’ heads and forequarters projecting caparisoned
from their stalls. Their necks kept moving up and down, with an
impatience that augmented as the growing wind broke their vertical
rhythm with a wilder swaying from side to side. What heads they were!
how gaunt, how strange!--several of them bare skulls--one with the skin
tight on its bones! One had lost the under jaw and hung low, looking
unutterably weary--but now and then hove high as if to ease the bit.
Above them, at the end of a branch, floated erect the form of a woman,
waving her arms in imperious gesture. The definiteness of these and
other leaf masses first surprised and then discomposed me: what if they
should overpower my brain with seeming reality? But the twilight became
darkness; the wind ceased; every shape was shut up in the night; I fell
asleep.

It was still dark when I began to be aware of a far-off, confused,
rushing noise, mingled with faint cries. It grew and grew until a tumult
as of gathering multitudes filled the wood. On all sides at once
the sounds drew nearer; the spot where I lay seemed the centre of a
commotion that extended throughout the forest. I scarce moved hand or
foot lest I should betray my presence to hostile things.

The moon at length approached the forest, and came slowly into it: with
her first gleam the noises increased to a deafening uproar, and I began
to see dim shapes about me. As she ascended and grew brighter, the
noises became yet louder, and the shapes clearer. A furious battle was
raging around me. Wild cries and roars of rage, shock of onset, struggle
prolonged, all mingled with words articulate, surged in my ears. Curses
and credos, snarls and sneers, laughter and mockery, sacred names and
howls of hate, came huddling in chaotic interpenetration. Skeletons and
phantoms fought in maddest confusion. Swords swept through the phantoms:
they only shivered. Maces crashed on the skeletons, shattering them
hideously: not one fell or ceased to fight, so long as a single joint
held two bones together. Bones of men and horses lay scattered and
heaped; grinding and crunching them under foot fought the skeletons.
Everywhere charged the bone-gaunt white steeds; everywhere on foot or
on wind-blown misty battle-horses, raged and ravened and raved the
indestructible spectres; weapons and hoofs clashed and crushed; while
skeleton jaws and phantom-throats swelled the deafening tumult with the
war-cry of every opinion, bad or good, that had bred strife, injustice,
cruelty in any world. The holiest words went with the most hating blow.
Lie-distorted truths flew hurtling in the wind of javelins and bones.
Every moment some one would turn against his comrades, and fight more
wildly than before, THE TRUTH! THE TRUTH! still his cry. One I noted who
wheeled ever in a circle, and smote on all sides. Wearied out, a pair
would sit for a minute side by side, then rise and renew the fierce
combat. None stooped to comfort the fallen, or stepped wide to spare
him.

The moon shone till the sun rose, and all the night long I had glimpses
of a woman moving at her will above the strife-tormented multitude, now
on this front now on that, one outstretched arm urging the fight, the
other pressed against her side. “Ye are men: slay one another!” she
shouted. I saw her dead eyes and her dark spot, and recalled what I had
seen the night before.

Such was the battle of the dead, which I saw and heard as I lay under
the tree.

Just before sunrise, a breeze went through the forest, and a voice
cried, “Let the dead bury their dead!” At the word the contending
thousands dropped noiseless, and when the sun looked in, he saw never a
bone, but here and there a withered branch.

I rose and resumed my journey, through as quiet a wood as ever grew out
of the quiet earth. For the wind of the morning had ceased when the sun
appeared, and the trees were silent. Not a bird sang, not a squirrel,
mouse, or weasel showed itself, not a belated moth flew athwart my path.
But as I went I kept watch over myself, nor dared let my eyes rest on
any forest-shape. All the time I seemed to hear faint sounds of mattock
and spade and hurtling bones: any moment my eyes might open on things I
would not see! Daylight prudence muttered that perhaps, to appear, ten
thousand phantoms awaited only my consenting fancy.

In the middle of the afternoon I came out of the wood--to find before
me a second net of dry water-courses. I thought at first that I had
wandered from my attempted line, and reversed my direction; but I soon
saw it was not so, and concluded presently that I had come to another
branch of the same river-bed. I began at once to cross it, and was in
the bottom of a wide channel when the sun set.

I sat down to await the moon, and growing sleepy, stretched myself on
the moss. The moment my head was down, I heard the sounds of rushing
streams--all sorts of sweet watery noises. The veiled melody of the
molten music sang me into a dreamless sleep, and when I woke the sun
was already up, and the wrinkled country widely visible. Covered with
shadows it lay striped and mottled like the skin of some wild animal. As
the sun rose the shadows diminished, and it seemed as if the rocks were
re-absorbing the darkness that had oozed out of them during the night.

Hitherto I had loved my Arab mare and my books more, I fear, than live
man or woman; now at length my soul was athirst for a human presence,
and I longed even after those inhabitants of this alien world whom the
raven had so vaguely described as nearest my sort. With heavy yet hoping
heart, and mind haunted by a doubt whether I was going in any direction
at all, I kept wearily travelling “north-west and by south.”




CHAPTER XII. FRIENDS AND FOES

Coming, in one of the channels, upon what seemed a little shrub, the
outlying picket, I trusted, of an army behind it, I knelt to look at
it closer. It bore a small fruit, which, as I did not recognise it,
I feared to gather and eat. Little I thought that I was watched from
behind the rocks by hundreds of eyes eager with the question whether I
would or would not take it.

I came to another plant somewhat bigger, then to another larger still,
and at length to clumps of a like sort; by which time I saw that they
were not shrubs but dwarf-trees. Before I reached the bank of this
second branch of the river-bed, I found the channels so full of them
that it was with difficulty I crossed such as I could not jump. In one
I heard a great rush, as of a multitude of birds from an ivied wall, but
saw nothing.

I came next to some large fruit-bearing trees, but what they bore looked
coarse. They stood on the edge of a hollow, which evidently had once
been the basin of a lake. From the left a forest seemed to flow into
and fill it; but while the trees above were of many sorts, those in the
hollow were almost entirely fruit-bearing.

I went a few yards down the slope of grass mingled with moss, and
stretched myself upon it weary. A little farther down stood a tiny tree
full of rosiest apples no bigger than small cherries, its top close to
my hand; I pulled and ate one of them. Finding it delicious, I was in
the act of taking another, when a sudden shouting of children, mingled
with laughter clear and sweet as the music of a brook, startled me with
delight.

“He likes our apples! He likes our apples! He’s a good giant! He’s a
good giant!” cried many little voices.

“He’s a giant!” objected one.

“He IS rather big,” assented another, “but littleness isn’t everything!
It won’t keep you from growing big and stupid except you take care!”

I rose on my elbow and stared. Above and about and below me stood a
multitude of children, apparently of all ages, some just able to run
alone, and some about twelve or thirteen. Three or four seemed older.
They stood in a small knot, a little apart, and were less excited
than the rest. The many were chattering in groups, declaiming and
contradicting, like a crowd of grown people in a city, only with greater
merriment, better manners, and more sense.

I gathered that, by the approach of my hand to a second apple, they knew
that I liked the first; but how from that they argued me good, I did not
see, nor wondered that one of them at least should suggest caution. I
did not open my mouth, for I was afraid of frightening them, and sure
I should learn more by listening than by asking questions. For I
understood nearly all they said--at which I was not surprised: to
understand is not more wonderful than to love.

There came a movement and slight dispersion among them, and presently a
sweet, innocent-looking, lovingly roguish little fellow handed me a huge
green apple. Silence fell on the noisy throng; all waited expectant.

“Eat, good giant,” he said.

I sat up, took the apple, smiled thanks, and would have eaten; but the
moment I bit into it, I flung it far away.

Again rose a shout of delight; they flung themselves upon me, so as
nearly to smother me; they kissed my face and hands; they laid hold of
my legs; they clambered about my arms and shoulders, embracing my head
and neck. I came to the ground at last, overwhelmed with the lovely
little goblins.

“Good, good giant!” they cried. “We knew you would come! Oh you dear,
good, strong giant!”

The babble of their talk sprang up afresh, and ever the jubilant shout
would rise anew from hundreds of clear little throats.

Again came a sudden silence. Those around me drew back; those atop of me
got off and began trying to set me on my feet. Upon their sweet faces,
concern had taken the place of merriment.

“Get up, good giant!” said a little girl. “Make haste! much haste! He
saw you throw his apple away!”

Before she ended, I was on my feet. She stood pointing up the slope. On
the brow of it was a clownish, bad-looking fellow, a few inches taller
than myself. He looked hostile, but I saw no reason to fear him, for he
had no weapon, and my little friends had vanished every one.

He began to descend, and I, in the hope of better footing and position,
to go up. He growled like a beast as he turned toward me.

Reaching a more level spot, I stood and waited for him. As he came near,
he held out his hand. I would have taken it in friendly fashion, but
he drew it back, threatened a blow, and held it out again. Then I
understood him to claim the apple I had flung away, whereupon I made a
grimace of dislike and a gesture of rejection.

He answered with a howl of rage that seemed to say, “Do you dare tell me
my apple was not fit to eat?”

“One bad apple may grow on the best tree,” I said.

Whether he perceived my meaning I cannot tell, but he made a stride
nearer, and I stood on my guard. He delayed his assault, however, until
a second giant, much like him, who had been stealing up behind me, was
close enough, when he rushed upon me. I met him with a good blow in the
face, but the other struck me on the back of the head, and between them
I was soon overpowered.

They dragged me into the wood above the valley, where their tribe
lived--in wretched huts, built of fallen branches and a few stones. Into
one of these they pushed me, there threw me on the ground, and kicked
me. A woman was present, who looked on with indifference.

I may here mention that during my captivity I hardly learned to
distinguish the women from the men, they differed so little. Often I
wondered whether I had not come upon a sort of fungoid people, with just
enough mind to give them motion and the expressions of anger and greed.
Their food, which consisted of tubers, bulbs, and fruits, was to me
inexpressibly disagreeable, but nothing offended them so much as to show
dislike to it. I was cuffed by the women and kicked by the men because I
would not swallow it.

I lay on the floor that night hardly able to move, but I slept a good
deal, and woke a little refreshed. In the morning they dragged me to the
valley, and tying my feet, with a long rope, to a tree, put a flat stone
with a saw-like edge in my left hand. I shifted it to the right; they
kicked me, and put it again in the left; gave me to understand that I
was to scrape the bark off every branch that had no fruit on it; kicked
me once more, and left me.

I set about the dreary work in the hope that by satisfying them I should
be left very much to myself--to make my observations and choose my time
for escape. Happily one of the dwarf-trees grew close by me, and
every other minute I plucked and ate a small fruit, which wonderfully
refreshed and strengthened me.




CHAPTER XIII. THE LITTLE ONES

I had been at work but a few moments, when I heard small voices near me,
and presently the Little Ones, as I soon found they called themselves,
came creeping out from among the tiny trees that like brushwood filled
the spaces between the big ones. In a minute there were scores and
scores about me. I made signs that the giants had but just left me,
and were not far off; but they laughed, and told me the wind was quite
clean.

“They are too blind to see us,” they said, and laughed like a multitude
of sheep-bells.

“Do you like that rope about your ankles?” asked one.

“I want them to think I cannot take it off,” I replied.

“They can scarcely see their own feet!” he rejoined. “Walk with short
steps and they will think the rope is all right.”

As he spoke, he danced with merriment.

One of the bigger girls got down on her knees to untie the clumsy knot.
I smiled, thinking those pretty fingers could do nothing with it, but in
a moment it was loose.

They then made me sit down, and fed me with delicious little fruits;
after which the smaller of them began to play with me in the wildest
fashion, so that it was impossible for me to resume my work. When the
first grew tired, others took their places, and this went on until the
sun was setting, and heavy steps were heard approaching. The little
people started from me, and I made haste to put the rope round my
ankles.

“We must have a care,” said the girl who had freed me; “a crush of one
of their horrid stumpy feet might kill a very little one!”

“Can they not perceive you at all then?”

“They might see something move; and if the children were in a heap on
the top of you, as they were a moment ago, it would be terrible; for
they hate every live thing but themselves.--Not that they are much alive
either!”

She whistled like a bird. The next instant not one of them was to be
seen or heard, and the girl herself had disappeared.

It was my master, as doubtless he counted himself, come to take me home.
He freed my ankles, and dragged me to the door of his hut; there he
threw me on the ground, again tied my feet, gave me a kick, and left me.

Now I might at once have made my escape; but at length I had friends,
and could not think of leaving them. They were so charming, so full of
winsome ways, that I must see more of them! I must know them better!
“To-morrow,” I said to myself with delight, “I shall see them again!”
 But from the moment there was silence in the huts until I fell asleep, I
heard them whispering all about me, and knew that I was lovingly watched
by a multitude. After that, I think they hardly ever left me quite
alone.

I did not come to know the giants at all, and I believe there was
scarcely anything in them to know. They never became in the least
friendly, but they were much too stupid to invent cruelties. Often I
avoided a bad kick by catching the foot and giving its owner a fall,
upon which he never, on that occasion, renewed his attempt.

But the little people were constantly doing and saying things that
pleased, often things that surprised me. Every day I grew more loath
to leave them. While I was at work, they would keep coming and going,
amusing and delighting me, and taking all the misery, and much of the
weariness out of my monotonous toil. Very soon I loved them more than
I can tell. They did not know much, but they were very wise, and seemed
capable of learning anything. I had no bed save the bare ground, but
almost as often as I woke, it was in a nest of children--one or other of
them in my arms, though which I seldom could tell until the light came,
for they ordered the succession among themselves. When one crept into my
bosom, unconsciously I clasped him there, and the rest lay close around
me, the smaller nearer. It is hardly necessary to say that I did not
suffer much from the nightly cold! The first thing they did in the
morning, and the last before sunset, was to bring the good giant plenty
to eat.

One morning I was surprised on waking to find myself alone. As I came
to my senses, however, I heard subdued sounds of approach, and presently
the girl already mentioned, the tallest and gravest of the community,
and regarded by all as their mother, appeared from the wood, followed by
the multitude in jubilation manifest--but silent lest they should rouse
the sleeping giant at whose door I lay. She carried a boy-baby in her
arms: hitherto a girl-baby, apparently about a year old, had been the
youngest. Three of the bigger girls were her nurses, but they shared
their treasure with all the rest. Among the Little Ones, dolls were
unknown; the bigger had the smaller, and the smaller the still less, to
tend and play with.

Lona came to me and laid the infant in my arms. The baby opened his eyes
and looked at me, closed them again, and fell asleep.

“He loves you already!” said the girl.

“Where did you find him?” I asked.

“In the wood, of course,” she answered, her eyes beaming with delight,
“--where we always find them. Isn’t he a beauty? We’ve been out all
night looking for him. Sometimes it is not easy to find!”

“How do you know when there is one to find?” I asked.

“I cannot tell,” she replied. “Every one makes haste to tell the other,
but we never find out who told first. Sometimes I think one must have
said it asleep, and another heard it half-awake. When there is a baby in
the wood, no one can stop to ask questions; and when we have found it,
then it is too late.”

“Do more boy or girl babies come to the wood?”

“They don’t come to the wood; we go to the wood and find them.”

“Are there more boys or girls of you now?”

I had found that to ask precisely the same question twice, made them
knit their brows.

“I do not know,” she answered.

“You can count them, surely!”

“We never do that. We shouldn’t like to be counted.”

“Why?”

“It wouldn’t be smooth. We would rather not know.”

“Where do the babies come from first?”

“From the wood--always. There is no other place they can come from.”

She knew where they came from last, and thought nothing else was to be
known about their advent.

“How often do you find one?”

“Such a happy thing takes all the glad we’ve got, and we forget the last
time. You too are glad to have him--are you not, good giant?”

“Yes, indeed, I am!” I answered. “But how do you feed him?”

“I will show you,” she rejoined, and went away--to return directly with
two or three ripe little plums. She put one to the baby’s lips.

“He would open his mouth if he were awake,” she said, and took him in
her arms.

She squeezed a drop to the surface, and again held the fruit to the
baby’s lips. Without waking he began at once to suck it, and she went on
slowly squeezing until nothing but skin and stone were left.

“There!” she cried, in a tone of gentle triumph. “A big-apple world it
would be with nothing for the babies! We wouldn’t stop in it--would we,
darling? We would leave it to the bad giants!”

“But what if you let the stone into the baby’s mouth when you were
feeding him?” I said.

“No mother would do that,” she replied. “I shouldn’t be fit to have a
baby!”

I thought what a lovely woman she would grow. But what became of them
when they grew up? Where did they go? That brought me again to the
question--where did they come from first?

“Will you tell me where you lived before?” I said.

“Here,” she replied.

“Have you NEVER lived anywhere else?” I ventured.

“Never. We all came from the wood. Some think we dropped out of the
trees.”

“How is it there are so many of you quite little?”

“I don’t understand. Some are less and some are bigger. I am very big.”

“Baby will grow bigger, won’t he?”

“Of course he will!”

“And will you grow bigger?”

“I don’t think so. I hope not. I am the biggest. It frightens me
sometimes.”

“Why should it frighten you?”

She gave me no answer.

“How old are you?” I resumed.

“I do not know what you mean. We are all just that.”

“How big will the baby grow?”

“I cannot tell.--Some,” she added, with a trouble in her voice, “begin
to grow after we think they have stopped.--That is a frightful thing. We
don’t talk about it!”

“What makes it frightful?”

She was silent for a moment, then answered,

“We fear they may be beginning to grow giants.”

“Why should you fear that?”

“Because it is so terrible.--I don’t want to talk about it!”

She pressed the baby to her bosom with such an anxious look that I dared
not further question her.

Before long I began to perceive in two or three of the smaller children
some traces of greed and selfishness, and noted that the bigger girls
cast on these a not infrequent glance of anxiety.

None of them put a hand to my work: they would do nothing for the
giants! But they never relaxed their loving ministrations to me. They
would sing to me, one after another, for hours; climb the tree to reach
my mouth and pop fruit into it with their dainty little fingers; and
they kept constant watch against the approach of a giant.

Sometimes they would sit and tell me stories--mostly very childish, and
often seeming to mean hardly anything. Now and then they would call a
general assembly to amuse me. On one such occasion a moody little
fellow sang me a strange crooning song, with a refrain so pathetic that,
although unintelligible to me, it caused the tears to run down my face.
This phenomenon made those who saw it regard me with much perplexity.
Then first I bethought myself that I had not once, in that world, looked
on water, falling or lying or running. Plenty there had been in some
long vanished age--that was plain enough--but the Little Ones had never
seen any before they saw my tears! They had, nevertheless, it seemed,
some dim, instinctive perception of their origin; for a very small child
went up to the singer, shook his clenched pud in his face, and said
something like this: “‘Ou skeeze ze juice out of ze good giant’s
seeberries! Bad giant!”

“How is it,” I said one day to Lona, as she sat with the baby in her
arms at the foot of my tree, “that I never see any children among the
giants?”

She stared a little, as if looking in vain for some sense in the
question, then replied,

“They are giants; there are no little ones.”

“Have they never any children?” I asked.

“No; there are never any in the wood for them. They do not love them. If
they saw ours, they would stamp them.”

“Is there always the same number of the giants then? I thought, before I
had time to know better, that they were your fathers and mothers.”

She burst into the merriest laughter, and said,

“No, good giant; WE are THEIR firsters.”

But as she said it, the merriment died out of her, and she looked
scared.

I stopped working, and gazed at her, bewildered.

“How CAN that be?” I exclaimed.

“I do not say; I do not understand,” she answered. “But we were here and
they not. They go from us. I am sorry, but we cannot help it. THEY could
have helped it.”

“How long have you been here?” I asked, more and more puzzled--in the
hope of some side-light on the matter.

“Always, I think,” she replied. “I think somebody made us always.”

I turned to my scraping.

She saw I did not understand.

“The giants were not made always,” she resumed. “If a Little One doesn’t
care, he grows greedy, and then lazy, and then big, and then stupid, and
then bad. The dull creatures don’t know that they come from us. Very
few of them believe we are anywhere. They say NONSENSE!--Look at little
Blunty: he is eating one of their apples! He will be the next! Oh! oh!
he will soon be big and bad and ugly, and not know it!”

The child stood by himself a little way off, eating an apple nearly
as big as his head. I had often thought he did not look so good as the
rest; now he looked disgusting.

“I will take the horrid thing from him!” I cried.

“It is no use,” she answered sadly. “We have done all we can, and it
is too late! We were afraid he was growing, for he would not believe
anything told him; but when he refused to share his berries, and said
he had gathered them for himself, then we knew it! He is a glutton, and
there is no hope of him.--It makes me sick to see him eat!”

“Could not some of the boys watch him, and not let him touch the
poisonous things?”

“He may have them if he will: it is all one--to eat the apples, and to
be a boy that would eat them if he could. No; he must go to the giants!
He belongs to them. You can see how much bigger he is than when first
you came! He is bigger since yesterday.”

“He is as like that hideous green lump in his hand as boy could look!”

“It suits what he is making himself.”

“His head and it might change places!”

“Perhaps they do!”

“Does he want to be a giant?”

“He hates the giants, but he is making himself one all the same: he
likes their apples! Oh baby, baby, he was just such a darling as you
when we found him!”

“He will be very miserable when he finds himself a giant!”

“Oh, no; he will like it well enough! That is the worst of it.”

“Will he hate the Little Ones?”

“He will be like the rest; he will not remember us--most likely will
not believe there are Little Ones. He will not care; he will eat his
apples.”

“Do tell me how it will come about. I understand your world so little! I
come from a world where everything is different.”

“I do not know about WORLD. What is it? What more but a word in your
beautiful big mouth?--That makes it something!”

“Never mind about the word; tell me what next will happen to Blunty.”

“He will wake one morning and find himself a giant--not like you, good
giant, but like any other bad giant. You will hardly know him, but I
will tell you which. He will think he has been a giant always, and will
not know you, or any of us. The giants have lost themselves, Peony says,
and that is why they never smile. I wonder whether they are not glad
because they are bad, or bad because they are not glad. But they can’t
be glad when they have no babies! I wonder what BAD means, good giant!”

“I wish I knew no more about it than you!” I returned. “But I try to be
good, and mean to keep on trying.”

“So do I--and that is how I know you are good.”

A long pause followed.

“Then you do not know where the babies come from into the wood?” I said,
making one attempt more.

“There is nothing to know there,” she answered. “They are in the wood;
they grow there.”

“Then how is it you never find one before it is quite grown?” I asked.

She knitted her brows and was silent a moment:

“They’re not there till they’re finished,” she said.

“It is a pity the little sillies can’t speak till they’ve forgotten
everything they had to tell!” I remarked.

“Little Tolma, the last before this baby, looked as if she had something
to tell, when I found her under a beech-tree, sucking her thumb, but she
hadn’t. She only looked up at me--oh, so sweetly! SHE will never go
bad and grow big! When they begin to grow big they care for nothing but
bigness; and when they cannot grow any bigger, they try to grow fatter.
The bad giants are very proud of being fat.”

“So they are in my world,” I said; “only they do not say FAT there, they
say RICH.”

“In one of their houses,” continued Lona, “sits the biggest and fattest
of them--so proud that nobody can see him; and the giants go to his
house at certain times, and call out to him, and tell him how fat he is,
and beg him to make them strong to eat more and grow fat like him.”

The rumour at length reached my ears that Blunty had vanished. I saw a
few grave faces among the bigger ones, but he did not seem to be much
missed.

The next morning Lona came to me and whispered,

“Look! look there--by that quince-tree: that is the giant that was
Blunty!--Would you have known him?”

“Never,” I answered. “--But now you tell me, I could fancy it might be
Blunty staring through a fog! He DOES look stupid!”

“He is for ever eating those apples now!” she said. “That is what comes
of Little Ones that WON’T be little!”

“They call it growing-up in my world!” I said to myself. “If only she
would teach me to grow the other way, and become a Little One!--Shall I
ever be able to laugh like them?”

I had had the chance, and had flung it from me! Blunty and I were alike!
He did not know his loss, and I had to be taught mine!




CHAPTER XIV. A CRISIS

For a time I had no desire save to spend my life with the Little Ones.
But soon other thoughts and feelings began to influence me. First awoke
the vague sense that I ought to be doing something; that I was not
meant for the fattening of boors! Then it came to me that I was in a
marvellous world, of which it was assuredly my business to discover
the ways and laws; and that, if I would do anything in return for the
children’s goodness, I must learn more about them than they could tell
me, and to that end must be free. Surely, I thought, no suppression of
their growth can be essential to their loveliness and truth and purity!
Not in any world could the possibility exist of such a discord between
constitution and its natural outcome! Life and law cannot be so at
variance that perfection must be gained by thwarting development! But
the growth of the Little Ones WAS arrested! something interfered with
it: what was it? Lona seemed the eldest of them, yet not more than
fifteen, and had been long in charge of a multitude, in semblance and
mostly in behaviour merest children, who regarded her as their mother!
Were they growing at all? I doubted it. Of time they had scarcely the
idea; of their own age they knew nothing! Lona herself thought she had
lived always! Full of wisdom and empty of knowledge, she was at once
their Love and their Law! But what seemed to me her ignorance might in
truth be my own lack of insight! Her one anxiety plainly was, that her
Little Ones should not grow, and change into bad giants! Their “good
giant” was bound to do his best for them: without more knowledge of
their nature, and some knowledge of their history, he could do nothing,
and must therefore leave them! They would only be as they were
before; they had in no way become dependent on me; they were still
my protectors, I was not theirs; my presence but brought them more in
danger of their idiotic neighbours! I longed to teach them many things:
I must first understand more of those I would teach! Knowledge no
doubt made bad people worse, but it must make good people better! I was
convinced they would learn mathematics; and might they not be taught to
write down the dainty melodies they murmured and forgot?

The conclusion was, that I must rise and continue my travels, in the
hope of coming upon some elucidation of the fortunes and destiny of the
bewitching little creatures.

My design, however, would not so soon have passed into action, but for
what now occurred.

To prepare them for my temporary absence, I was one day telling them
while at work that I would long ago have left the bad giants, but that I
loved the Little Ones so much--when, as by one accord, they came rushing
and crowding upon me; they scrambled over each other and up the tree and
dropped on my head, until I was nearly smothered. With three very little
ones in my arms, one on each shoulder clinging to my neck, one standing
straight up on my head, four or five holding me fast by the legs, others
grappling my body and arms, and a multitude climbing and descending upon
these, I was helpless as one overwhelmed by lava. Absorbed in the merry
struggle, not one of them saw my tyrant coming until he was almost upon
me. With just one cry of “Take care, good giant!” they ran from me like
mice, they dropped from me like hedgehogs, they flew from me up the tree
like squirrels, and the same moment, sharp round the stem came the bad
giant, and dealt me such a blow on the head with a stick that I fell to
the ground. The children told me afterwards that they sent him “such
a many bumps of big apples and stones” that he was frightened, and ran
blundering home.

When I came to myself it was night. Above me were a few pale stars that
expected the moon. I thought I was alone. My head ached badly, and I was
terribly athirst.

I turned wearily on my side. The moment my ear touched the ground, I
heard the gushing and gurgling of water, and the soft noises made me
groan with longing. At once I was amid a multitude of silent children,
and delicious little fruits began to visit my lips. They came and came
until my thirst was gone.

Then I was aware of sounds I had never heard there before; the air was
full of little sobs.

I tried to sit up. A pile of small bodies instantly heaped itself at my
back. Then I struggled to my feet, with much pushing and pulling from
the Little Ones, who were wonderfully strong for their size.

“You must go away, good giant,” they said. “When the bad giants see you
hurt, they will all trample on you.”

“I think I must,” I answered.

“Go and grow strong, and come again,” they said.

“I will,” I replied--and sat down.

“Indeed you must go at once!” whispered Lona, who had been supporting
me, and now knelt beside me.

“I listened at his door,” said one of the bigger boys, “and heard the
bad giant say to his wife that he had found you idle, talking to a lot
of moles and squirrels, and when he beat you, they tried to kill him. He
said you were a wizard, and they must knock you, or they would have no
peace.”

“I will go at once,” I said, “and come back as soon as I have found out
what is wanted to make you bigger and stronger.”

“We don’t want to be bigger,” they answered, looking very serious.
“We WON’T grow bad giants!--We are strong now; you don’t know how much
strong!”

It was no use holding them out a prospect that had not any attraction
for them! I said nothing more, but rose and moved slowly up the slope of
the valley. At once they formed themselves into a long procession; some
led the way, some walked with me helping me, and the rest followed. They
kept feeding me as we went.

“You are broken,” they said, “and much red juice has run out of you: put
some in.”

When we reached the edge of the valley, there was the moon just lifting
her forehead over the rim of the horizon.

“She has come to take care of you, and show you the way,” said Lona.

I questioned those about me as we walked, and learned there was a great
place with a giant-girl for queen. When I asked if it was a city, they
said they did not know. Neither could they tell how far off, or in what
direction it was, or what was the giant-girl’s name; all they knew was,
that she hated the Little Ones, and would like to kill them, only she
could not find them. I asked how they knew that; Lona answered that she
had always known it. If the giant-girl came to look for them, they must
hide hard, she said. When I told them I should go and ask her why she
hated them, they cried out,

“No, no! she will kill you, good giant; she will kill you! She is an
awful bad-giant witch!”

I asked them where I was to go then. They told me that, beyond the
baby-forest, away where the moon came from, lay a smooth green country,
pleasant to the feet, without rocks or trees. But when I asked how I was
to set out for it.

“The moon will tell you, we think,” they said.

They were taking me up the second branch of the river bed: when they saw
that the moon had reached her height, they stopped to return.

“We have never gone so far from our trees before,” they said. “Now mind
you watch how you go, that you may see inside your eyes how to come back
to us.”

“And beware of the giant-woman that lives in the desert,” said one of
the bigger girls as they were turning, “I suppose you have heard of
her!”

“No,” I answered.

“Then take care not to go near her. She is called the Cat-woman. She is
awfully ugly--AND SCRATCHES.”

As soon as the bigger ones stopped, the smaller had begun to run back.
The others now looked at me gravely for a moment, and then walked slowly
away. Last to leave me, Lona held up the baby to be kissed, gazed in
my eyes, whispered, “The Cat-woman will not hurt YOU,” and went without
another word. I stood a while, gazing after them through the moonlight,
then turned and, with a heavy heart, began my solitary journey. Soon the
laughter of the Little Ones overtook me, like sheep-bells innumerable,
rippling the air, and echoing in the rocks about me. I turned again, and
again gazed after them: they went gamboling along, with never a care in
their sweet souls. But Lona walked apart with her baby.

Pondering as I went, I recalled many traits of my little friends.

Once when I suggested that they should leave the country of the bad
giants, and go with me to find another, they answered, “But that would
be to NOT ourselves!”--so strong in them was the love of place that
their country seemed essential to their very being! Without ambition or
fear, discomfort or greed, they had no motive to desire any change; they
knew of nothing amiss; and, except their babies, they had never had a
chance of helping any one but myself:--How were they to grow? But again,
Why should they grow? In seeking to improve their conditions, might
I not do them harm, and only harm? To enlarge their minds after the
notions of my world--might it not be to distort and weaken them? Their
fear of growth as a possible start for gianthood might be instinctive!

The part of philanthropist is indeed a dangerous one; and the man who
would do his neighbour good must first study how not to do him evil, and
must begin by pulling the beam out of his own eye.




CHAPTER XV. A STRANGE HOSTESS

I travelled on attended by the moon. As usual she was full--I had never
seen her other--and to-night as she sank I thought I perceived something
like a smile on her countenance.

When her under edge was a little below the horizon, there appeared in
the middle of her disc, as if it had been painted upon it, a cottage,
through the open door and window of which she shone; and with the sight
came the conviction that I was expected there. Almost immediately the
moon was gone, and the cottage had vanished; the night was rapidly
growing dark, and my way being across a close succession of small
ravines, I resolved to remain where I was and expect the morning. I
stretched myself, therefore, in a sandy hollow, made my supper off the
fruits the children had given me at parting, and was soon asleep.

I woke suddenly, saw above me constellations unknown to my former world,
and had lain for a while gazing at them, when I became aware of a figure
seated on the ground a little way from and above me. I was startled, as
one is on discovering all at once that he is not alone. The figure was
between me and the sky, so that I saw its outline well. From where I lay
low in the hollow, it seemed larger than human.

It moved its head, and then first I saw that its back was toward me.

“Will you not come with me?” said a sweet, mellow voice, unmistakably a
woman’s.

Wishing to learn more of my hostess,

“I thank you,” I replied, “but I am not uncomfortable here. Where would
you have me go? I like sleeping in the open air.”

“There is no hurt in the air,” she returned; “but the creatures that
roam the night in these parts are not such as a man would willingly have
about him while he sleeps.”

“I have not been disturbed,” I said.

“No; I have been sitting by you ever since you lay down.”

“That is very kind of you! How came you to know I was here? Why do you
show me such favour?”

“I saw you,” she answered, still with her back to me, “in the light of
the moon, just as she went down. I see badly in the day, but at night
perfectly. The shadow of my house would have hidden you, but both
its doors were open. I was out on the waste, and saw you go into this
hollow. You were asleep, however, before I could reach you, and I was
not willing to disturb you. People are frightened if I come on them
suddenly. They call me the Cat-woman. It is not my name.”

I remembered what the children had told me--that she was very ugly, and
scratched. But her voice was gentle, and its tone a little apologetic:
she could not be a bad giantess!

“You shall not hear it from me,” I answered, “Please tell me what I MAY
call you!”

“When you know me, call me by the name that seems to you to fit me,” she
replied: “that will tell me what sort you are. People do not often give
me the right one. It is well when they do.”

“I suppose, madam, you live in the cottage I saw in the heart of the
moon?”

“I do. I live there alone, except when I have visitors. It is a poor
place, but I do what I can for my guests, and sometimes their sleep is
sweet to them.”

Her voice entered into me, and made me feel strangely still.

“I will go with you, madam,” I said, rising.

She rose at once, and without a glance behind her led the way. I could
see her just well enough to follow. She was taller than myself, but not
so tall as I had thought her. That she never turned her face to me made
me curious--nowise apprehensive, her voice rang so true. But how was I
to fit her with a name who could not see her? I strove to get alongside
of her, but failed: when I quickened my pace she quickened hers, and
kept easily ahead of me. At length I did begin to grow a little afraid.
Why was she so careful not to be seen? Extraordinary ugliness would
account for it: she might fear terrifying me! Horror of an inconceivable
monstrosity began to assail me: was I following through the dark
an unheard of hideousness? Almost I repented of having accepted her
hospitality.

Neither spoke, and the silence grew unbearable. I MUST break it!

“I want to find my way,” I said, “to a place I have heard of, but whose
name I have not yet learned. Perhaps you can tell it me!”

“Describe it, then, and I will direct you. The stupid Bags know nothing,
and the careless little Lovers forget almost everything.”

“Where do those live?”

“You are just come from them!”

“I never heard those names before!”

“You would not hear them. Neither people knows its own name!”

“Strange!”

“Perhaps so! but hardly any one anywhere knows his own name! It would
make many a fine gentleman stare to hear himself addressed by what is
really his name!”

I held my peace, beginning to wonder what my name might be.

“What now do you fancy yours?” she went on, as if aware of my thought.
“But, pardon me, it is a matter of no consequence.”

I had actually opened my mouth to answer her, when I discovered that my
name was gone from me. I could not even recall the first letter of it!
This was the second time I had been asked my name and could not tell it!

“Never mind,” she said; “it is not wanted. Your real name, indeed, is
written on your forehead, but at present it whirls about so irregularly
that nobody can read it. I will do my part to steady it. Soon it will go
slower, and, I hope, settle at last.”

This startled me, and I was silent.

We had left the channels and walked a long time, but no sign of the
cottage yet appeared.

“The Little Ones told me,” I said at length, “of a smooth green country,
pleasant to the feet!”

“Yes?” she returned.

“They told me too of a girl giantess that was queen somewhere: is that
her country?”

“There is a city in that grassy land,” she replied, “where a woman is
princess. The city is called Bulika. But certainly the princess is not
a girl! She is older than this world, and came to it from yours--with
a terrible history, which is not over yet. She is an evil person, and
prevails much with the Prince of the Power of the Air. The people of
Bulika were formerly simple folk, tilling the ground and pasturing
sheep. She came among them, and they received her hospitably. She taught
them to dig for diamonds and opals and sell them to strangers, and made
them give up tillage and pasturage and build a city. One day they found
a huge snake and killed it; which so enraged her that she declared
herself their princess, and became terrible to them. The name of the
country at that time was THE LAND OF WATERS; for the dry channels,
of which you have crossed so many, were then overflowing with live
torrents; and the valley, where now the Bags and the Lovers have their
fruit-trees, was a lake that received a great part of them. But the
wicked princess gathered up in her lap what she could of the water over
the whole country, closed it in an egg, and carried it away. Her lap,
however, would not hold more than half of it; and the instant she was
gone, what she had not yet taken fled away underground, leaving the
country as dry and dusty as her own heart. Were it not for the waters
under it, every living thing would long ago have perished from it. For
where no water is, no rain falls; and where no rain falls, no springs
rise. Ever since then, the princess has lived in Bulika, holding the
inhabitants in constant terror, and doing what she can to keep them from
multiplying. Yet they boast and believe themselves a prosperous, and
certainly are a self-satisfied people--good at bargaining and buying,
good at selling and cheating; holding well together for a common
interest, and utterly treacherous where interests clash; proud of their
princess and her power, and despising every one they get the better of;
never doubting themselves the most honourable of all the nations, and
each man counting himself better than any other. The depth of their
worthlessness and height of their vainglory no one can understand who
has not been there to see, who has not learned to know the miserable
misgoverned and self-deceived creatures.”

“I thank you, madam. And now, if you please, will you tell me something
about the Little Ones--the Lovers? I long heartily to serve them. Who
and what are they? and how do they come to be there? Those children are
the greatest wonder I have found in this world of wonders.”

“In Bulika you may, perhaps, get some light on those matters. There is
an ancient poem in the library of the palace, I am told, which of course
no one there can read, but in which it is plainly written that after the
Lovers have gone through great troubles and learned their own name, they
will fill the land, and make the giants their slaves.”

“By that time they will have grown a little, will they not?” I said.

“Yes, they will have grown; yet I think too they will not have grown.
It is possible to grow and not to grow, to grow less and to grow bigger,
both at once--yes, even to grow by means of not growing!”

“Your words are strange, madam!” I rejoined. “But I have heard it said
that some words, because they mean more, appear to mean less!”

“That is true, and such words HAVE to be understood. It were well for
the princess of Bulika if she heard what the very silence of the land
is shouting in her ears all day long! But she is far too clever to
understand anything.”

“Then I suppose, when the little Lovers are grown, their land will have
water again?”

“Not exactly so: when they are thirsty enough, they will have water,
and when they have water, they will grow. To grow, they must have water.
And, beneath, it is flowing still.”

“I have heard that water twice,” I said; “--once when I lay down to wait
for the moon--and when I woke the sun was shining! and once when I
fell, all but killed by the bad giant. Both times came the voices of the
water, and healed me.”

The woman never turned her head, and kept always a little before me, but
I could hear every word that left her lips, and her voice much reminded
me of the woman’s in the house of death. Much of what she said, I did
not understand, and therefore cannot remember. But I forgot that I had
ever been afraid of her.

We went on and on, and crossed yet a wide tract of sand before reaching
the cottage. Its foundation stood in deep sand, but I could see that
it was a rock. In character the cottage resembled the sexton’s, but had
thicker walls. The door, which was heavy and strong, opened immediately
into a large bare room, which had two little windows opposite each
other, without glass. My hostess walked in at the open door out of which
the moon had looked, and going straight to the farthest corner, took a
long white cloth from the floor, and wound it about her head and face.
Then she closed the other door, in at which the moon had looked, trimmed
a small horn lantern that stood on the hearth, and turned to receive me.

“You are very welcome, Mr. Vane!” she said, calling me by the name I had
forgotten. “Your entertainment will be scanty, but, as the night is not
far spent, and the day not at hand, it is better you should be indoors.
Here you will be safe, and a little lack is not a great misery.”

“I thank you heartily, madam,” I replied. “But, seeing you know the name
I could not tell you, may I not now know yours?”

“My name is Mara,” she answered.

Then I remembered the sexton and the little black cat.

“Some people,” she went on, “take me for Lot’s wife, lamenting over
Sodom; and some think I am Rachel, weeping for her children; but I am
neither of those.”

“I thank you again, Mara,” I said. “--May I lie here on your floor till
the morning?”

“At the top of that stair,” she answered, “you will find a bed--on which
some have slept better than they expected, and some have waked all the
night and slept all the next day. It is not a very soft one, but it is
better than the sand--and there are no hyenas sniffing about it!”

The stair, narrow and steep, led straight up from the room to an
unceiled and unpartitioned garret, with one wide, low dormer window.
Close under the sloping roof stood a narrow bed, the sight of which with
its white coverlet made me shiver, so vividly it recalled the couches in
the chamber of death. On the table was a dry loaf, and beside it a cup
of cold water. To me, who had tasted nothing but fruit for months, they
were a feast.

“I must leave you in the dark,” my hostess called from the bottom of the
stair. “This lantern is all the light I have, and there are things to do
to-night.”

“It is of no consequence, thank you, madam,” I returned. “To eat and
drink, to lie down and sleep, are things that can be done in the dark.”

“Rest in peace,” she said.

I ate up the loaf, drank the water every drop, and laid myself down.
The bed was hard, the covering thin and scanty, and the night cold: I
dreamed that I lay in the chamber of death, between the warrior and the
lady with the healing wound.

I woke in the middle of the night, thinking I heard low noises of wild
animals.

“Creatures of the desert scenting after me, I suppose!” I said to
myself, and, knowing I was safe, would have gone to sleep again. But
that instant a rough purring rose to a howl under my window, and I
sprang from my bed to see what sort of beast uttered it.

Before the door of the cottage, in the full radiance of the moon, a tall
woman stood, clothed in white, with her back toward me. She was stooping
over a large white animal like a panther, patting and stroking it with
one hand, while with the other she pointed to the moon half-way up the
heaven, then drew a perpendicular line to the horizon. Instantly the
creature darted off with amazing swiftness in the direction indicated.
For a moment my eyes followed it, then sought the woman; but she was
gone, and not yet had I seen her face! Again I looked after the animal,
but whether I saw or only fancied a white speck in the distance, I could
not tell.--What did it mean? What was the monster-cat sent off to do? I
shuddered, and went back to my bed. Then I remembered that, when I lay
down in the sandy hollow outside, the moon was setting; yet here
she was, a few hours after, shining in all her glory! “Everything is
uncertain here,” I said to myself, “--even the motions of the heavenly
bodies!”

I learned afterward that there were several moons in the service of this
world, but the laws that ruled their times and different orbits I failed
to discover.

Again I fell asleep, and slept undisturbed.

When I went down in the morning, I found bread and water waiting me, the
loaf so large that I ate only half of it. My hostess sat muffled beside
me while I broke my fast, and except to greet me when I entered, never
opened her mouth until I asked her to instruct me how to arrive at
Bulika. She then told me to go up the bank of the river-bed until it
disappeared; then verge to the right until I came to a forest--in which
I might spend a night, but which I must leave with my face to the rising
moon. Keeping in the same direction, she said, until I reached a running
stream, I must cross that at right angles, and go straight on until I
saw the city on the horizon.

I thanked her, and ventured the remark that, looking out of the window
in the night, I was astonished to see her messenger understand her so
well, and go so straight and so fast in the direction she had indicated.

“If I had but that animal of yours to guide me--” I went on, hoping to
learn something of its mission, but she interrupted me, saying,

“It was to Bulika she went--the shortest way.”

“How wonderfully intelligent she looked!”

“Astarte knows her work well enough to be sent to do it,” she answered.

“Have you many messengers like her?”

“As many as I require.”

“Are they hard to teach?”

“They need no teaching. They are all of a certain breed, but not one of
the breed is like another. Their origin is so natural it would seem to
you incredible.”

“May I not know it?”

“A new one came to me last night--from your head while you slept.”

I laughed.

“All in this world seem to love mystery!” I said to myself. “Some chance
word of mine suggested an idea--and in this form she embodies the small
fact!”

“Then the creature is mine!” I cried.

“Not at all!” she answered. “That only can be ours in whose existence
our will is a factor.”

“Ha! a metaphysician too!” I remarked inside, and was silent.

“May I take what is left of the loaf?” I asked presently.

“You will want no more to-day,” she replied.

“To-morrow I may!” I rejoined.

She rose and went to the door, saying as she went,

“It has nothing to do with to-morrow--but you may take it if you will.”

She opened the door, and stood holding it. I rose, taking up the
bread--but lingered, much desiring to see her face.

“Must I go, then?” I asked.

“No one sleeps in my house two nights together!” she answered.

“I thank you, then, for your hospitality, and bid you farewell!” I said,
and turned to go.

“The time will come when you must house with me many days and many
nights,” she murmured sadly through her muffling.

“Willingly,” I replied.

“Nay, NOT willingly!” she answered.

I said to myself that she was right--I would not willingly be her guest
a second time! but immediately my heart rebuked me, and I had scarce
crossed the threshold when I turned again.

She stood in the middle of the room; her white garments lay like foamy
waves at her feet, and among them the swathings of her face: it was
lovely as a night of stars. Her great gray eyes looked up to heaven;
tears were flowing down her pale cheeks. She reminded me not a little
of the sexton’s wife, although the one looked as if she had not wept for
thousands of years, and the other as if she wept constantly behind the
wrappings of her beautiful head. Yet something in the very eyes that
wept seemed to say, “Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in
the morning.”

I had bowed my head for a moment, about to kneel and beg her
forgiveness, when, looking up in the act, I found myself outside a
doorless house. I went round and round it, but could find no entrance.

I had stopped under one of the windows, on the point of calling aloud my
repentant confession, when a sudden wailing, howling scream invaded my
ears, and my heart stood still. Something sprang from the window above
my head, and lighted beyond me. I turned, and saw a large gray cat, its
hair on end, shooting toward the river-bed. I fell with my face in the
sand, and seemed to hear within the house the gentle sobbing of one who
suffered but did not repent.




CHAPTER XVI. A GRUESOME DANCE

I rose to resume my journey, and walked many a desert mile. How I longed
for a mountain, or even a tall rock, from whose summit I might see
across the dismal plain or the dried-up channels to some bordering hope!
Yet what could such foresight have availed me? That which is within a
man, not that which lies beyond his vision, is the main factor in what
is about to befall him: the operation upon him is the event. Foreseeing
is not understanding, else surely the prophecy latent in man would come
oftener to the surface!

The sun was half-way to the horizon when I saw before me a rugged rocky
ascent; but ere I reached it my desire to climb was over, and I longed
to lie down. By that time the sun was almost set, and the air had begun
to grow dark. At my feet lay a carpet of softest, greenest moss, couch
for a king: I threw myself upon it, and weariness at once began to ebb,
for, the moment my head was down, the third time I heard below me many
waters, playing broken airs and ethereal harmonies with the stones of
their buried channels. Loveliest chaos of music-stuff the harp aquarian
kept sending up to my ears! What might not a Händel have done with that
ever-recurring gurgle and bell-like drip, to the mingling and mutually
destructive melodies their common refrain!

As I lay listening, my eyes went wandering up and down the rocky slope
abrupt above me, reading on its face the record that down there, ages
ago, rushed a cataract, filling the channels that had led me to its
foot. My heart swelled at the thought of the splendid tumult, where
the waves danced revelling in helpless fall, to mass their music in one
organ-roar below. But soon the hidden brooks lulled me to sleep, and
their lullabies mingled with my dreams.

I woke before the sun, and eagerly climbed to see what lay beyond. Alas,
nothing but a desert of finest sand! Not a trace was left of the river
that had plunged adown the rocks! The powdery drift had filled its
course to the level of the dreary expanse! As I looked back I saw that
the river had divided into two branches as it fell, that whose bank I
had now followed to the foot of the rocky scaur, and that which first I
crossed to the Evil Wood. The wood I descried between the two on the
far horizon. Before me and to the left, the desert stretched beyond my
vision, but far to the right I could see a lift in the sky-line, giving
hope of the forest to which my hostess had directed me.

I sat down, and sought in my pocket the half-loaf I had brought with
me--then first to understand what my hostess had meant concerning it.
Verily the bread was not for the morrow: it had shrunk and hardened to a
stone! I threw it away, and set out again.

About noon I came to a few tamarisk and juniper trees, and then to a few
stunted firs. As I went on, closer thickets and larger firs met me, and
at length I was in just such a forest of pines and other trees as that
in which the Little Ones found their babies, and believed I had returned
upon a farther portion of the same. But what mattered WHERE while
EVERYWHERE was the same as NOWHERE! I had not yet, by doing something in
it, made ANYWHERE into a place! I was not yet alive; I was only dreaming
I lived! I was but a consciousness with an outlook! Truly I had been
nothing else in the world I had left, but now I knew the fact! I said
to myself that if in this forest I should catch the faint gleam of the
mirror, I would turn far aside lest it should entrap me unawares, and
give me back to my old existence: here I might learn to be something by
doing something! I could not endure the thought of going back, with so
many beginnings and not an end achieved. The Little Ones would meet what
fate was appointed them; the awful witch I should never meet; the dead
would ripen and arise without me; I should but wake to know that I had
dreamed, and that all my going was nowhither! I would rather go on and
on than come to such a close!

I went deeper into the wood: I was weary, and would rest in it.

The trees were now large, and stood in regular, almost geometric,
fashion, with roomy spaces between. There was little undergrowth, and
I could see a long way in every direction. The forest was like a great
church, solemn and silent and empty, for I met nothing on two feet or
four that day. Now and then, it is true, some swift thing, and again
some slow thing, would cross the space on which my eye happened that
moment to settle; but it was always at some distance, and only enhanced
the sense of wideness and vacancy. I heard a few birds, and saw plenty
of butterflies, some of marvellously gorgeous colouring and combinations
of colour, some of a pure and dazzling whiteness.

Coming to a spot where the pines stood farther apart and gave room for
flowering shrubs, and hoping it a sign of some dwelling near, I took the
direction where yet more and more roses grew, for I was hungry after the
voice and face of my kind--after any live soul, indeed, human or not,
which I might in some measure understand. What a hell of horror, I
thought, to wander alone, a bare existence never going out of itself,
never widening its life in another life, but, bound with the cords of
its poor peculiarities, lying an eternal prisoner in the dungeon of its
own being! I began to learn that it was impossible to live for oneself
even, save in the presence of others--then, alas, fearfully possible!
evil was only through good! selfishness but a parasite on the tree
of life! In my own world I had the habit of solitary song; here not a
crooning murmur ever parted my lips! There I sang without thinking; here
I thought without singing! there I had never had a bosom-friend; here
the affection of an idiot would be divinely welcome! “If only I had a
dog to love!” I sighed--and regarded with wonder my past self, which
preferred the company of book or pen to that of man or woman; which, if
the author of a tale I was enjoying appeared, would wish him away that I
might return to his story. I had chosen the dead rather than the living,
the thing thought rather than the thing thinking! “Any man,” I said
now, “is more than the greatest of books!” I had not cared for my
live brothers and sisters, and now I was left without even the dead to
comfort me!

The wood thinned yet more, and the pines grew yet larger, sending up
huge stems, like columns eager to support the heavens. More trees of
other kinds appeared; the forest was growing richer! The roses wore now
trees, and their flowers of astonishing splendour.

Suddenly I spied what seemed a great house or castle; but its forms were
so strangely indistinct, that I could not be certain it was more than a
chance combination of tree-shapes. As I drew nearer, its lines yet held
together, but neither they nor the body of it grew at all more definite;
and when at length I stood in front of it, I remained as doubtful of its
nature as before. House or castle habitable, it certainly was not; it
might be a ruin overgrown with ivy and roses! Yet of building hid in the
foliage, not the poorest wall-remnant could I discern. Again and again
I seemed to descry what must be building, but it always vanished before
closer inspection. Could it be, I pondered, that the ivy had embraced a
huge edifice and consumed it, and its interlaced branches retained the
shapes of the walls it had assimilated?--I could be sure of nothing
concerning the appearance.

Before me was a rectangular vacancy--the ghost of a doorway without a
door: I stepped through it, and found myself in an open space like a
great hall, its floor covered with grass and flowers, its walls and roof
of ivy and vine, mingled with roses.

There could be no better place in which to pass the night! I gathered
a quantity of withered leaves, laid them in a corner, and threw myself
upon them. A red sunset filled the hall, the night was warm, and my
couch restful; I lay gazing up at the live ceiling, with its tracery
of branches and twigs, its clouds of foliage, and peeping patches of
loftier roof. My eyes went wading about as if tangled in it, until the
sun was down, and the sky beginning to grow dark. Then the red roses
turned black, and soon the yellow and white alone were visible. When
they vanished, the stars came instead, hanging in the leaves like
live topazes, throbbing and sparkling and flashing many colours: I was
canopied with a tree from Aladdin’s cave!

Then I discovered that it was full of nests, whence tiny heads,
nearly indistinguishable, kept popping out with a chirp or two, and
disappearing again. For a while there were rustlings and stirrings and
little prayers; but as the darkness grew, the small heads became still,
and at last every feathered mother had her brood quiet under her wings,
the talk in the little beds was over, and God’s bird-nursery at rest
beneath the waves of sleep. Once more a few flutterings made me look
up: an owl went sailing across. I had only a glimpse of him, but several
times felt the cool wafture of his silent wings. The mother birds did
not move again; they saw that he was looking for mice, not children.

About midnight I came wide awake, roused by a revelry, whose noises
were yet not loud. Neither were they distant; they were close to me, but
attenuate. My eyes were so dazzled, however, that for a while I could
see nothing; at last they came to themselves.

I was lying on my withered leaves in the corner of a splendid hall.
Before me was a crowd of gorgeously dressed men and gracefully robed
women, none of whom seemed to see me. In dance after dance they vaguely
embodied the story of life, its meetings, its passions, its partings. A
student of Shakspere, I had learned something of every dance alluded
to in his plays, and hence partially understood several of those I
now saw--the minuet, the pavin, the hey, the coranto, the lavolta. The
dancers were attired in fashion as ancient as their dances.

A moon had risen while I slept, and was shining through the
countless-windowed roof; but her light was crossed by so many shadows
that at first I could distinguish almost nothing of the faces of
the multitude; I could not fail, however, to perceive that there was
something odd about them: I sat up to see them better.--Heavens! could
I call them faces? They were skull fronts!--hard, gleaming bone, bare
jaws, truncated noses, lipless teeth which could no more take part in
any smile! Of these, some flashed set and white and murderous; others
were clouded with decay, broken and gapped, coloured of the earth in
which they seemed so long to have lain! Fearfuller yet, the eye-sockets
were not empty; in each was a lidless living eye! In those wrecks of
faces, glowed or flashed or sparkled eyes of every colour, shape, and
expression. The beautiful, proud eye, dark and lustrous, condescending
to whatever it rested upon, was the more terrible; the lovely,
languishing eye, the more repulsive; while the dim, sad eyes, less at
variance with their setting, were sad exceedingly, and drew the heart in
spite of the horror out of which they gazed.

I rose and went among the apparitions, eager to understand something
of their being and belongings. Were they souls, or were they and their
rhythmic motions but phantasms of what had been? By look nor by gesture,
not by slightest break in the measure, did they show themselves aware
of me; I was not present to them: how much were they in relation to each
other? Surely they saw their companions as I saw them! Or was each only
dreaming itself and the rest? Did they know each how they appeared to
the others--a death with living eyes? Had they used their faces, not for
communication, not to utter thought and feeling, not to share existence
with their neighbours, but to appear what they wished to appear, and
conceal what they were? and, having made their faces masks, were they
therefore deprived of those masks, and condemned to go without faces
until they repented?

“How long must they flaunt their facelessness in faceless eyes?” I
wondered. “How long will the frightful punition endure? Have they at
length begun to love and be wise? Have they yet yielded to the shame
that has found them?”

I heard not a word, saw not a movement of one naked mouth. Were they
because of lying bereft of speech? With their eyes they spoke as if
longing to be understood: was it truth or was it falsehood that spoke
in their eyes? They seemed to know one another: did they see one skull
beautiful, and another plain? Difference must be there, and they had had
long study of skulls!

My body was to theirs no obstacle: was I a body, and were they but
forms? or was I but a form, and were they bodies? The moment one of the
dancers came close against me, that moment he or she was on the other
side of me, and I could tell, without seeing, which, whether man or
woman, had passed through my house.

On many of the skulls the hair held its place, and however dressed, or
in itself however beautiful, to my eyes looked frightful on the bones
of the forehead and temples. In such case, the outer ear often remained
also, and at its tip, the jewel of the ear as Sidney calls it,
would hang, glimmering, gleaming, or sparkling, pearl or opal or
diamond--under the night of brown or of raven locks, the sunrise
of golden ripples, or the moonshine of pale, interclouded, fluffy
cirri--lichenous all on the ivory-white or damp-yellow naked bone. I
looked down and saw the daintily domed instep; I looked up and saw the
plump shoulders basing the spring of the round full neck--which withered
at half-height to the fluted shaft of a gibbose cranium.

The music became wilder, the dance faster and faster; eyes flared and
flashed, jewels twinkled and glittered, casting colour and fire on the
pallid grins that glode through the hall, weaving a ghastly rhythmic
woof in intricate maze of multitudinous motion, when sudden came a
pause, and every eye turned to the same spot:--in the doorway stood a
woman, perfect in form, in holding, and in hue, regarding the company
as from the pedestal of a goddess, while the dancers stood “like one
forbid,” frozen to a new death by the vision of a life that killed.
“Dead things, I live!” said her scornful glance. Then, at once, like
leaves in which an instant wind awakes, they turned each to another, and
broke afresh into melodious consorted motion, a new expression in
their eyes, late solitary, now filled with the interchange of a common
triumph. “Thou also,” they seemed to say, “wilt soon become weak as
we! thou wilt soon become like unto us!” I turned mine again to the
woman--and saw upon her side a small dark shadow.

She had seen the change in the dead stare; she looked down; she
understood the talking eyes; she pressed both her lovely hands on the
shadow, gave a smothered cry, and fled. The birds moved rustling in
their nests, and a flash of joy lit up the eyes of the dancers, when
suddenly a warm wind, growing in strength as it swept through the place,
blew out every light. But the low moon yet glimmered on the horizon with
“sick assay” to shine, and a turbid radiance yet gleamed from so many
eyes, that I saw well enough what followed. As if each shape had been
but a snow-image, it began to fall to pieces, ruining in the warm wind.
In papery flakes the flesh peeled from its bones, dropping like soiled
snow from under its garments; these fell fluttering in rags and strips,
and the whole white skeleton, emerging from garment and flesh together,
stood bare and lank amid the decay that littered the floor. A faint
rattling shiver went through the naked company; pair after pair
the lamping eyes went out; and the darkness grew round me with the
loneliness. For a moment the leaves were still swept fluttering all one
way; then the wind ceased, and the owl floated silent through the silent
night.

Not for a moment had I been afraid. It is true that whoever would cross
the threshold of any world, must leave fear behind him; but, for myself,
I could claim no part in its absence. No conscious courage was operant
in me; simply, I was not afraid. I neither knew why I was not afraid,
nor wherefore I might have been afraid. I feared not even fear--which of
all dangers is the most dangerous.

I went out into the wood, at once to resume my journey. Another moon was
rising, and I turned my face toward it.




CHAPTER XVII. A GROTESQUE TRAGEDY

I had not gone ten paces when I caught sight of a strange-looking
object, and went nearer to know what it might be. I found it a
mouldering carriage of ancient form, ruinous but still upright on its
heavy wheels. On each side of the pole, still in its place, lay the
skeleton of a horse; from their two grim white heads ascended the
shrivelled reins to the hand of the skeleton-coachman seated on his
tattered hammer-cloth; both doors had fallen away; within sat two
skeletons, each leaning back in its corner.

Even as I looked, they started awake, and with a cracking rattle of
bones, each leaped from the door next it. One fell and lay; the other
stood a moment, its structure shaking perilously; then with difficulty,
for its joints were stiff, crept, holding by the back of the carriage,
to the opposite side, the thin leg-bones seeming hardly strong enough to
carry its weight, where, kneeling by the other, it sought to raise it,
almost falling itself again in the endeavour.

The prostrate one rose at length, as by a sudden effort, to the sitting
posture. For a few moments it turned its yellowish skull to this side
and that; then, heedless of its neighbour, got upon its feet by grasping
the spokes of the hind wheel. Half erected thus, it stood with its back
to the other, both hands holding one of its knee-joints. With little
less difficulty and not a few contortions, the kneeling one rose next,
and addressed its companion.

“Have you hurt yourself, my lord?” it said, in a voice that sounded
far-off, and ill-articulated as if blown aside by some spectral wind.

“Yes, I have,” answered the other, in like but rougher tone. “You would
do nothing to help me, and this cursed knee is out!”

“I did my best, my lord.”

“No doubt, my lady, for it was bad! I thought I should never find my
feet again!--But, bless my soul, madam! are you out in your bones?”

She cast a look at herself.

“I have nothing else to be out in,” she returned; “--and YOU at least
cannot complain! But what on earth does it mean? Am I dreaming?”

“YOU may be dreaming, madam--I cannot tell; but this knee of mine
forbids me the grateful illusion.--Ha! I too, I perceive, have nothing
to walk in but bones!--Not so unbecoming to a man, however! I trust to
goodness they are not MY bones! every one aches worse than another, and
this loose knee worst of all! The bed must have been damp--and I too
drunk to know it!”

“Probably, my lord of Cokayne!”

“What! what!--You make me think I too am dreaming--aches and all! How
do YOU know the title my roistering bullies give me? I don’t remember
you!--Anyhow, you have no right to take liberties! My name is--I am
lord----tut, tut! What do you call me when I’m--I mean when you are
sober? I cannot--at the moment,--Why, what IS my name?--I must have been
VERY drunk when I went to bed! I often am!”

“You come so seldom to mine, that I do not know, my lord; but I may take
your word for THAT!”

“I hope so!”

“--if for nothing else!” “Hoity toity! I never told you a lie in my
life!”

“You never told me anything but lies.”

“Upon my honour!--Why, I never saw the woman before!”

“You knew me well enough to lie to, my lord!”

“I do seem to begin to dream I have met you before, but, upon my oath,
there is nothing to know you by! Out of your clothes, who is to tell
who you may not be?--One thing I MAY swear--that I never saw you so much
undressed before!--By heaven, I have no recollection of you!”

“I am glad to hear it: my recollections of you are the less
distasteful!--Good morning, my lord!”

She turned away, hobbled, clacking, a few paces, and stood again.

“You are just as heartless as--as--any other woman, madam!--Where in
this hell of a place shall I find my valet?--What was the cursed name I
used to call the fool?”

He turned his bare noddle this way and that on its creaking pivot, still
holding his knee with both hands.

“I will be your valet for once, my lord,” said the lady, turning once
more to him. “--What can I do for you? It is not easy to tell!”

“Tie my leg on, of course, you fool! Can’t you see it is all but off?
Heigho, my dancing days!”

She looked about with her eyeless sockets and found a piece of fibrous
grass, with which she proceeded to bind together the adjoining parts
that had formed the knee. When she had done, he gave one or two
carefully tentative stamps.

“You used to stamp rather differently, my lord!” she said, as she rose
from her knees.

“Eh? what!--Now I look at you again, it seems to me I used to hate
you!--Eh?”

“Naturally, my lord! You hated a good many people!--your wife, of
course, among the rest!”

“Ah, I begin, I be-gin---- But--I must have been a long time
somewhere!--I really forget!--There! your damned, miserable bit of grass
is breaking!--We used to get on PRETTY well together--eh?”

“Not that I remember, my lord. The only happy moments I had in your
company were scattered over the first week of our marriage.”

“Was that the way of it? Ha! ha!--Well, it’s over now, thank goodness!”

“I wish I could believe it! Why were we sitting there in that carriage
together? It wakes apprehension!”

“I think we were divorced, my lady!”

“Hardly enough: we are still together!”

“A sad truth, but capable of remedy: the forest seems of some extent!”

“I doubt! I doubt!”

“I am sorry I cannot think of a compliment to pay you--without lying,
that is. To judge by your figure and complexion you have lived hard
since I saw you last! I cannot surely be QUITE so naked as your
ladyship!--I beg your pardon, madam! I trust you will take it I am
but jesting in a dream! It is of no consequence, however; dreaming
or waking, all’s one--all merest appearance! You can’t be certain of
anything, and that’s as good as knowing there is nothing! Life may teach
any fool that!”

“It has taught me the fool I was to love you!”

“You were not the only fool to do that! Women had a trick of falling in
love with me:--I had forgotten that you were one of them!” “I did love
you, my lord--a little--at one time!”

“Ah, there was your mistake, my lady! You should have loved me much,
loved me devotedly, loved me savagely--loved me eternally! Then I should
have tired of you the sooner, and not hated you so much afterward!--But
let bygones be bygones!--WHERE are we? Locality is the question! To be
or not to be, is NOT the question!”

“We are in the other world, I presume!”

“Granted!--but in which or what sort of other world? This can’t be
hell!”

“It must: there’s marriage in it! You and I are damned in each other.”

“Then I’m not like Othello, damned in a fair wife!--Oh, I remember my
Shakspeare, madam!”

She picked up a broken branch that had fallen into a bush, and steadying
herself with it, walked away, tossing her little skull.

“Give that stick to me,” cried her late husband; “I want it more than
you.”

She returned him no answer.

“You mean to make me beg for it?”

“Not at all, my lord. I mean to keep it,” she replied, continuing her
slow departure.

“Give it me at once; I mean to have it! I require it.”

“Unfortunately, I think I require it myself!” returned the lady, walking
a little quicker, with a sharper cracking of her joints and clinking of
her bones.

He started to follow her, but nearly fell: his knee-grass had burst, and
with an oath he stopped, grasping his leg again.

“Come and tie it up properly!” he would have thundered, but he only
piped and whistled!

She turned and looked at him.

“Come and tie it up instantly!” he repeated.

She walked a step or two farther from him.

“I swear I will not touch you!” he cried.

“Swear on, my lord! there is no one here to believe you. But, pray, do
not lose your temper, or you will shake yourself to pieces, and where to
find string enough to tie up all your crazy joints, is more than I can
tell.”

She came back, and knelt once more at his side--first, however, laying
the stick in dispute beyond his reach and within her own.

The instant she had finished retying the joint, he made a grab at her,
thinking, apparently, to seize her by the hair; but his hard fingers
slipped on the smooth poll.

“Disgusting!” he muttered, and laid hold of her upper arm-bone.

“You will break it!” she said, looking up from her knees.

“I will, then!” he answered, and began to strain at it.

“I shall not tie your leg again the next time it comes loose!” she
threatened.

He gave her arm a vicious twist, but happily her bones were in better
condition than his. She stretched her other hand toward the broken
branch.

“That’s right: reach me the stick!” he grinned.

She brought it round with such a swing that one of the bones of the
sounder leg snapped. He fell, choking with curses. The lady laughed.

“Now you will have to wear splints always!” she said; “such dry bones
never mend!”

“You devil!” he cried.

“At your service, my lord! Shall I fetch you a couple of wheel-spokes?
Neat--but heavy, I fear!”

He turned his bone-face aside, and did not answer, but lay and groaned.
I marvelled he had not gone to pieces when he fell. The lady rose and
walked away--not all ungracefully, I thought.

“What can come of it?” I said to myself. “These are too wretched for any
world, and this cannot be hell, for the Little Ones are in it, and
the sleepers too! What can it all mean? Can things ever come right for
skeletons?”

“There are words too big for you and me: ALL is one of them, and EVER is
another,” said a voice near me which I knew.

I looked about, but could not see the speaker.

“You are not in hell,” it resumed. “Neither am I in hell. But those
skeletons are in hell!”

Ere he ended I caught sight of the raven on the bough of a beech, right
over my head. The same moment he left it, and alighting on the ground,
stood there, the thin old man of the library, with long nose and long
coat.

“The male was never a gentleman,” he went on, “and in the bony stage
of retrogression, with his skeleton through his skin, and his character
outside his manners, does not look like one. The female is less vulgar,
and has a little heart. But, the restraints of society removed, you see
them now just as they are and always were!”

“Tell me, Mr. Raven, what will become of them,” I said.

“We shall see,” he replied. “In their day they were the handsomest
couple at court; and now, even in their dry bones, they seem to regard
their former repute as an inalienable possession; to see their faces,
however, may yet do something for them! They felt themselves rich too
while they had pockets, but they have already begun to feel rather
pinched! My lord used to regard my lady as a worthless encumbrance, for
he was tired of her beauty and had spent her money; now he needs her
to cobble his joints for him! These changes have roots of hope in them.
Besides, they cannot now get far away from each other, and they see none
else of their own kind: they must at last grow weary of their mutual
repugnance, and begin to love one another! for love, not hate, is
deepest in what Love ‘loved into being.’”

“I saw many more of their kind an hour ago, in the hall close by!” I
said.

“Of their kind, but not of their sort,” he answered. “For many years
these will see none such as you saw last night. Those are centuries
in advance of these. You saw that those could even dress themselves a
little! It is true they cannot yet retain their clothes so long as they
would--only, at present, for a part of the night; but they are pretty
steadily growing more capable, and will by and by develop faces; for
every grain of truthfulness adds a fibre to the show of their humanity.
Nothing but truth can appear; and whatever is must seem.”

“Are they upheld by this hope?” I asked.

“They are upheld by hope, but they do not in the least know their hope;
to understand it, is yet immeasurably beyond them,” answered Mr. Raven.

His unexpected appearance had caused me no astonishment. I was like a
child, constantly wondering, and surprised at nothing.

“Did you come to find me, sir?” I asked.

“Not at all,” he replied. “I have no anxiety about you. Such as you
always come back to us.”

“Tell me, please, who am I such as?” I said.

“I cannot make my friend the subject of conversation,” he answered, with
a smile.

“But when that friend is present!” I urged.

“I decline the more strongly,” he rejoined.

“But when that friend asks you!” I persisted.

“Then most positively I refuse,” he returned.

“Why?”

“Because he and I would be talking of two persons as if they were one
and the same. Your consciousness of yourself and my knowledge of you are
far apart!”

The lapels of his coat flew out, and the lappets lifted, and I thought
the metamorphosis of HOMO to CORVUS was about to take place before my
eyes. But the coat closed again in front of him, and he added, with
seeming inconsequence,

“In this world never trust a person who has once deceived you. Above
all, never do anything such a one may ask you to do.”

“I will try to remember,” I answered; “--but I may forget!”

“Then some evil that is good for you will follow.”

“And if I remember?”

“Some evil that is not good for you, will not follow.”

The old man seemed to sink to the ground, and immediately I saw the
raven several yards from me, flying low and fast.




CHAPTER XVIII. DEAD OR ALIVE?

I went walking on, still facing the moon, who, not yet high, was staring
straight into the forest. I did not know what ailed her, but she
was dark and dented, like a battered disc of old copper, and looked
dispirited and weary. Not a cloud was nigh to keep her company, and the
stars were too bright for her. “Is this going to last for ever?” she
seemed to say. She was going one way and I was going the other, yet
through the wood we went a long way together. We did not commune much,
for my eyes were on the ground; but her disconsolate look was fixed on
me: I felt without seeing it. A long time we were together, I and the
moon, walking side by side, she the dull shine, and I the live shadow.

Something on the ground, under a spreading tree, caught my eye with its
whiteness, and I turned toward it. Vague as it was in the shadow of
the foliage, it suggested, as I drew nearer, a human body. “Another
skeleton!” I said to myself, kneeling and laying my hand upon it. A body
it was, however, and no skeleton, though as nearly one as body could
well be. It lay on its side, and was very cold--not cold like a stone,
but cold like that which was once alive, and is alive no more. The
closer I looked at it, the oftener I touched it, the less it seemed
possible it should be other than dead. For one bewildered moment, I
fancied it one of the wild dancers, a ghostly Cinderella, perhaps,
that had lost her way home, and perished in the strange night of an
out-of-door world! It was quite naked, and so worn that, even in the
shadow, I could, peering close, have counted without touching them,
every rib in its side. All its bones, indeed, were as visible as if
tight-covered with only a thin elastic leather. Its beautiful yet
terrible teeth, unseemly disclosed by the retracted lips, gleamed
ghastly through the dark. Its hair was longer than itself, thick and
very fine to the touch, and black as night.

It was the body of a tall, probably graceful woman.--How had she come
there? Not of herself, and already in such wasted condition, surely! Her
strength must have failed her; she had fallen, and lain there until she
died of hunger! But how, even so, could she be thus emaciated? And how
came she to be naked? Where were the savages to strip and leave her?
or what wild beasts would have taken her garments? That her body should
have been left was not wonderful!

I rose to my feet, stood, and considered. I must not, could not let her
lie exposed and forsaken! Natural reverence forbade it. Even the
garment of a woman claims respect; her body it were impossible to leave
uncovered! Irreverent eyes might look on it! Brutal claws might toss
it about! Years would pass ere the friendly rains washed it into the
soil!--But the ground was hard, almost solid with interlacing roots, and
I had but my bare hands!

At first it seemed plain that she had not long been dead: there was not
a sign of decay about her! But then what had the slow wasting of life
left of her to decay?

Could she be still alive? Might she not? What if she were! Things went
very strangely in this strange world! Even then there would be little
chance of bringing her back, but I must know she was dead before I
buried her!

As I left the forest-hall, I had spied in the doorway a bunch of ripe
grapes, and brought it with me, eating as I came: a few were yet left on
the stalk, and their juice might possibly revive her! Anyhow it was all
I had with which to attempt her rescue! The mouth was happily a little
open; but the head was in such an awkward position that, to move the
body, I passed my arm under the shoulder on which it lay, when I found
the pine-needles beneath it warm: she could not have been any time dead,
and MIGHT still be alive, though I could discern no motion of the heart,
or any indication that she breathed! One of her hands was clenched hard,
apparently inclosing something small. I squeezed a grape into her mouth,
but no swallowing followed.

To do for her all I could, I spread a thick layer of pine-needles and
dry leaves, laid one of my garments over it, warm from my body, lifted
her upon it, and covered her with my clothes and a great heap of leaves:
I would save the little warmth left in her, hoping an increase to it
when the sun came back. Then I tried another grape, but could perceive
no slightest movement of mouth or throat.

“Doubt,” I said to myself, “may be a poor encouragement to do anything,
but it is a bad reason for doing nothing.” So tight was the skin upon
her bones that I dared not use friction.

I crept into the heap of leaves, got as close to her as I could, and
took her in my arms. I had not much heat left in me, but what I had
I would share with her! Thus I spent what remained of the night,
sleepless, and longing for the sun. Her cold seemed to radiate into me,
but no heat to pass from me to her.

Had I fled from the beautiful sleepers, I thought, each on her “dim,
straight” silver couch, to lie alone with such a bedfellow! I had
refused a lovely privilege: I was given over to an awful duty! Beneath
the sad, slow-setting moon, I lay with the dead, and watched for the
dawn.

The darkness had given way, and the eastern horizon was growing dimly
clearer, when I caught sight of a motion rather than of anything
that moved--not far from me, and close to the ground. It was the low
undulating of a large snake, which passed me in an unswerving line.
Presently appeared, making as it seemed for the same point, what I took
for a roebuck-doe and her calf. Again a while, and two creatures like
bear-cubs came, with three or four smaller ones behind them. The light
was now growing so rapidly that when, a few minutes after, a troop of
horses went trotting past, I could see that, although the largest of
them were no bigger than the smallest Shetland pony, they must yet be
full-grown, so perfect were they in form, and so much had they all the
ways and action of great horses. They were of many breeds. Some seemed
models of cart-horses, others of chargers, hunters, racers. Dwarf cattle
and small elephants followed.

“Why are the children not here!” I said to myself. “The moment I am free
of this poor woman, I must go back and fetch them!”

Where were the creatures going? What drew them? Was this an exodus, or
a morning habit? I must wait for the sun! Till he came I must not leave
the woman! I laid my hand on the body, and could not help thinking it
felt a trifle warmer. It might have gained a little of the heat I had
lost! it could hardly have generated any! What reason for hope there was
had not grown less!

The forehead of the day began to glow, and soon the sun came peering up,
as if to see for the first time what all this stir of a new world was
about. At sight of his great innocent splendour, I rose full of life,
strong against death. Removing the handkerchief I had put to protect the
mouth and eyes from the pine-needles, I looked anxiously to see whether
I had found a priceless jewel, or but its empty case.

The body lay motionless as when I found it. Then first, in the morning
light, I saw how drawn and hollow was the face, how sharp were the bones
under the skin, how every tooth shaped itself through the lips. The
human garment was indeed worn to its threads, but the bird of heaven
might yet be nestling within, might yet awake to motion and song!

But the sun was shining on her face! I re-arranged the handkerchief,
laid a few leaves lightly over it, and set out to follow the creatures.
Their main track was well beaten, and must have long been used--likewise
many of the tracks that, joining it from both sides, merged in, and
broadened it. The trees retreated as I went, and the grass grew thicker.
Presently the forest was gone, and a wide expanse of loveliest green
stretched away to the horizon. Through it, along the edge of the forest,
flowed a small river, and to this the track led. At sight of the water a
new though undefined hope sprang up in me. The stream looked everywhere
deep, and was full to the brim, but nowhere more than a few yards wide.
A bluish mist rose from it, vanishing as it rose. On the opposite side,
in the plentiful grass, many small animals were feeding. Apparently they
slept in the forest, and in the morning sought the plain, swimming the
river to reach it. I knelt and would have drunk, but the water was hot,
and had a strange metallic taste.

I leapt to my feet: here was the warmth I sought--the first necessity of
life! I sped back to my helpless charge.

Without well considering my solitude, no one will understand what seemed
to lie for me in the redemption of this woman from death. “Prove what
she may,” I thought with myself, “I shall at least be lonely no more!” I
had found myself such poor company that now first I seemed to know what
hope was. This blessed water would expel the cold death, and drown my
desolation!

I bore her to the stream. Tall as she was, I found her marvellously
light, her bones were so delicate, and so little covered them. I grew
yet more hopeful when I found her so far from stiff that I could carry
her on one arm, like a sleeping child, leaning against my shoulder. I
went softly, dreading even the wind of my motion, and glad there was no
other.

The water was too hot to lay her at once in it: the shock might scare
from her the yet fluttering life! I laid her on the bank, and dipping
one of my garments, began to bathe the pitiful form. So wasted was it
that, save from the plentifulness and blackness of the hair, it was
impossible even to conjecture whether she was young or old. Her eyelids
were just not shut, which made her look dead the more: there was a crack
in the clouds of her night, at which no sun shone through!

The longer I went on bathing the poor bones, the less grew my hope that
they would ever again be clothed with strength, that ever those eyelids
would lift, and a soul look out; still I kept bathing continuously,
allowing no part time to grow cold while I bathed another; and gradually
the body became so much warmer, that at last I ventured to submerge it:
I got into the stream and drew it in, holding the face above the water,
and letting the swift, steady current flow all about the rest. I noted,
but was able to conclude nothing from the fact, that, for all the heat,
the shut hand never relaxed its hold.

After about ten minutes, I lifted it out and laid it again on the bank,
dried it, and covered it as well as I could, then ran to the forest for
leaves.

The grass and soil were dry and warm; and when I returned I thought it
had scarcely lost any of the heat the water had given it. I spread the
leaves upon it, and ran for more--then for a third and a fourth freight.

I could now leave it and go to explore, in the hope of discovering
some shelter. I ran up the stream toward some rocky hills I saw in that
direction, which were not far off.

When I reached them, I found the river issuing full grown from a rock
at the bottom of one of them. To my fancy it seemed to have run down a
stair inside, an eager cataract, at every landing wild to get out, but
only at the foot finding a door of escape.

It did not fill the opening whence it rushed, and I crept through into a
little cave, where I learned that, instead of hurrying tumultuously down
a stair, it rose quietly from the ground at the back like the base of
a large column, and ran along one side, nearly filling a deep, rather
narrow channel. I considered the place, and saw that, if I could find
a few fallen boughs long enough to lie across the channel, and large
enough to bear a little weight without bending much, I might, with
smaller branches and plenty of leaves, make upon them a comfortable
couch, which the stream under would keep constantly warm. Then I ran
back to see how my charge fared.

She was lying as I had left her. The heat had not brought her to life,
but neither had it developed anything to check farther hope. I got a few
boulders out of the channel, and arranged them at her feet and on both
sides of her.

Running again to the wood, I had not to search long ere I found some
small boughs fit for my purpose--mostly of beech, their dry yellow
leaves yet clinging to them. With these I had soon laid the floor of a
bridge-bed over the torrent. I crossed the boughs with smaller branches,
interlaced these with twigs, and buried all deep in leaves and dry moss.

When thus at length, after not a few journeys to the forest, I had
completed a warm, dry, soft couch, I took the body once more, and set
out with it for the cave. It was so light that now and then as I went
I almost feared lest, when I laid it down, I should find it a skeleton
after all; and when at last I did lay it gently on the pathless bridge,
it was a greater relief to part with that fancy than with the weight.
Once more I covered the body with a thick layer of leaves; and trying
again to feed her with a grape, found to my joy that I could open the
mouth a little farther. The grape, indeed, lay in it unheeded, but I
hoped some of the juice might find its way down.

After an hour or two on the couch, she was no longer cold. The warmth of
the brook had interpenetrated her frame--truly it was but a frame!--and
she was warm to the touch;--not, probably, with the warmth of life, but
with a warmth which rendered it more possible, if she were alive, that
she might live. I had read of one in a trance lying motionless for
weeks!

In that cave, day after day, night after night, seven long days and
nights, I sat or lay, now waking now sleeping, but always watching.
Every morning I went out and bathed in the hot stream, and every morning
felt thereupon as if I had eaten and drunk--which experience gave me
courage to lay her in it also every day.  Once as I did so, a shadow of
discoloration on her left side gave me a terrible shock, but the next
morning it had vanished, and I continued the treatment--every morning,
after her bath, putting a fresh grape in her mouth.

I too ate of the grapes and other berries I found in the forest; but I
believed that, with my daily bath in that river, I could have done very
well without eating at all.

Every time I slept, I dreamed of finding a wounded angel, who, unable to
fly, remained with me until at last she loved me and would not leave me;
and every time I woke, it was to see, instead of an angel-visage with
lustrous eyes, the white, motionless, wasted face upon the couch. But
Adam himself, when first he saw her asleep, could not have looked more
anxiously for Eve’s awaking than I watched for this woman’s. Adam knew
nothing of himself, perhaps nothing of his need of another self; I, an
alien from my fellows, had learned to love what I had lost! Were this
one wasted shred of womanhood to disappear, I should have nothing in me
but a consuming hunger after life! I forgot even the Little Ones: things
were not amiss with them! here lay what might wake and be a woman! might
actually open eyes, and look out of them upon me!

Now first I knew what solitude meant--now that I gazed on one who
neither saw nor heard, neither moved nor spoke. I saw now that a man
alone is but a being that may become a man--that he is but a need, and
therefore a possibility. To be enough for himself, a being must be
an eternal, self-existent worm! So superbly constituted, so simply
complicate is man; he rises from and stands upon such a pedestal of
lower physical organisms and spiritual structures, that no atmosphere
will comfort or nourish his life, less divine than that offered by other
souls; nowhere but in other lives can he breathe. Only by the reflex of
other lives can he ripen his specialty, develop the idea of himself,
the individuality that distinguishes him from every other. Were all men
alike, each would still have an individuality, secured by his personal
consciousness, but there would be small reason why there should be more
than two or three such; while, for the development of the differences
which make a large and lofty unity possible, and which alone can
make millions into a church, an endless and measureless influence and
reaction are indispensable. A man to be perfect--complete, that is,
in having reached the spiritual condition of persistent and universal
growth, which is the mode wherein he inherits the infinitude of his
Father--must have the education of a world of fellow-men. Save for the
hope of the dawn of life in the form beside me, I should have fled for
fellowship to the beasts that grazed and did not speak. Better to go
about with them--infinitely better--than to live alone! But with the
faintest prospect of a woman to my friend, I, poorest of creatures, was
yet a possible man!




CHAPTER XIX. THE WHITE LEECH

I woke one morning from a profound sleep, with one of my hands very
painful. The back of it was much swollen, and in the centre of the
swelling was a triangular wound, like the bite of a leech. As the day
went on, the swelling subsided, and by the evening the hurt was all but
healed. I searched the cave, turning over every stone of any size, but
discovered nothing I could imagine capable of injuring me.

Slowly the days passed, and still the body never moved, never opened
its eyes. It could not be dead, for assuredly it manifested no sign of
decay, and the air about it was quite pure. Moreover, I could imagine
that the sharpest angles of the bones had begun to disappear, that
the form was everywhere a little rounder, and the skin had less of the
parchment-look: if such change was indeed there, life must be there! the
tide which had ebbed so far toward the infinite, must have begun again
to flow! Oh joy to me, if the rising ripples of life’s ocean were indeed
burying under lovely shape the bones it had all but forsaken! Twenty
times a day I looked for evidence of progress, and twenty times a day I
doubted--sometimes even despaired; but the moment I recalled the mental
picture of her as I found her, hope revived.

Several weeks had passed thus, when one night, after lying a long time
awake, I rose, thinking to go out and breathe the cooler air; for,
although from the running of the stream it was always fresh in the cave,
the heat was not seldom a little oppressive. The moon outside was full,
the air within shadowy clear, and naturally I cast a lingering look on
my treasure ere I went. “Bliss eternal!” I cried aloud, “do I see her
eyes?” Great orbs, dark as if cut from the sphere of a starless night,
and luminous by excess of darkness, seemed to shine amid the glimmering
whiteness of her face. I stole nearer, my heart beating so that I feared
the noise of it startling her. I bent over her. Alas, her eyelids were
close shut! Hope and Imagination had wrought mutual illusion! my heart’s
desire would never be! I turned away, threw myself on the floor of the
cave, and wept. Then I bethought me that her eyes had been a little
open, and that now the awful chink out of which nothingness had peered,
was gone: it might be that she had opened them for a moment, and was
again asleep!--it might be she was awake and holding them close! In
either case, life, less or more, must have shut them! I was comforted,
and fell fast asleep.

That night I was again bitten, and awoke with a burning thirst.

In the morning I searched yet more thoroughly, but again in vain. The
wound was of the same character, and, as before, was nearly well by the
evening. I concluded that some large creature of the leech kind came
occasionally from the hot stream. “But, if blood be its object,” I said
to myself, “so long as I am there, I need hardly fear for my treasure!”

That same morning, when, having peeled a grape as usual and taken away
the seeds, I put it in her mouth, her lips made a slight movement of
reception, and I KNEW she lived!

My hope was now so much stronger that I began to think of some attire
for her: she must be able to rise the moment she wished! I betook myself
therefore to the forest, to investigate what material it might afford,
and had hardly begun to look when fibrous skeletons, like those of the
leaves of the prickly pear, suggested themselves as fit for the purpose.
I gathered a stock of them, laid them to dry in the sun, pulled apart
the reticulated layers, and of these had soon begun to fashion two loose
garments, one to hang from her waist, the other from her shoulders.
With the stiletto-point of an aloe-leaf and various filaments, I sewed
together three thicknesses of the tissue.

During the week that followed, there was no farther sign except that she
more evidently took the grapes. But indeed all the signs became surer:
plainly she was growing plumper, and her skin fairer. Still she did not
open her eyes; and the horrid fear would at times invade me, that her
growth was of some hideous fungoid nature, the few grapes being nowise
sufficient to account for it.

Again I was bitten; and now the thing, whatever it was, began to pay me
regular visits at intervals of three days. It now generally bit me in
the neck or the arm, invariably with but one bite, always while I slept,
and never, even when I slept, in the daytime. Hour after hour would I
lie awake on the watch, but never heard it coming, or saw sign of its
approach. Neither, I believe, did I ever feel it bite me. At length
I became so hopeless of catching it, that I no longer troubled myself
either to look for it by day, or lie in wait for it at night. I knew
from my growing weakness that I was losing blood at a dangerous rate,
but I cared little for that: in sight of my eyes death was yielding to
life; a soul was gathering strength to save me from loneliness; we would
go away together, and I should speedily recover!

The garments were at length finished, and, contemplating my handiwork
with no small satisfaction, I proceeded to mat layers of the fibre into
sandals.

One night I woke suddenly, breathless and faint, and longing after air,
and had risen to crawl from the cave, when a slight rustle in the leaves
of the couch set me listening motionless.

“I caught the vile thing,” said a feeble voice, in my mother-tongue; “I
caught it in the very act!”

She was alive! she spoke! I dared not yield to my transport lest I
should terrify her.

“What creature?” I breathed, rather than said.

“The creature,” she answered, “that was biting you.”

“What was it?”

“A great white leech.”

“How big?” I pursued, forcing myself to be calm.

“Not far from six feet long, I should think,” she answered.

“You have saved my life, perhaps!--But how could you touch the horrid
thing! How brave of you!” I cried.

“I did!” was all her answer, and I thought she shuddered.

“Where is it? What could you do with such a monster?”

“I threw it in the river.”

“Then it will come again, I fear!”

“I do not think I could have killed it, even had I known how!--I heard
you moaning, and got up to see what disturbed you; saw the frightful
thing at your neck, and pulled it away. But I could not hold it, and was
hardly able to throw it from me. I only heard it splash in the water!”

“We’ll kill it next time!” I said; but with that I turned faint, sought
the open air, but fell.

When I came to myself the sun was up. The lady stood a little way off,
looking, even in the clumsy attire I had fashioned for her, at once
grand and graceful. I HAD seen those glorious eyes! Through the night
they had shone! Dark as the darkness primeval, they now outshone the
day! She stood erect as a column, regarding me. Her pale cheek indicated
no emotion, only question. I rose.

“We must be going!” I said. “The white leech----”

I stopped: a strange smile had flickered over her beautiful face.

“Did you find me there?” she asked, pointing to the cave.

“No; I brought you there,” I replied.

“You brought me?”

“Yes.”

“From where?”

“From the forest.”

“What have you done with my clothes--and my jewels?”

“You had none when I found you.”

“Then why did you not leave me?”

“Because I hoped you were not dead.”

“Why should you have cared?”

“Because I was very lonely, and wanted you to live.”

“You would have kept me enchanted for my beauty!” she said, with proud
scorn.

Her words and her look roused my indignation.

“There was no beauty left in you,” I said.

“Why, then, again, did you not let me alone?”

“Because you were of my own kind.”

“Of YOUR kind?” she cried, in a tone of utter contempt.

“I thought so, but find I was mistaken!”

“Doubtless you pitied me!”

“Never had woman more claim on pity, or less on any other feeling!”

With an expression of pain, mortification, and anger unutterable, she
turned from me and stood silent. Starless night lay profound in the
gulfs of her eyes: hate of him who brought it back had slain their
splendour. The light of life was gone from them.

“Had you failed to rouse me, what would you have done?” she asked
suddenly without moving.

“I would have buried it.”

“It! What?--You would have buried THIS?” she exclaimed, flashing round
upon me in a white fury, her arms thrown out, and her eyes darting forks
of cold lightning.

“Nay; that I saw not! That, weary weeks of watching and tending have
brought back to you,” I answered--for with such a woman I must be plain!
“Had I seen the smallest sign of decay, I would at once have buried
you.”

“Dog of a fool!” she cried, “I was but in a trance--Samoil! what a
fate!--Go and fetch the she-savage from whom you borrowed this hideous
disguise.”

“I made it for you. It is hideous, but I did my best.”

She drew herself up to her tall height.

“How long have I been insensible?” she demanded. “A woman could not have
made that dress in a day!”

“Not in twenty days,” I rejoined, “hardly in thirty!”

“Ha! How long do you pretend I have lain unconscious?--Answer me at
once.”

“I cannot tell how long you had lain when I found you, but there was
nothing left of you save skin and bone: that is more than three months
ago.--Your hair was beautiful, nothing else! I have done for it what I
could.”

“My poor hair!” she said, and brought a great armful of it round from
behind her; “--it will be more than a three-months’ care to bring YOU
to life again!--I suppose I must thank you, although I cannot say I am
grateful!”

“There is no need, madam: I would have done the same for any woman--yes,
or for any man either!”

“How is it my hair is not tangled?” she said, fondling it.

“It always drifted in the current.”

“How?--What do you mean?”

“I could not have brought you to life but by bathing you in the hot
river every morning.”

She gave a shudder of disgust, and stood for a while with her gaze fixed
on the hurrying water. Then she turned to me:

“We must understand each other!” she said. “--You have done me the two
worst of wrongs--compelled me to live, and put me to shame: neither of
them can I pardon!”

She raised her left hand, and flung it out as if repelling me. Something
ice-cold struck me on the forehead. When I came to myself, I was on the
ground, wet and shivering.




CHAPTER XX. GONE!--BUT HOW?

I rose, and looked around me, dazed at heart. For a moment I could not
see her: she was gone, and loneliness had returned like the cloud after
the rain! She whom I brought back from the brink of the grave, had fled
from me, and left me with desolation! I dared not one moment remain thus
hideously alone. Had I indeed done her a wrong? I must devote my life to
sharing the burden I had compelled her to resume!

I descried her walking swiftly over the grass, away from the river, took
one plunge for a farewell restorative, and set out to follow her. The
last visit of the white leech, and the blow of the woman, had enfeebled
me, but already my strength was reviving, and I kept her in sight
without difficulty.

“Is this, then, the end?” I said as I went, and my heart brooded a
sad song. Her angry, hating eyes haunted me. I could understand her
resentment at my having forced life upon her, but how had I further
injured her? Why should she loathe me? Could modesty itself be indignant
with true service? How should the proudest woman, conscious of my every
action, cherish against me the least sense of disgracing wrong? How
reverently had I not touched her! As a father his motherless child, I
had borne and tended her! Had all my labour, all my despairing hope gone
to redeem only ingratitude? “No,” I answered myself; “beauty must have
a heart! However profoundly hidden, it must be there! The deeper buried,
the stronger and truer will it wake at last in its beautiful grave! To
rouse that heart were a better gift to her than the happiest life! It
would be to give her a nobler, a higher life!”

She was ascending a gentle slope before me, walking straight and steady
as one that knew whither, when I became aware that she was increasing
the distance between us. I summoned my strength, and it came in
full tide. My veins filled with fresh life! My body seemed to become
ethereal, and, following like an easy wind, I rapidly overtook her.

Not once had she looked behind. Swiftly she moved, like a Greek goddess
to rescue, but without haste. I was within three yards of her, when she
turned sharply, yet with grace unbroken, and stood. Fatigue or heat she
showed none. Her paleness was not a pallor, but a pure whiteness; her
breathing was slow and deep. Her eyes seemed to fill the heavens, and
give light to the world. It was nearly noon, but the sense was upon
me as of a great night in which an invisible dew makes the stars look
large.

“Why do you follow me?” she asked, quietly but rather sternly, as if she
had never before seen me.

“I have lived so long,” I answered, “on the mere hope of your eyes, that
I must want to see them again!”

“You WILL not be spared!” she said coldly. “I command you to stop where
you stand.”

“Not until I see you in a place of safety will I leave you,” I replied.

“Then take the consequences,” she said, and resumed her swift-gliding
walk.

But as she turned she cast on me a glance, and I stood as if run through
with a spear. Her scorn had failed: she would kill me with her beauty!

Despair restored my volition; the spell broke; I ran, and overtook her.

“Have pity upon me!” I cried.

She gave no heed. I followed her like a child whose mother pretends to
abandon him. “I will be your slave!” I said, and laid my hand on her
arm.

She turned as if a serpent had bit her. I cowered before the blaze of
her eyes, but could not avert my own.

“Pity me,” I cried again.

She resumed her walking.

The whole day I followed her. The sun climbed the sky, seemed to pause
on its summit, went down the other side. Not a moment did she pause, not
a moment did I cease to follow. She never turned her head, never relaxed
her pace.

The sun went below, and the night came up. I kept close to her: if I
lost sight of her for a moment, it would be for ever!

All day long we had been walking over thick soft grass: abruptly she
stopped, and threw herself upon it. There was yet light enough to show
that she was utterly weary. I stood behind her, and gazed down on her
for a moment.

Did I love her? I knew she was not good! Did I hate her? I could not
leave her! I knelt beside her.

“Begone! Do not dare touch me,” she cried.

Her arms lay on the grass by her sides as if paralyzed.

Suddenly they closed about my neck, rigid as those of the
torture-maiden. She drew down my face to hers, and her lips clung to my
cheek. A sting of pain shot somewhere through me, and pulsed. I could
not stir a hair’s breadth. Gradually the pain ceased. A slumberous
weariness, a dreamy pleasure stole over me, and then I knew nothing.

All at once I came to myself. The moon was a little way above the
horizon, but spread no radiance; she was but a bright thing set in
blackness. My cheek smarted; I put my hand to it, and found a wet spot.
My neck ached: there again was a wet spot! I sighed heavily, and felt
very tired. I turned my eyes listlessly around me--and saw what had
become of the light of the moon: it was gathered about the lady! she
stood in a shimmering nimbus! I rose and staggered toward her.

“Down!” she cried imperiously, as to a rebellious dog. “Follow me a step
if you dare!”

“I will!” I murmured, with an agonised effort.

“Set foot within the gates of my city, and my people will stone you:
they do not love beggars!”

I was deaf to her words. Weak as water, and half awake, I did not know
that I moved, but the distance grew less between us. She took one step
back, raised her left arm, and with the clenched hand seemed to strike
me on the forehead. I received as it were a blow from an iron hammer,
and fell.

I sprang to my feet, cold and wet, but clear-headed and strong. Had the
blow revived me? it had left neither wound nor pain!--But how came I
wet?--I could not have lain long, for the moon was no higher!

The lady stood some yards away, her back toward me. She was doing
something, I could not distinguish what. Then by her sudden gleam I knew
she had thrown off her garments, and stood white in the dazed moon. One
moment she stood--and fell forward.

A streak of white shot away in a swift-drawn line. The same instant the
moon recovered herself, shining out with a full flash, and I saw that
the streak was a long-bodied thing, rushing in great, low-curved bounds
over the grass. Dark spots seemed to run like a stream adown its back,
as if it had been fleeting along under the edge of a wood, and catching
the shadows of the leaves.

“God of mercy!” I cried, “is the terrible creature speeding to the
night-infolded city?” and I seemed to hear from afar the sudden burst
and spread of outcrying terror, as the pale savage bounded from house to
house, rending and slaying.

While I gazed after it fear-stricken, past me from behind, like a swift,
all but noiseless arrow, shot a second large creature, pure white. Its
path was straight for the spot where the lady had fallen, and, as I
thought, lay. My tongue clave to the roof of my mouth. I sprang forward
pursuing the beast. But in a moment the spot I made for was far behind
it.

“It was well,” I thought, “that I could not cry out: if she had risen,
the monster would have been upon her!”

But when I reached the place, no lady was there; only the garments she
had dropped lay dusk in the moonlight.

I stood staring after the second beast. It tore over the ground with yet
greater swiftness than the former--in long, level, skimming leaps, the
very embodiment of wasteless speed. It followed the line the other had
taken, and I watched it grow smaller and smaller, until it disappeared
in the uncertain distance.

But where was the lady? Had the first beast surprised her, creeping upon
her noiselessly? I had heard no shriek! and there had not been time to
devour her! Could it have caught her up as it ran, and borne her away to
its den? So laden it could not have run so fast! and I should have seen
that it carried something!

Horrible doubts began to wake in me. After a thorough but fruitless
search, I set out in the track of the two animals.





CHAPTER XXI. THE FUGITIVE MOTHER

As I hastened along, a cloud came over the moon, and from the gray dark
suddenly emerged a white figure, clasping a child to her bosom, and
stooping as she ran. She was on a line parallel with my own, but did not
perceive me as she hurried along, terror and anxiety in every movement
of her driven speed.

“She is chased!” I said to myself. “Some prowler of this terrible night
is after her!”

To follow would have added to her fright: I stepped into her track to
stop her pursuer.

As I stood for a moment looking after her through the dusk, behind me
came a swift, soft-footed rush, and ere I could turn, something sprang
over my head, struck me sharply on the forehead, and knocked me down.
I was up in an instant, but all I saw of my assailant was a vanishing
whiteness. I ran after the beast, with the blood trickling from my
forehead; but had run only a few steps, when a shriek of despair tore
the quivering night. I ran the faster, though I could not but fear it
must already be too late.

In a minute or two I spied a low white shape approaching me through the
vapour-dusted moonlight. It must be another beast, I thought at first,
for it came slowly, almost crawling, with strange, floundering leaps,
as of a creature in agony! I drew aside from its path, and waited. As it
neared me, I saw it was going on three legs, carrying its left fore-paw
high from the ground. It had many dark, oval spots on a shining white
skin, and was attended by a low rushing sound, as of water falling upon
grass. As it went by me, I saw something streaming from the lifted paw.

“It is blood!” I said to myself, “some readier champion than I has
wounded the beast!” But, strange to tell, such a pity seized me at sight
of the suffering creature, that, though an axe had been in my hand I
could not have struck at it. In a broken succession of hobbling leaps
it went out of sight, its blood, as it seemed, still issuing in a small
torrent, which kept flowing back softly through the grass beside me. “If
it go on bleeding like that,” I thought, “it will soon be hurtless!”

I went on, for I might yet be useful to the woman, and hoped also to see
her deliverer.

I descried her a little way off, seated on the grass, with her child in
her lap.

“Can I do anything for you?” I asked.

At the sound of my voice she started violently, and would have risen. I
threw myself on the ground.

“You need not be frightened,” I said. “I was following the beast when
happily you found a nearer protector! It passed me now with its foot
bleeding so much that by this time it must be all but dead!”

“There is little hope of that!” she answered, trembling. “Do you not
know whose beast she is?”

Now I had certain strange suspicions, but I answered that I knew nothing
of the brute, and asked what had become of her champion.

“What champion?” she rejoined. “I have seen no one.”

“Then how came the monster to grief?”

“I pounded her foot with a stone--as hard as I could strike. Did you not
hear her cry?”

“Well, you are a brave woman!” I answered. “I thought it was you gave
the cry!”

“It was the leopardess.”

“I never heard such a sound from the throat of an animal! it was like
the scream of a woman in torture!”

“My voice was gone; I could not have shrieked to save my baby! When I
saw the horrid mouth at my darling’s little white neck, I caught up a
stone and mashed her lame foot.”

“Tell me about the creature,” I said; “I am a stranger in these parts.”

“You will soon know about her if you are going to Bulika!” she answered.
“Now, I must never go back there!”

“Yes, I am going to Bulika,” I said, “--to see the princess.”

“Have a care; you had better not go!--But perhaps you are--! The
princess is a very good, kind woman!”

I heard a little movement. Clouds had by this time gathered so thick
over the moon that I could scarcely see my companion: I feared she was
rising to run from me.

“You are in no danger of any sort from me,” I said. “What oath would you
like me to take?”

“I know by your speech that you are not of the people of Bulika,” she
replied; “I will trust you!--I am not of them, either, else I should not
be able: they never trust any one--If only I could see you! But I like
your voice!--There, my darling is asleep! The foul beast has not hurt
her!--Yes: it was my baby she was after!” she went on, caressing the
child. “And then she would have torn her mother to pieces for carrying
her off!--Some say the princess has two white leopardesses,” she
continued: “I know only one--with spots. Everybody knows HER! If the
princess hear of a baby, she sends her immediately to suck its blood,
and then it either dies or grows up an idiot. I would have gone away
with my baby, but the princess was from home, and I thought I might wait
until I was a little stronger. But she must have taken the beast with
her, and been on her way home when I left, and come across my track. I
heard the SNIFF-SNUFF of the leopardess behind me, and ran;--oh, how I
ran!--But my darling will not die! There is no mark on her!”

“Where are you taking her?”

“Where no one ever tells!”

“Why is the princess so cruel?”

“There is an old prophecy that a child will be the death of her. That is
why she will listen to no offer of marriage, they say.”

“But what will become of her country if she kill all the babies?”

“She does not care about her country. She sends witches around to teach
the women spells that keep babies away, and give them horrible things
to eat. Some say she is in league with the Shadows to put an end to the
race. At night we hear the questing beast, and lie awake and shiver. She
can tell at once the house where a baby is coming, and lies down at the
door, watching to get in. There are words that have power to shoo her
away, only they do not always work--But here I sit talking, and the
beast may by this time have got home, and her mistress be sending the
other after us!”

As thus she ended, she rose in haste.

“I do not think she will ever get home.--Let me carry the baby for you!”
 I said, as I rose also.

She returned me no answer, and when I would have taken it, only clasped
it the closer.

“I cannot think,” I said, walking by her side, “how the brute could be
bleeding so much!”

“Take my advice, and don’t go near the palace,” she answered. “There are
sounds in it at night as if the dead were trying to shriek, but could
not open their mouths!”

She bade me an abrupt farewell. Plainly she did not want more of my
company; so I stood still, and heard her footsteps die away on the
grass.




CHAPTER XXII. BULIKA

I had lost all notion of my position, and was walking about in pure,
helpless impatience, when suddenly I found myself in the path of the
leopardess, wading in the blood from her paw. It ran against my ankles
with the force of a small brook, and I got out of it the more quickly
because of an unshaped suspicion in my mind as to whose blood it might
be. But I kept close to the sound of it, walking up the side of the
stream, for it would guide me in the direction of Bulika.

I soon began to reflect, however, that no leopardess, no elephant, no
hugest animal that in our world preceded man, could keep such a torrent
flowing, except every artery in its body were open, and its huge system
went on filling its vessels from fields and lakes and forests as fast as
they emptied themselves: it could not be blood! I dipped a finger in it,
and at once satisfied myself that it was not. In truth, however it might
have come there, it was a softly murmuring rivulet of water that ran,
without channel, over the grass! But sweet as was its song, I dared not
drink of it; I kept walking on, hoping after the light, and listening to
the familiar sound so long unheard--for that of the hot stream was very
different. The mere wetting of my feet in it, however, had so refreshed
me, that I went on without fatigue till the darkness began to grow
thinner, and I knew the sun was drawing nigh. A few minutes more, and
I could discern, against the pale aurora, the wall-towers of a
city--seemingly old as time itself. Then I looked down to get a sight of
the brook.

It was gone. I had indeed for a long time noted its sound growing
fainter, but at last had ceased to attend to it. I looked back: the
grass in its course lay bent as it had flowed, and here and there
glimmered a small pool. Toward the city, there was no trace of it. Near
where I stood, the flow of its fountain must at least have paused!

Around the city were gardens, growing many sorts of vegetables, hardly
one of which I recognised. I saw no water, no flowers, no sign of
animals. The gardens came very near the walls, but were separated from
them by huge heaps of gravel and refuse thrown from the battlements.

I went up to the nearest gate, and found it but half-closed, nowise
secured, and without guard or sentinel. To judge by its hinges, it could
not be farther opened or shut closer. Passing through, I looked down
a long ancient street. It was utterly silent, and with scarce an
indication in it of life present. Had I come upon a dead city? I turned
and went out again, toiled a long way over the dust-heaps, and crossed
several roads, each leading up to a gate: I would not re-enter until
some of the inhabitants should be stirring.

What was I there for? what did I expect or hope to find? what did I mean
to do?

I must see, if but once more, the woman I had brought to life! I did
not desire her society: she had waked in me frightful suspicions; and
friendship, not to say love, was wildly impossible between us! But her
presence had had a strange influence upon me, and in her presence I
must resist, and at the same time analyse that influence! The seemingly
inscrutable in her I would fain penetrate: to understand something of
her mode of being would be to look into marvels such as imagination
could never have suggested! In this I was too daring: a man must not,
for knowledge, of his own will encounter temptation! On the other hand,
I had reinstated an evil force about to perish, and was, to the extent
of my opposing faculty, accountable for what mischief might ensue! I had
learned that she was the enemy of children: the Little Ones might be in
her danger! It was in the hope of finding out something of their history
that I had left them; on that I had received a little light: I must have
more; I must learn how to protect them!

Hearing at length a little stir in the place, I walked through the
next gate, and thence along a narrow street of tall houses to a little
square, where I sat down on the base of a pillar with a hideous bat-like
creature atop. Ere long, several of the inhabitants came sauntering
past. I spoke to one: he gave me a rude stare and ruder word, and went
on.

I got up and went through one narrow street after another, gradually
filling with idlers, and was not surprised to see no children. By
and by, near one of the gates, I encountered a group of young men who
reminded me not a little of the bad giants. They came about me staring,
and presently began to push and hustle me, then to throw things at me.
I bore it as well as I could, wishing not to provoke enmity where
wanted to remain for a while. Oftener than once or twice I appealed to
passers-by whom I fancied more benevolent-looking, but none would halt
a moment to listen to me. I looked poor, and that was enough: to the
citizens of Bulika, as to house-dogs, poverty was an offence! Deformity
and sickness were taxed; and no legislation of their princess was more
heartily approved of than what tended to make poverty subserve wealth.

I took to my heels at last, and no one followed me beyond the gate. A
lumbering fellow, however, who sat by it eating a hunch of bread, picked
up a stone to throw after me, and happily, in his stupid eagerness,
threw, not the stone but the bread. I took it, and he did not dare
follow to reclaim it: beyond the walls they were cowards every one. I
went off a few hundred yards, threw myself down, ate the bread, fell
asleep, and slept soundly in the grass, where the hot sunlight renewed
my strength.

It was night when I woke. The moon looked down on me in friendly
fashion, seeming to claim with me old acquaintance. She was very bright,
and the same moon, I thought, that saw me through the terrors of my
first night in that strange world. A cold wind blew from the gate,
bringing with it an evil odour; but it did not chill me, for the sun had
plenished me with warmth. I crept again into the city. There I found the
few that were still in the open air crouched in corners to escape the
shivering blast.

I was walking slowly through the long narrow street, when, just before
me, a huge white thing bounded across it, with a single flash in the
moonlight, and disappeared. I turned down the next opening, eager to get
sight of it again.

It was a narrow lane, almost too narrow to pass through, but it led
me into a wider street. The moment I entered the latter, I saw on
the opposite side, in the shadow, the creature I had followed, itself
following like a dog what I took for a man. Over his shoulder, every
other moment, he glanced at the animal behind him, but neither spoke to
it, nor attempted to drive it away. At a place where he had to cross a
patch of moonlight, I saw that he cast no shadow, and was himself but
a flat superficial shadow, of two dimensions. He was, nevertheless, an
opaque shadow, for he not merely darkened any object on the other
side of him, but rendered it, in fact, invisible. In the shadow he was
blacker than the shadow; in the moonlight he looked like one who had
drawn his shadow up about him, for not a suspicion of it moved beside
or under him; while the gleaming animal, which followed so close at his
heels as to seem the white shadow of his blackness, and which I now saw
to be a leopardess, drew her own gliding shadow black over the ground by
her side. When they passed together from the shadow into the moonlight,
the Shadow deepened in blackness, the animal flashed into radiance. I
was at the moment walking abreast of them on the opposite side, my bare
feet sounding on the flat stones: the leopardess never turned head
or twitched ear; the shadow seemed once to look at me, for I lost his
profile, and saw for a second only a sharp upright line. That instant
the wind found me and blew through me: I shuddered from head to foot,
and my heart went from wall to wall of my bosom, like a pebble in a
child’s rattle.




CHAPTER XXIII. A WOMAN OF BULIKA

I turned aside into an alley, and sought shelter in a small archway. In
the mouth of it I stopped, and looked out at the moonlight which filled
the alley. The same instant a woman came gliding in after me, turned,
trembling, and looked out also. A few seconds passed; then a huge
leopard, its white skin dappled with many blots, darted across the
archway. The woman pressed close to me, and my heart filled with pity. I
put my arm round her.

“If the brute come here, I will lay hold of it,” I said, “and you must
run.”

“Thank you!” she murmured.

“Have you ever seen it before?” I asked.

“Several times,” she answered, still trembling. “She is a pet of the
princess’s. You are a stranger, or you would know her!”

“I am a stranger,” I answered. “But is she, then, allowed to run loose?”

“She is kept in a cage, her mouth muzzled, and her feet in gloves of
crocodile leather. Chained she is too; but she gets out often, and sucks
the blood of any child she can lay hold of. Happily there are not many
mothers in Bulika!”

Here she burst into tears.

“I wish I were at home!” she sobbed. “The princess returned only last
night, and there is the leopardess out already! How am I to get into the
house? It is me she is after, I know! She will be lying at my own door,
watching for me!--But I am a fool to talk to a stranger!”

“All strangers are not bad!” I said. “The beast shall not touch you till
she has done with me, and by that time you will be in. You are happy to
have a house to go to! What a terrible wind it is!”

“Take me home safe, and I will give you shelter from it,” she rejoined.
“But we must wait a little!”

I asked her many questions. She told me the people never did anything
except dig for precious stones in their cellars. They were rich, and had
everything made for them in other towns.

“Why?” I asked.

“Because it is a disgrace to work,” she answered. “Everybody in Bulika
knows that!”

I asked how they were rich if none of them earned money. She replied
that their ancestors had saved for them, and they never spent. When they
wanted money they sold a few of their gems.

“But there must be some poor!” I said.

“I suppose there must be, but we never think of such people. When one
goes poor, we forget him. That is how we keep rich. We mean to be rich
always.”

“But when you have dug up all your precious stones and sold them, you
will have to spend your money, and one day you will have none left!”

“We have so many, and there are so many still in the ground, that that
day will never come,” she replied.

“Suppose a strange people were to fall upon you, and take everything you
have!”

“No strange people will dare; they are all horribly afraid of our
princess. She it is who keeps us safe and free and rich!”

Every now and then as she spoke, she would stop and look behind her.

I asked why her people had such a hatred of strangers. She answered that
the presence of a stranger defiled the city.

“How is that?” I said.

“Because we are more ancient and noble than any other
nation.--Therefore,” she added, “we always turn strangers out before
night.”

“How, then, can you take me into your house?” I asked.

“I will make an exception of you,” she replied.

“Is there no place in the city for the taking in of strangers?”

“Such a place would be pulled down, and its owner burned. How is purity
to be preserved except by keeping low people at a proper distance?
Dignity is such a delicate thing!”

She told me that their princess had reigned for thousands of years; that
she had power over the air and the water as well as the earth--and, she
believed, over the fire too; that she could do what she pleased, and was
answerable to nobody.

When at length she was willing to risk the attempt, we took our way
through lanes and narrow passages, and reached her door without having
met a single live creature. It was in a wider street, between two
tall houses, at the top of a narrow, steep stair, up which she climbed
slowly, and I followed. Ere we reached the top, however, she seemed to
take fright, and darted up the rest of the steps: I arrived just in time
to have the door closed in my face, and stood confounded on the landing,
where was about length enough, between the opposite doors of the two
houses, for a man to lie down.

Weary, and not scrupling to defile Bulika with my presence, I took
advantage of the shelter, poor as it was.




CHAPTER XXIV. THE WHITE LEOPARDESS

At the foot of the stair lay the moonlit street, and I could hear the
unwholesome, inhospitable wind blowing about below. But not a breath of
it entered my retreat, and I was composing myself to rest, when suddenly
my eyes opened, and there was the head of the shining creature I had
seen following the Shadow, just rising above the uppermost step! The
moment she caught sight of my eyes, she stopped and began to retire,
tail foremost. I sprang up; whereupon, having no room to turn, she threw
herself backward, head over tail, scrambled to her feet, and in a moment
was down the stair and gone. I followed her to the bottom, and looked
all up and down the street. Not seeing her, I went back to my hard
couch.

There were, then, two evil creatures prowling about the city, one with,
and one without spots! I was not inclined to risk much for man or woman
in Bulika, but the life of a child might well be worth such a poor
one as mine, and I resolved to keep watch at that door the rest of the
night.

Presently I heard the latch move, slow, slow: I looked up, and seeing
the door half-open, rose and slid softly in. Behind it stood, not the
woman I had befriended, but the muffled woman of the desert. Without a
word she led me a few steps to an empty stone-paved chamber, and pointed
to a rug on the floor. I wrapped myself in it, and once more lay down.
She shut the door of the room, and I heard the outer door open and close
again. There was no light save what came from the moonlit air.

As I lay sleepless, I began to hear a stifled moaning. It went on for
a good while, and then came the cry of a child, followed by a terrible
shriek. I sprang up and darted into the passage: from another door in it
came the white leopardess with a new-born baby in her mouth, carrying
it like a cub of her own. I threw myself upon her, and compelled her to
drop the infant, which fell on the stone slabs with a piteous wail.

At the cry appeared the muffled woman. She stepped over us, the beast
and myself, where we lay struggling in the narrow passage, took up the
child, and carried it away. Returning, she lifted me off the animal,
opened the door, and pushed me gently out. At my heels followed the
leopardess.

“She too has failed me!” thought I; “--given me up to the beast to be
settled with at her leisure! But we shall have a tussle for it!”

I ran down the stair, fearing she would spring on my back, but she
followed me quietly. At the foot I turned to lay hold of her, but
she sprang over my head; and when again I turned to face her, she was
crouching at my feet! I stooped and stroked her lovely white skin;
she responded by licking my bare feet with her hard dry tongue. Then I
patted and fondled her, a well of tenderness overflowing in my heart:
she might be treacherous too, but if I turned from every show of love
lest it should be feigned, how was I ever to find the real love which
must be somewhere in every world?

I stood up; she rose, and stood beside me.

A bulky object fell with a heavy squelch in the middle of the street, a
few yards from us. I ran to it, and found a pulpy mass, with just form
enough left to show it the body of a woman. It must have been thrown
from some neighbouring window! I looked around me: the Shadow was
walking along the other side of the way, with the white leopardess again
at his heel!

I followed and gained upon them, urging in my heart for the leopardess
that probably she was not a free agent. When I got near them, however,
she turned and flew at me with such a hideous snarl, that instinctively
I drew back: instantly she resumed her place behind the Shadow. Again
I drew near; again she flew at me, her eyes flaming like live emeralds.
Once more I made the experiment: she snapped at me like a dog, and
bit me. My heart gave way, and I uttered a cry; whereupon the creature
looked round with a glance that plainly meant--“Why WOULD you make me do
it?”

I turned away angry with myself: I had been losing my time ever since
I entered the place! night as it was I would go straight to the palace!
From the square I had seen it--high above the heart of the city,
compassed with many defences, more a fortress than a palace!

But I found its fortifications, like those of the city, much neglected,
and partly ruinous. For centuries, clearly, they had been of no account!
It had great and strong gates, with something like a drawbridge to them
over a rocky chasm; but they stood open, and it was hard to believe that
water had ever occupied the hollow before them. All was so still that
sleep seemed to interpenetrate the structure, causing the very moonlight
to look discordantly awake. I must either enter like a thief, or break a
silence that rendered frightful the mere thought of a sound!

Like an outcast dog I was walking about the walls, when I came to a
little recess with a stone bench: I took refuge in it from the wind, lay
down, and in spite of the cold fell fast asleep.

I was wakened by something leaping upon me, and licking my face with
the rough tongue of a feline animal. “It is the white leopardess!” I
thought. “She is come to suck my blood!--and why should she not have
it?--it would cost me more to defend than to yield it!” So I lay still,
expecting a shoot of pain. But the pang did not arrive; a pleasant
warmth instead began to diffuse itself through me. Stretched at my back,
she lay as close to me as she could lie, the heat of her body slowly
penetrating mine, and her breath, which had nothing of the wild beast in
it, swathing my head and face in a genial atmosphere. A full conviction
that her intention toward me was good, gained possession of me. I
turned like a sleepy boy, threw my arm over her, and sank into profound
unconsciousness.

When I began to come to myself, I fancied I lay warm and soft in my own
bed. “Is it possible I am at home?” I thought. The well-known scents of
the garden seemed to come crowding in. I rubbed my eyes, and looked out:
I lay on a bare stone, in the heart of a hateful city!

I sprang from the bench. Had I indeed had a leopardess for my bedfellow,
or had I but dreamed it? She had but just left me, for the warmth of her
body was with me yet!

I left the recess with a new hope, as strong as it was shapeless. One
thing only was clear to me: I must find the princess! Surely I had some
power with her, if not over her! Had I not saved her life, and had she
not prolonged it at the expense of my vitality? The reflection gave me
courage to encounter her, be she what she might.




CHAPTER XXV. THE PRINCESS

Making a circuit of the castle, I came again to the open gates, crossed
the ravine-like moat, and found myself in a paved court, planted at
regular intervals with towering trees like poplars. In the centre was
one taller than the rest, whose branches, near the top, spread a little
and gave it some resemblance to a palm. Between their great stems I
got glimpses of the palace, which was of a style strange to me, but
suggested Indian origin. It was long and low, with lofty towers at the
corners, and one huge dome in the middle, rising from the roof to half
the height of the towers. The main entrance was in the centre of the
front--a low arch that seemed half an ellipse. No one was visible, the
doors stood wide open, and I went unchallenged into a large hall, in
the form of a longish ellipse. Toward one side stood a cage, in which
couched, its head on its paws, a huge leopardess, chained by a steel
collar, with its mouth muzzled and its paws muffled. It was white
with dark oval spots, and lay staring out of wide-open eyes, with
canoe-shaped pupils, and great green irids. It appeared to watch me, but
not an eyeball, not a foot, not a whisker moved, and its tail stretched
out behind it rigid as an iron bar. I could not tell whether it was a
live thing or not.

From this vestibule two low passages led; I took one of them, and
found it branch into many, all narrow and irregular. At a spot where was
scarce room for two to pass, a page ran against me. He started back in
terror, but having scanned me, gathered impudence, puffed himself out,
and asked my business.

“To see the princess,” I answered.

“A likely thing!” he returned. “I have not seen her highness this
morning myself!”

I caught him by the back of the neck, shook him, and said, “Take me to
her at once, or I will drag you with me till I find her. She shall know
how her servants receive her visitors.”

He gave a look at me, and began to pull like a blind man’s dog, leading
me thus to a large kitchen, where were many servants, feebly busy, and
hardly awake. I expected them to fall upon me and drive me out, but they
stared instead, with wide eyes--not at me, but at something behind me,
and grew more ghastly as they stared. I turned my head, and saw the
white leopardess, regarding them in a way that might have feared stouter
hearts.

Presently, however, one of them, seeing, I suppose, that attack was not
imminent, began to recover himself; I turned to him, and let the boy go.

“Take me to the princess,” I said.

“She has not yet left her room, your lordship,” he replied.

“Let her know that I am here, waiting audience of her.”

“Will your lordship please to give me your name?”

“Tell her that one who knows the white leech desires to see her.”

“She will kill me if I take such a message: I must not. I dare not.”

“You refuse?”

He cast a glance at my attendant, and went.

The others continued staring--too much afraid of her to take their eyes
off her. I turned to the graceful creature, where she stood, her muzzle
dropped to my heel, white as milk, a warm splendour in the gloomy place,
and stooped and patted her. She looked up at me; the mere movement of
her head was enough to scatter them in all directions. She rose on her
hind legs, and put her paws on my shoulders; I threw my arms round her.
She pricked her ears, broke from me, and was out of sight in a moment.

The man I had sent to the princess entered.

“Please to come this way, my lord,” he said.

My heart gave a throb, as if bracing itself to the encounter. I followed
him through many passages, and was at last shown into a room so large
and so dark that its walls were invisible. A single spot on the floor
reflected a little light, but around that spot all was black. I looked
up, and saw at a great height an oval aperture in the roof, on the
periphery of which appeared the joints between blocks of black marble.
The light on the floor showed close fitting slabs of the same material.
I found afterward that the elliptical wall as well was of black marble,
absorbing the little light that reached it. The roof was the long half
of an ellipsoid, and the opening in it was over one of the foci of the
ellipse of the floor. I fancied I caught sight of reddish lines, but
when I would have examined them, they were gone.

All at once, a radiant form stood in the centre of the darkness,
flashing a splendour on every side. Over a robe of soft white, her hair
streamed in a cataract, black as the marble on which it fell. Her
eyes were a luminous blackness; her arms and feet like warm ivory. She
greeted me with the innocent smile of a girl--and in face, figure, and
motion seemed but now to have stepped over the threshold of womanhood.
“Alas,” thought I, “ill did I reckon my danger! Can this be the woman I
rescued--she who struck me, scorned me, left me?” I stood gazing at her
out of the darkness; she stood gazing into it, as if searching for me.

She disappeared. “She will not acknowledge me!” I thought. But the next
instant her eyes flashed out of the dark straight into mine. She had
descried me and come to me!

“You have found me at last!” she said, laying her hand on my shoulder.
“I knew you would!”

My frame quivered with conflicting consciousnesses, to analyse which
I had no power. I was simultaneously attracted and repelled: each
sensation seemed either.

“You shiver!” she said. “This place is cold for you! Come.”

I stood silent: she had struck me dumb with beauty; she held me dumb
with sweetness.

Taking me by the hand, she drew me to the spot of light, and again
flashed upon me. An instant she stood there.

“You have grown brown since last I saw you,” she said.

“This is almost the first roof I have been under since you left me,” I
replied.

“Whose was the other?” she rejoined.

“I do not know the woman’s name.”

“I would gladly learn it! The instinct of hospitality is not strong
in my people!” She took me again by the hand, and led me through the
darkness many steps to a curtain of black. Beyond it was a white stair,
up which she conducted me to a beautiful chamber.

“How you must miss the hot flowing river!” she said. “But there is a
bath in the corner with no white leeches in it! At the foot of your
couch you will find a garment. When you come down, I shall be in the
room to your left at the foot of the stair.”

I stood as she left me, accusing my presumption: how was I to treat
this lovely woman as a thing of evil, who behaved to me like a
sister?--Whence the marvellous change in her? She left me with a blow;
she received me almost with an embrace! She had reviled me; she said
she knew I would follow and find her! Did she know my doubts concerning
her--how much I should want explained? COULD she explain all? Could I
believe her if she did? As to her hospitality, I had surely earned
and might accept that--at least until I came to a definite judgment
concerning her!

Could such beauty as I saw, and such wickedness as I suspected, exist
in the same person? If they could, HOW was it possible? Unable to answer
the former question, I must let the latter wait!

Clear as crystal, the water in the great white bath sent a sparkling
flash from the corner where it lay sunk in the marble floor, and seemed
to invite me to its embrace. Except the hot stream, two draughts in the
cottage of the veiled woman, and the pools in the track of the wounded
leopardess, I had not seen water since leaving home: it looked a thing
celestial. I plunged in.

Immediately my brain was filled with an odour strange and delicate,
which yet I did not altogether like. It made me doubt the princess
afresh: had she medicated it? had she enchanted it? was she in any way
working on me unlawfully? And how was there water in the palace, and not
a drop in the city? I remembered the crushed paw of the leopardess, and
sprang from the bath.

What had I been bathing in? Again I saw the fleeing mother, again I
heard the howl, again I saw the limping beast. But what matter whence it
flowed? was not the water sweet? Was it not very water the pitcher-plant
secreted from its heart, and stored for the weary traveller? Water came
from heaven: what mattered the well where it gathered, or the spring
whence it burst? But I did not re-enter the bath.

I put on the robe of white wool, embroidered on the neck and hem, that
lay ready for me, and went down the stair to the room whither my hostess
had directed me. It was round, all of alabaster, and without a single
window: the light came through everywhere, a soft, pearly shimmer rather
than shine. Vague shadowy forms went flitting about over the walls and
low dome, like loose rain-clouds over a grey-blue sky.

The princess stood waiting me, in a robe embroidered with argentine
rings and discs, rectangles and lozenges, close together--a silver
mail. It fell unbroken from her neck and hid her feet, but its long open
sleeves left her arms bare.

In the room was a table of ivory, bearing cakes and fruit, an ivory jug
of milk, a crystal jug of wine of a pale rose-colour, and a white loaf.

“Here we do not kill to eat,” she said; “but I think you will like what
I can give you.”

I told her I could desire nothing better than what I saw. She seated
herself on a couch by the table, and made me a sign to sit by her.

She poured me out a bowlful of milk, and, handing me the loaf, begged
me to break from it such a piece as I liked. Then she filled from the
wine-jug two silver goblets of grotesquely graceful workmanship.

“You have never drunk wine like this!” she said.

I drank, and wondered: every flower of Hybla and Hymettus must have sent
its ghost to swell the soul of that wine!

“And now that you will be able to listen,” she went on, “I must do what
I can to make myself intelligible to you. Our natures, however, are so
different, that this may not be easy. Men and women live but to die; we,
that is such as I--we are but a few--live to live on. Old age is to you
a horror; to me it is a dear desire: the older we grow, the nearer we
are to our perfection. Your perfection is a poor thing, comes soon, and
lasts but a little while; ours is a ceaseless ripening. I am not yet
ripe, and have lived thousands of your years--how many, I never cared to
note. The everlasting will not be measured.

“Many lovers have sought me; I have loved none of them: they sought but
to enslave me; they sought me but as the men of my city seek gems of
price.--When you found me, I found a man! I put you to the test; you
stood it; your love was genuine!--It was, however, far from ideal--far
from such love as I would have. You loved me truly, but not with true
love. Pity has, but is not love. What woman of any world would return
love for pity? Such love as yours was then, is hateful to me. I knew
that, if you saw me as I am, you would love me--like the rest of
them--to have and to hold: I would none of that either! I would be
otherwise loved! I would have a love that outlived hopelessness,
outmeasured indifference, hate, scorn! Therefore did I put on cruelty,
despite, ingratitude. When I left you, I had shown myself such as you
could at least no longer follow from pity: I was no longer in need
of you! But you must satisfy my desire or set me free--prove yourself
priceless or worthless! To satisfy the hunger of my love, you must
follow me, looking for nothing, not gratitude, not even pity in
return!--follow and find me, and be content with merest presence, with
scantest forbearance!--I, not you, have failed; I yield the contest.”

She looked at me tenderly, and hid her face in her hands. But I had
caught a flash and a sparkle behind the tenderness, and did not believe
her. She laid herself out to secure and enslave me; she only fascinated
me!

“Beautiful princess,” I said, “let me understand how you came to be
found in such evil plight.”

“There are things I cannot explain,” she replied, “until you have become
capable of understanding them--which can only be when love is grown
perfect. There are many things so hidden from you that you cannot even
wish to know them; but any question you can put, I can in some measure
answer.

“I had set out to visit a part of my dominions occupied by a savage
dwarf-people, strong and fierce, enemies to law and order, opposed to
every kind of progress--an evil race. I went alone, fearing nothing,
unaware of the least necessity for precaution. I did not know that upon
the hot stream beside which you found me, a certain woman, by no means
so powerful as myself, not being immortal, had cast what you call a
spell--which is merely the setting in motion of a force as natural as
any other, but operating primarily in a region beyond the ken of the
mortal who makes use of the force.

“I set out on my journey, reached the stream, bounded across it,----”

A shadow of embarrassment darkened her cheek: I understood it, but
showed no sign. Checked for the merest moment, she went on:

“--you know what a step it is in parts!--But in the very act, an
indescribable cold invaded me. I recognised at once the nature of the
assault, and knew it could affect me but temporarily. By sheer force of
will I dragged myself to the wood--nor knew anything more until I saw
you asleep, and the horrible worm at your neck. I crept out, dragged the
monster from you, and laid my lips to the wound. You began to wake; I
buried myself among the leaves.”

She rose, her eyes flashing as never human eyes flashed, and threw her
arms high over her head.

“What you have made me is yours!” she cried. “I will repay you as never
yet did woman! My power, my beauty, my love are your own: take them.”

She dropt kneeling beside me, laid her arms across my knees, and looked
up in my face.

Then first I noted on her left hand a large clumsy glove. In my mind’s
eye I saw hair and claws under it, but I knew it was a hand shut
hard--perhaps badly bruised. I glanced at the other: it was lovely as
hand could be, and I felt that, if I did less than loathe her, I should
love her. Not to dally with usurping emotions, I turned my eyes aside.

She started to her feet. I sat motionless, looking down.

“To me she may be true!” said my vanity. For a moment I was tempted to
love a lie.

An odour, rather than the gentlest of airy pulses, was fanning me.
I glanced up. She stood erect before me, waving her lovely arms in
seemingly mystic fashion.

A frightful roar made my heart rebound against the walls of its cage.
The alabaster trembled as if it would shake into shivers. The princess
shuddered visibly.

“My wine was too strong for you!” she said, in a quavering voice; “I
ought not to have let you take a full draught! Go and sleep now, and
when you wake ask me what you please.--I will go with you: come.”

As she preceded me up the stair,--

“I do not wonder that roar startled you!” she said. “It startled me, I
confess: for a moment I feared she had escaped. But that is impossible.”

The roar seemed to me, however--I could not tell why--to come from the
WHITE leopardess, and to be meant for me, not the princess.

With a smile she left me at the door of my room, but as she turned I
read anxiety on her beautiful face.




CHAPTER XXVI. A BATTLE ROYAL

I threw myself on the bed, and began to turn over in my mind the tale
she had told me. She had forgotten herself, and, by a single incautious
word, removed one perplexity as to the condition in which I found her in
the forest! The leopardess BOUNDED over; the princess lay prostrate on
the bank: the running stream had dissolved her self-enchantment! Her own
account of the object of her journey revealed the danger of the Little
Ones then imminent: I had saved the life of their one fearful enemy!

I had but reached this conclusion when I fell asleep. The lovely wine
may not have been quite innocent.

When I opened my eyes, it was night. A lamp, suspended from the ceiling,
cast a clear, although soft light through the chamber. A delicious
languor infolded me. I seemed floating, far from land, upon the bosom of
a twilight sea. Existence was in itself pleasure. I had no pain. Surely
I was dying!

No pain!--ah, what a shoot of mortal pain was that! what a sickening
sting! It went right through my heart! Again! That was sharpness
itself!--and so sickening! I could not move my hand to lay it on my
heart; something kept it down!

The pain was dying away, but my whole body seemed paralysed. Some evil
thing was upon me!--something hateful! I would have struggled, but could
not reach a struggle. My will agonised, but in vain, to assert itself.
I desisted, and lay passive. Then I became aware of a soft hand on my
face, pressing my head into the pillow, and of a heavy weight lying
across me.

I began to breathe more freely; the weight was gone from my chest; I
opened my eyes.

The princess was standing above me on the bed, looking out into the
room, with the air of one who dreamed. Her great eyes were clear and
calm. Her mouth wore a look of satisfied passion; she wiped from it a
streak of red.

She caught my gaze, bent down, and struck me on the eyes with the
handkerchief in her hand: it was like drawing the edge of a knife across
them, and for a moment or two I was blind.

I heard a dull heavy sound, as of a large soft-footed animal alighting
from a little jump. I opened my eyes, and saw the great swing of a long
tail as it disappeared through the half-open doorway. I sprang after it.

The creature had vanished quite. I shot down the stair, and into the
hall of alabaster. The moon was high, and the place like the inside of
a faint, sun-blanched moon. The princess was not there. I must find her:
in her presence I might protect myself; out of it I could not! I was
a tame animal for her to feed upon; a human fountain for a thirst
demoniac! She showed me favour the more easily to use me! My waking eyes
did not fear her, but they would close, and she would come! Not seeing
her, I felt her everywhere, for she might be anywhere--might even now
be waiting me in some secret cavern of sleep! Only with my eyes upon her
could I feel safe from her!

Outside the alabaster hall it was pitch-dark, and I had to grope my way
along with hands and feet. At last I felt a curtain, put it aside, and
entered the black hall. There I found a great silent assembly. How it
was visible I neither saw nor could imagine, for the walls, the floor,
the roof, were shrouded in what seemed an infinite blackness, blacker
than the blackest of moonless, starless nights; yet my eyes could
separate, although vaguely, not a few of the individuals in the mass
interpenetrated and divided, as well as surrounded, by the darkness.
It seemed as if my eyes would never come quite to themselves. I pressed
their balls and looked and looked again, but what I saw would not grow
distinct. Blackness mingled with form, silence and undefined motion
possessed the wide space. All was a dim, confused dance, filled with
recurrent glimpses of shapes not unknown to me. Now appeared a woman,
with glorious eyes looking out of a skull; now an armed figure on a
skeleton horse; now one now another of the hideous burrowing phantasms.
I could trace no order and little relation in the mingling and crossing
currents and eddies. If I seemed to catch the shape and rhythm of a
dance, it was but to see it break, and confusion prevail. With the
shifting colours of the seemingly more solid shapes, mingled a multitude
of shadows, independent apparently of originals, each moving after
its own free shadow-will. I looked everywhere for the princess, but
throughout the wildly changing kaleidoscopic scene, could not see her
nor discover indication of her presence. Where was she? What might she
not be doing? No one took the least notice of me as I wandered hither
and thither seeking her. At length losing hope, I turned away to look
elsewhere. Finding the wall, and keeping to it with my hand, for even
then I could not see it, I came, groping along, to a curtained opening
into the vestibule.

Dimly moonlighted, the cage of the leopardess was the arena of what
seemed a desperate although silent struggle. Two vastly differing forms,
human and bestial, with entangled confusion of mingling bodies and
limbs, writhed and wrestled in closest embrace. It had lasted but an
instant when I saw the leopardess out of the cage, walking quietly to
the open door. As I hastened after her I threw a glance behind me: there
was the leopardess in the cage, couching motionless as when I saw her
first.

The moon, half-way up the sky, was shining round and clear; the bodiless
shadow I had seen the night before, was walking through the trees
toward the gate; and after him went the leopardess, swinging her tail.
I followed, a little way off, as silently as they, and neither of them
once looked round. Through the open gate we went down to the city, lying
quiet as the moonshine upon it. The face of the moon was very still, and
its stillness looked like that of expectation.

The Shadow took his way straight to the stair at the top of which I had
lain the night before. Without a pause he went up, and the leopardess
followed. I quickened my pace, but, a moment after, heard a cry of
horror. Then came the fall of something soft and heavy between me and
the stair, and at my feet lay a body, frightfully blackened and crushed,
but still recognisable as that of the woman who had led me home and shut
me out. As I stood petrified, the spotted leopardess came bounding down
the stair with a baby in her mouth. I darted to seize her ere she
could turn at the foot; but that instant, from behind me, the white
leopardess, like a great bar of glowing silver, shot through the
moonlight, and had her by the neck. She dropped the child; I caught it
up, and stood to watch the battle between them.

What a sight it was--now the one, now the other uppermost, both too
intent for any noise beyond a low growl, a whimpered cry, or a snarl of
hate--followed by a quicker scrambling of claws, as each, worrying
and pushing and dragging, struggled for foothold on the pavement! The
spotted leopardess was larger than the white, and I was anxious for my
friend; but I soon saw that, though neither stronger nor more active,
the white leopardess had the greater endurance. Not once did she lose
her hold on the neck of the other. From the spotted throat at length
issued a howl of agony, changing, by swift-crowded gradations, into the
long-drawn CRESCENDO of a woman’s uttermost wail. The white one relaxed
her jaws; the spotted one drew herself away, and rose on her hind legs.
Erect in the moonlight stood the princess, a confused rush of shadows
careering over her whiteness--the spots of the leopard crowding,
hurrying, fleeing to the refuge of her eyes, where merging they
vanished. The last few, outsped and belated, mingled with the cloud
of her streamy hair, leaving her radiant as the moon when a legion of
little vapours has flown, wind-hunted, off her silvery disc--save that,
adown the white column of her throat, a thread of blood still trickled
from every wound of her adversary’s terrible teeth. She turned away,
took a few steps with the gait of a Hecate, fell, covered afresh with
her spots, and fled at a long, stretching gallop.

The white leopardess turned also, sprang upon me, pulled my arms
asunder, caught the baby as it fell, and flew with it along the street
toward the gate.




CHAPTER XXVII. THE SILENT FOUNTAIN

I turned and followed the spotted leopardess, catching but one glimpse
of her as she tore up the brow of the hill to the gate of the palace.
When I reached the entrance-hall, the princess was just throwing the
robe around her which she had left on the floor. The blood had ceased to
flow from her wounds, and had dried in the wind of her flight.

When she saw me, a flash of anger crossed her face, and she turned her
head aside. Then, with an attempted smile, she looked at me, and said,

“I have met with a small accident! Happening to hear that the cat-woman
was again in the city, I went down to send her away. But she had one of
her horrid creatures with her: it sprang upon me, and had its claws in
my neck before I could strike it!”

She gave a shiver, and I could not help pitying her, although I knew
she lied, for her wounds were real, and her face reminded me of how she
looked in the cave. My heart began to reproach me that I had let her
fight unaided, and I suppose I looked the compassion I felt.

“Child of folly!” she said, with another attempted smile, “--not crying,
surely!--Wait for me here; I am going into the black hall for a moment.
I want you to get me something for my scratches.”

But I followed her close. Out of my sight I feared her.

The instant the princess entered, I heard a buzzing sound as of many
low voices, and, one portion after another, the assembly began to be
shiftingly illuminated, as by a ray that went travelling from spot to
spot. Group after group would shine out for a space, then sink back into
the general vagueness, while another part of the vast company would grow
momently bright.

Some of the actions going on when thus illuminated, were not unknown to
me; I had been in them, or had looked on them, and so had the princess:
present with every one of them I now saw her. The skull-headed dancers
footed the grass in the forest-hall: there was the princess looking in
at the door! The fight went on in the Evil Wood: there was the princess
urging it! Yet I was close behind her all the time, she standing
motionless, her head sunk on her bosom. The confused murmur continued,
the confused commotion of colours and shapes; and still the ray went
shifting and showing. It settled at last on the hollow in the heath, and
there was the princess, walking up and down, and trying in vain to wrap
the vapour around her! Then first I was startled at what I saw: the old
librarian walked up to her, and stood for a moment regarding her; she
fell; her limbs forsook her and fled; her body vanished.

A wild shriek rang through the echoing place, and with the fall of her
eidolon, the princess herself, till then standing like a statue in front
of me, fell heavily, and lay still. I turned at once and went out: not
again would I seek to restore her! As I stood trembling beside the
cage, I knew that in the black ellipsoid I had been in the brain of the
princess!--I saw the tail of the leopardess quiver once.

While still endeavouring to compose myself, I heard the voice of the
princess beside me.

“Come now,” she said; “I will show you what I want you to do for me.”

She led the way into the court. I followed in dazed compliance.

The moon was near the zenith, and her present silver seemed brighter
than the gold of the absent sun. She brought me through the trees to the
tallest of them, the one in the centre. It was not quite like the rest,
for its branches, drawing their ends together at the top, made a clump
that looked from beneath like a fir-cone. The princess stood close under
it, gazing up, and said, as if talking to herself,

“On the summit of that tree grows a tiny blossom which would at once
heal my scratches! I might be a dove for a moment and fetch it, but I
see a little snake in the leaves whose bite would be worse to a dove
than the bite of a tiger to me!--How I hate that cat-woman!”

She turned to me quickly, saying with one of her sweetest smiles,

“Can you climb?”

The smile vanished with the brief question, and her face changed to a
look of sadness and suffering. I ought to have left her to suffer, but
the way she put her hand to her wounded neck went to my heart.

I considered the tree. All the way up to the branches, were projections
on the stem like the remnants on a palm of its fallen leaves.

“I can climb that tree,” I answered.

“Not with bare feet!” she returned.

In my haste to follow the leopardess disappearing, I had left my sandals
in my room.

“It is no matter,” I said; “I have long gone barefoot!”

Again I looked at the tree, and my eyes went wandering up the stem until
my sight lost itself in the branches. The moon shone like silvery
foam here and there on the rugged bole, and a little rush of wind went
through the top with a murmurous sound as of water falling softly into
water. I approached the tree to begin my ascent of it. The princess
stopped me.

“I cannot let you attempt it with your feet bare!” she insisted. “A fall
from the top would kill you!”

“So would a bite from the snake!” I answered--not believing, I confess,
that there was any snake.

“It would not hurt YOU!” she replied. “--Wait a moment.”

She tore from her garment the two wide borders that met in front, and
kneeling on one knee, made me put first my left foot, then my right on
the other, and bound them about with the thick embroidered strips.

“You have left the ends hanging, princess!” I said.

“I have nothing to cut them off with; but they are not long enough to
get entangled,” she replied.

I turned to the tree, and began to climb.

Now in Bulika the cold after sundown was not so great as in certain
other parts of the country--especially about the sexton’s cottage; yet
when I had climbed a little way, I began to feel very cold, grew still
colder as I ascended, and became coldest of all when I got among the
branches. Then I shivered, and seemed to have lost my hands and feet.

There was hardly any wind, and the branches did not sway in the
least, yet, as I approached the summit, I became aware of a peculiar
unsteadiness: every branch on which I placed foot or laid hold, seemed
on the point of giving way. When my head rose above the branches
near the top, and in the open moonlight I began to look about for the
blossom, that instant I found myself drenched from head to foot. The
next, as if plunged in a stormy water, I was flung about wildly, and
felt myself sinking. Tossed up and down, tossed this way and tossed that
way, rolled over and over, checked, rolled the other way and tossed up
again, I was sinking lower and lower. Gasping and gurgling and choking,
I fell at last upon a solid bottom.

“I told you so!” croaked a voice in my ear.




CHAPTER XXVIII. I AM SILENCED

I rubbed the water out of my eyes, and saw the raven on the edge of a
huge stone basin. With the cold light of the dawn reflected from his
glossy plumage, he stood calmly looking down upon me. I lay on my back
in water, above which, leaning on my elbows, I just lifted my face. I
was in the basin of the large fountain constructed by my father in the
middle of the lawn. High over me glimmered the thick, steel-shiny stalk,
shooting, with a torrent uprush, a hundred feet into the air, to spread
in a blossom of foam.

Nettled at the coolness of the raven’s remark,

“You told me nothing!” I said.

“I told you to do nothing any one you distrusted asked you!”

“Tut! how was mortal to remember that?”

“You will not forget the consequences of having forgotten it!” replied
Mr. Raven, who stood leaning over the margin of the basin, and stretched
his hand across to me.

I took it, and was immediately beside him on the lawn, dripping and
streaming.

“You must change your clothes at once!” he said. “A wetting does not
signify where you come from--though at present such an accident is
unusual; here it has its inconveniences!”

He was again a raven, walking, with something stately in his step,
toward the house, the door of which stood open.

“I have not much to change!” I laughed; for I had flung aside my robe to
climb the tree.

“It is a long time since I moulted a feather!” said the raven.

In the house no one seemed awake. I went to my room, found a
dressing-gown, and descended to the library.

As I entered, the librarian came from the closet. I threw myself on a
couch. Mr. Raven drew a chair to my side and sat down. For a minute or
two neither spoke. I was the first to break the silence.

“What does it all mean?” I said.

“A good question!” he rejoined: “nobody knows what anything is; a man
can learn only what a thing means! Whether he do, depends on the use he
is making of it.”

“I have made no use of anything yet!”

“Not much; but you know the fact, and that is something! Most people
take more than a lifetime to learn that they have learned nothing, and
done less! At least you have not been without the desire to be of use!”

“I did want to do something for the children--the precious Little Ones,
I mean.”

“I know you did--and started the wrong way!”

“I did not know the right way.”

“That is true also--but you are to blame that you did not.”

“I am ready to believe whatever you tell me--as soon as I understand
what it means.”

“Had you accepted our invitation, you would have known the right way.
When a man will not act where he is, he must go far to find his work.”

“Indeed I have gone far, and got nowhere, for I have not found my work!
I left the children to learn how to serve them, and have only learned
the danger they are in.”

“When you were with them, you were where you could help them: you left
your work to look for it! It takes a wise man to know when to go away; a
fool may learn to go back at once!”

“Do you mean, sir, I could have done something for the Little Ones by
staying with them?”

“Could you teach them anything by leaving them?”

“No; but how could I teach them? I did not know how to begin. Besides,
they were far ahead of me!”

“That is true. But you were not a rod to measure them with! Certainly,
if they knew what you know, not to say what you might have known, they
would be ahead of you--out of sight ahead! but you saw they were not
growing--or growing so slowly that they had not yet developed the
idea of growing! they were even afraid of growing!--You had never seen
children remain children!”

“But surely I had no power to make them grow!”

“You might have removed some of the hindrances to their growing!”

“What are they? I do not know them. I did think perhaps it was the want
of water!”

“Of course it is! they have none to cry with!”

“I would gladly have kept them from requiring any for that purpose!”

“No doubt you would--the aim of all stupid philanthropists! Why, Mr.
Vane, but for the weeping in it, your world would never have become
worth saving! You confess you thought it might be water they wanted: why
did not you dig them a well or two?”

“That never entered my mind!”

“Not when the sounds of the waters under the earth entered your ears?”

“I believe it did once. But I was afraid of the giants for them. That
was what made me bear so much from the brutes myself!”

“Indeed you almost taught the noble little creatures to be afraid of the
stupid Bags! While they fed and comforted and worshipped you, all the
time you submitted to be the slave of bestial men! You gave the darlings
a seeming coward for their hero! A worse wrong you could hardly have
done them. They gave you their hearts; you owed them your soul!--You
might by this time have made the Bags hewers of wood and drawers of
water to the Little Ones!”

“I fear what you say is true, Mr. Raven! But indeed I was afraid that
more knowledge might prove an injury to them--render them less innocent,
less lovely.”

“They had given you no reason to harbour such a fear!”

“Is not a little knowledge a dangerous thing?”

“That is one of the pet falsehoods of your world! Is man’s greatest
knowledge more than a little? or is it therefore dangerous? The fancy
that knowledge is in itself a great thing, would make any degree of
knowledge more dangerous than any amount of ignorance. To know all
things would not be greatness.”

“At least it was for love of them, not from cowardice that I served the
giants!”

“Granted. But you ought to have served the Little Ones, not the giants!
You ought to have given the Little Ones water; then they would soon
have taught the giants their true position. In the meantime you could
yourself have made the giants cut down two-thirds of their coarse
fruit-trees to give room to the little delicate ones! You lost your
chance with the Lovers, Mr. Vane! You speculated about them instead of
helping them!”




CHAPTER XXIX. THE PERSIAN CAT

I sat in silence and shame. What he said was true: I had not been a wise
neighbour to the Little Ones!

Mr. Raven resumed:

“You wronged at the same time the stupid creatures themselves. For them
slavery would have been progress. To them a few such lessons as you
could have given them with a stick from one of their own trees, would
have been invaluable.”

“I did not know they were cowards!”

“What difference does that make? The man who grounds his action on
another’s cowardice, is essentially a coward himself.--I fear worse will
come of it! By this time the Little Ones might have been able to protect
themselves from the princess, not to say the giants--they were always
fit enough for that; as it was they laughed at them! but now, through
your relations with her,----”

“I hate her!” I cried.

“Did you let her know you hated her?”

Again I was silent.

“Not even to her have you been faithful!--But hush! we were followed
from the fountain, I fear!”

“No living creature did I see!--except a disreputable-looking cat that
bolted into the shrubbery.”

“It was a magnificent Persian--so wet and draggled, though, as to look
what she was--worse than disreputable!”

“What do you mean, Mr. Raven?” I cried, a fresh horror taking me by the
throat. “--There was a beautiful blue Persian about the house, but
she fled at the very sound of water!--Could she have been after the
goldfish?”

“We shall see!” returned the librarian. “I know a little about cats of
several sorts, and there is that in the room which will unmask this one,
or I am mistaken in her.”

He rose, went to the door of the closet, brought from it the mutilated
volume, and sat down again beside me. I stared at the book in his hand:
it was a whole book, entire and sound!

“Where was the other half of it?” I gasped.

“Sticking through into my library,” he answered.

I held my peace. A single question more would have been a plunge into a
bottomless sea, and there might be no time!

“Listen,” he said: “I am going to read a stanza or two. There is one
present who, I imagine, will hardly enjoy the reading!”

He opened the vellum cover, and turned a leaf or two. The parchment was
discoloured with age, and one leaf showed a dark stain over two-thirds
of it. He slowly turned this also, and seemed looking for a certain
passage in what appeared a continuous poem. Somewhere about the middle
of the book he began to read.

But what follows represents--not what he read, only the impression it
made upon me. The poem seemed in a language I had never before heard,
which yet I understood perfectly, although I could not write the words,
or give their meaning save in poor approximation. These fragments, then,
are the shapes which those he read have finally taken in passing again
through my brain:--

     “But if I found a man that could believe
        In what he saw not, felt not, and yet knew,
      From him I should take substance, and receive
        Firmness and form relate to touch and view;
        Then should I clothe me in the likeness true
      Of that idea where his soul did cleave!”

He turned a leaf and read again:--

     “In me was every woman.  I had power
        Over the soul of every living man,
      Such as no woman ever had in dower--
        Could what no woman ever could, or can;
        All women, I, the woman, still outran,
      Outsoared, outsank, outreigned, in hall or bower.

     “For I, though me he neither saw nor heard,
        Nor with his hand could touch finger of mine,
      Although not once my breath had ever stirred
        A hair of him, could trammel brain and spine
        With rooted bonds which Death could not untwine--
      Or life, though hope were evermore deferred.”

Again he paused, again turned a leaf, and again began:--

     “For by his side I lay, a bodiless thing;
        I breathed not, saw not, felt not, only thought,
      And made him love me--with a hungering
        After he knew not what--if it was aught
        Or but a nameless something that was wrought
      By him out of himself; for I did sing

     “A song that had no sound into his soul;
        I lay a heartless thing against his heart,
      Giving him nothing where he gave his whole
        Being to clothe me human, every part:
        That I at last into his sense might dart,
      Thus first into his living mind I stole.

     “Ah, who was ever conquering Love but I!
        Who else did ever throne in heart of man!
      To visible being, with a gladsome cry
        Waking, life’s tremor through me throbbing ran!”

A strange, repulsive feline wail arose somewhere in the room. I started
up on my elbow and stared about me, but could see nothing.

Mr. Raven turned several leaves, and went on:--

     “Sudden I woke, nor knew the ghastly fear
        That held me--not like serpent coiled about,
      But like a vapour moist, corrupt, and drear,
        Filling heart, soul, and breast and brain throughout;
        My being lay motionless in sickening doubt,
      Nor dared to ask how came the horror here.

     “My past entire I knew, but not my now;
        I understood nor what I was, nor where;
      I knew what I had been: still on my brow
        I felt the touch of what no more was there!
        I was a fainting, dead, yet live Despair;
      A life that flouted life with mop and mow!

     “That I was a queen I knew right well,
        And sometimes wore a splendour on my head
      Whose flashing even dead darkness could not quell--
        The like on neck and arms and girdle-stead;
        And men declared a light my closed eyes shed
      That killed the diamond in its silver cell.”

Again I heard the ugly cry of feline pain. Again I looked, but saw
neither shape nor motion. Mr. Raven seemed to listen a moment, but again
turned several pages, and resumed:--

     “Hideously wet, my hair of golden hue
        Fouled my fair hands: to have it swiftly shorn
      I had given my rubies, all for me dug new--
        No eyes had seen, and such no waist had worn!
        For a draught of water from a drinking horn,
      For one blue breath, I had given my sapphires blue!

     “Nay, I had given my opals for a smock,
        A peasant-maiden’s garment, coarse and clean:
      My shroud was rotting!  Once I heard a cock
        Lustily crow upon the hillock green
        Over my coffin.  Dulled by space between,
      Came back an answer like a ghostly mock.”

Once more arose the bestial wail.

“I thought some foul thing was in the room!” said the librarian, casting
a glance around him; but instantly he turned a leaf or two, and again
read:--

     “For I had bathed in milk and honey-dew,
        In rain from roses shook, that ne’er touched earth,
      And ointed me with nard of amber hue;
        Never had spot me spotted from my birth,
        Or mole, or scar of hurt, or fret of dearth;
      Never one hair superfluous on me grew.

     “Fleeing cold whiteness, I would sit alone--
        Not in the sun--I feared his bronzing light,
      But in his radiance back around me thrown
        By fulgent mirrors tempering his might;
        Thus bathing in a moon-bath not too bright,
      My skin I tinted slow to ivory tone.

     “But now, all round was dark, dark all within!
        My eyes not even gave out a phantom-flash;
      My fingers sank in pulp through pulpy skin;
        My body lay death-weltered in a mash
        Of slimy horrors----”

With a fearsome yell, her clammy fur staring in clumps, her tail thick
as a cable, her eyes flashing green as a chrysoprase, her distended
claws entangling themselves so that she floundered across the carpet, a
huge white cat rushed from somewhere, and made for the chimney. Quick as
thought the librarian threw the manuscript between her and the hearth.
She crouched instantly, her eyes fixed on the book. But his voice went
on as if still he read, and his eyes seemed also fixed on the book:--

     “Ah, the two worlds! so strangely are they one,
        And yet so measurelessly wide apart!
      Oh, had I lived the bodiless alone
        And from defiling sense held safe my heart,
        Then had I scaped the canker and the smart,
      Scaped life-in-death, scaped misery’s endless moan!”

At these words such a howling, such a prolonged yell of agony burst from
the cat, that we both stopped our ears. When it ceased, Mr. Raven walked
to the fire-place, took up the book, and, standing between the creature
and the chimney, pointed his finger at her for a moment. She lay
perfectly still. He took a half-burnt stick from the hearth, drew with
it some sign on the floor, put the manuscript back in its place, with a
look that seemed to say, “Now we have her, I think!” and, returning to
the cat, stood over her and said, in a still, solemn voice:--

“Lilith, when you came here on the way to your evil will, you little
thought into whose hands you were delivering yourself!--Mr. Vane, when
God created me,--not out of Nothing, as say the unwise, but out of His
own endless glory--He brought me an angelic splendour to be my wife:
there she lies! For her first thought was POWER; she counted it slavery
to be one with me, and bear children for Him who gave her being. One
child, indeed, she bore; then, puffed with the fancy that she had
created her, would have me fall down and worship her! Finding, however,
that I would but love and honour, never obey and worship her, she poured
out her blood to escape me, fled to the army of the aliens, and soon
had so ensnared the heart of the great Shadow, that he became her slave,
wrought her will, and made her queen of Hell. How it is with her now,
she best knows, but I know also. The one child of her body she fears and
hates, and would kill, asserting a right, which is a lie, over what God
sent through her into His new world. Of creating, she knows no more than
the crystal that takes its allotted shape, or the worm that makes two
worms when it is cloven asunder. Vilest of God’s creatures, she lives
by the blood and lives and souls of men. She consumes and slays, but is
powerless to destroy as to create.”

The animal lay motionless, its beryl eyes fixed flaming on the man: his
eyes on hers held them fixed that they could not move from his.

“Then God gave me another wife--not an angel but a woman--who is to this
as light is to darkness.”

The cat gave a horrible screech, and began to grow bigger. She went on
growing and growing. At last the spotted leopardess uttered a roar that
made the house tremble. I sprang to my feet. I do not think Mr. Raven
started even with his eyelids.

“It is but her jealousy that speaks,” he said, “jealousy self-kindled,
foiled and fruitless; for here I am, her master now whom she, would
not have for her husband! while my beautiful Eve yet lives, hoping
immortally! Her hated daughter lives also, but beyond her evil ken,
one day to be what she counts her destruction--for even Lilith shall
be saved by her childbearing. Meanwhile she exults that my human wife
plunged herself and me in despair, and has borne me a countless race of
miserables; but my Eve repented, and is now beautiful as never was woman
or angel, while her groaning, travailing world is the nursery of our
Father’s children. I too have repented, and am blessed.--Thou, Lilith,
hast not yet repented; but thou must.--Tell me, is the great
Shadow beautiful? Knowest thou how long thou wilt thyself remain
beautiful?--Answer me, if thou knowest.”

Then at last I understood that Mr. Raven was indeed Adam, the old and
the new man; and that his wife, ministering in the house of the dead,
was Eve, the mother of us all, the lady of the New Jerusalem.

The leopardess reared; the flickering and fleeing of her spots began;
the princess at length stood radiant in her perfect shape.

“I AM beautiful--and immortal!” she said--and she looked the goddess she
would be.

“As a bush that burns, and is consumed,” answered he who had been her
husband. “--What is that under thy right hand?”

For her arm lay across her bosom, and her hand was pressed to her side.

A swift pang contorted her beautiful face, and passed.

“It is but a leopard-spot that lingers! it will quickly follow those I
have dismissed,” she answered.

“Thou art beautiful because God created thee, but thou art the slave of
sin: take thy hand from thy side.”

Her hand sank away, and as it dropt she looked him in the eyes with a
quailing fierceness that had in it no surrender.

He gazed a moment at the spot.

“It is not on the leopard; it is in the woman!” he said. “Nor will it
leave thee until it hath eaten to thy heart, and thy beauty hath flowed
from thee through the open wound!”

She gave a glance downward, and shivered.

“Lilith,” said Adam, and his tone had changed to a tender beseeching,
“hear me, and repent, and He who made thee will cleanse thee!”

Her hand returned quivering to her side. Her face grew dark. She gave
the cry of one from whom hope is vanishing. The cry passed into a howl.
She lay writhing on the floor, a leopardess covered with spots.

“The evil thou meditatest,” Adam resumed, “thou shalt never compass,
Lilith, for Good and not Evil is the Universe. The battle between them
may last for countless ages, but it must end: how will it fare with
thee when Time hath vanished in the dawn of the eternal morn? Repent, I
beseech thee; repent, and be again an angel of God!”

She rose, she stood upright, a woman once more, and said,

“I will not repent. I will drink the blood of thy child.” My eyes were
fastened on the princess; but when Adam spoke, I turned to him: he stood
towering above her; the form of his visage was altered, and his voice
was terrible.

“Down!” he cried; “or by the power given me I will melt thy very bones.”

She flung herself on the floor, dwindled and dwindled, and was again a
gray cat. Adam caught her up by the skin of her neck, bore her to
the closet, and threw her in. He described a strange figure on the
threshold, and closing the door, locked it.

Then he returned to my side the old librarian, looking sad and worn, and
furtively wiping tears from his eyes.




CHAPTER XXX. ADAM EXPLAINS

“We must be on our guard,” he said, “or she will again outwit us. She
would befool the very elect!”

“How are we to be on our guard?” I asked.

“Every way,” he answered. “She fears, therefore hates her child, and is
in this house on her way to destroy her. The birth of children is in her
eyes the death of their parents, and every new generation the enemy of
the last. Her daughter appears to her an open channel through which her
immortality--which yet she counts self-inherent--is flowing fast away:
to fill it up, almost from her birth she has pursued her with an utter
enmity. But the result of her machinations hitherto is, that in the
region she claims as her own, has appeared a colony of children, to
which that daughter is heart and head and sheltering wings. My Eve
longed after the child, and would have been to her as a mother to her
first-born, but we were then unfit to train her: she was carried into
the wilderness, and for ages we knew nothing of her fate. But she was
divinely fostered, and had young angels for her playmates; nor did she
ever know care until she found a baby in the wood, and the mother-heart
in her awoke. One by one she has found many children since, and that
heart is not yet full. Her family is her absorbing charge, and never
children were better mothered. Her authority over them is without
appeal, but it is unknown to herself, and never comes to the surface
except in watchfulness and service. She has forgotten the time when she
lived without them, and thinks she came herself from the wood, the first
of the family.

“You have saved the life of her and their enemy; therefore your life
belongs to her and them. The princess was on her way to destroy them,
but as she crossed that stream, vengeance overtook her, and she would
have died had you not come to her aid. You did; and ere now she would
have been raging among the Little Ones, had she dared again cross the
stream. But there was yet a way to the blessed little colony through the
world of the three dimensions; only, from that, by the slaying of her
former body, she had excluded herself, and except in personal contact
with one belonging to it, could not re-enter it. You provided the
opportunity: never, in all her long years, had she had one before. Her
hand, with lightest touch, was on one or other of your muffled feet,
every step as you climbed. In that little chamber, she is now watching
to leave it as soon as ever she may.”

“She cannot know anything about the door!--she cannot at least know how
to open it!” I said; but my heart was not so confident as my words.

“Hush, hush!” whispered the librarian, with uplifted hand; “she can hear
through anything!--You must go at once, and make your way to my wife’s
cottage. I will remain to keep guard over her.”

“Let me go to the Little Ones!” I cried.

“Beware of that, Mr. Vane. Go to my wife, and do as she tells you.”

His advice did not recommend itself: why haste to encounter measureless
delay? If not to protect the children, why go at all? Alas, even now I
believed him only enough to ask him questions, not to obey him!

“Tell me first, Mr. Raven,” I said, “why, of all places, you have shut
her up there! The night I ran from your house, it was immediately into
that closet!”

“The closet is no nearer our cottage, and no farther from it, than any
or every other place.”

“But,” I returned, hard to persuade where I could not understand, “how
is it then that, when you please, you take from that same door a whole
book where I saw and felt only a part of one? The other part, you have
just told me, stuck through into your library: when you put it again on
the shelf, will it not again stick through into that? Must not then the
two places, in which parts of the same volume can at the same moment
exist, lie close together? Or can one part of the book be in space, or
SOMEWHERE, and the other out of space, or NOWHERE?”

“I am sorry I cannot explain the thing to you,” he answered; “but there
is no provision in you for understanding it. Not merely, therefore,
is the phenomenon inexplicable to you, but the very nature of it is
inapprehensible by you. Indeed I but partially apprehend it myself. At
the same time you are constantly experiencing things which you not only
do not, but cannot understand. You think you understand them, but your
understanding of them is only your being used to them, and therefore not
surprised at them. You accept them, not because you understand them,
but because you must accept them: they are there, and have unavoidable
relations with you! The fact is, no man understands anything; when he
knows he does not understand, that is his first tottering step--not
toward understanding, but toward the capability of one day
understanding. To such things as these you are not used, therefore you
do not fancy you understand them. Neither I nor any man can here help
you to understand; but I may, perhaps, help you a little to believe!”

He went to the door of the closet, gave a low whistle, and stood
listening. A moment after, I heard, or seemed to hear, a soft whir of
wings, and, looking up, saw a white dove perch for an instant on the top
of the shelves over the portrait, thence drop to Mr. Raven’s shoulder,
and lay her head against his cheek. Only by the motions of their two
heads could I tell that they were talking together; I heard nothing.
Neither had I moved my eyes from them, when suddenly she was not there,
and Mr. Raven came back to his seat.

“Why did you whistle?” I asked. “Surely sound here is not sound there!”

“You are right,” he answered. “I whistled that you might know I called
her. Not the whistle, but what the whistle meant reached her.--There is
not a minute to lose: you must go!”

“I will at once!” I replied, and moved for the door.

“You will sleep to-night at my hostelry!” he said--not as a question,
but in a tone of mild authority.

“My heart is with the children,” I replied. “But if you insist----”

“I do insist. You can otherwise effect nothing.--I will go with you as
far as the mirror, and see you off.”

He rose. There came a sudden shock in the closet. Apparently the
leopardess had flung herself against the heavy door. I looked at my
companion.

“Come; come!” he said.

Ere we reached the door of the library, a howling yell came after
us, mingled with the noise of claws that scored at the hard oak. I
hesitated, and half turned.

“To think of her lying there alone,” I murmured, “--with that terrible
wound!”

“Nothing will ever close that wound,” he answered, with a sigh. “It must
eat into her heart! Annihilation itself is no death to evil. Only good
where evil was, is evil dead. An evil thing must live with its evil
until it chooses to be good. That alone is the slaying of evil.”

I held my peace until a sound I did not understand overtook us.

“If she should break loose!” I cried.

“Make haste!” he rejoined. “I shall hurry down the moment you are gone,
and I have disarranged the mirrors.”

We ran, and reached the wooden chamber breathless. Mr. Raven seized the
chains and adjusted the hood. Then he set the mirrors in their proper
relation, and came beside me in front of the standing one. Already I saw
the mountain range emerging from the mist.

Between us, wedging us asunder, darted, with the yell of a demon, the
huge bulk of the spotted leopardess. She leaped through the mirror as
through an open window, and settled at once into a low, even, swift
gallop.

I cast a look of dismay at my companion, and sprang through to follow
her. He came after me leisurely.

“You need not run,” he called; “you cannot overtake her. This is our
way.”

As he spoke he turned in the opposite direction.

“She has more magic at her finger-tips than I care to know!” he added
quietly.

“We must do what we can!” I said, and ran on, but sickening as I saw her
dwindle in the distance, stopped, and went back to him.

“Doubtless we must,” he answered. “But my wife has warned Mara, and she
will do her part; you must sleep first: you have given me your word!”

“Nor do I mean to break it. But surely sleep is not the first thing!
Surely, surely, action takes precedence of repose!”

“A man can do nothing he is not fit to do.--See! did I not tell you Mara
would do her part?”

I looked whither he pointed, and saw a white spot moving at an acute
angle with the line taken by the leopardess.

“There she is!” he cried. “The spotted leopardess is strong, but the
white is stronger!”

“I have seen them fight: the combat did not appear decisive as to that.”

“How should such eyes tell which have never slept? The princess did
not confess herself beaten--that she never does--but she fled! When she
confesses her last hope gone, that it is indeed hard to kick against
the goad, then will her day begin to dawn! Come; come! He who cannot act
must make haste to sleep!”




CHAPTER XXXI. THE SEXTON’S OLD HORSE

I stood and watched the last gleam of the white leopardess melt away,
then turned to follow my guide--but reluctantly. What had I to do with
sleep? Surely reason was the same in every world, and what reason could
there be in going to sleep with the dead, when the hour was calling the
live man? Besides, no one would wake me, and how could I be certain of
waking early--of waking at all?--the sleepers in that house let morning
glide into noon, and noon into night, nor ever stirred! I murmured, but
followed, for I knew not what else to do.

The librarian walked on in silence, and I walked silent as he. Time and
space glided past us. The sun set; it began to grow dark, and I felt in
the air the spreading cold of the chamber of death. My heart sank lower
and lower. I began to lose sight of the lean, long-coated figure, and at
length could no more hear his swishing stride through the heather.
But then I heard instead the slow-flapping wings of the raven; and, at
intervals, now a firefly, now a gleaming butterfly rose into the rayless
air.

By and by the moon appeared, slow crossing the far horizon.

“You are tired, are you not, Mr. Vane?” said the raven, alighting on a
stone. “You must make acquaintance with the horse that will carry you in
the morning!”

He gave a strange whistle through his long black beak. A spot appeared
on the face of the half-risen moon. To my ears came presently the
drumming of swift, soft-galloping hoofs, and in a minute or two, out of
the very disc of the moon, low-thundered the terrible horse. His mane
flowed away behind him like the crest of a wind-fighting wave, torn
seaward in hoary spray, and the whisk of his tail kept blinding the eye
of the moon. Nineteen hands he seemed, huge of bone, tight of skin, hard
of muscle--a steed the holy Death himself might choose on which to ride
abroad and slay! The moon seemed to regard him with awe; in her scary
light he looked a very skeleton, loosely roped together. Terrifically
large, he moved with the lightness of a winged insect. As he drew near,
his speed slackened, and his mane and tail drifted about him settling.

Now I was not merely a lover of horses, but I loved every horse I saw.
I had never spent money except upon horses, and had never sold a horse.
The sight of this mighty one, terrible to look at, woke in me longing to
possess him. It was pure greed, nay, rank covetousness, an evil thing
in all the worlds. I do not mean that I could have stolen him, but that,
regardless of his proper place, I would have bought him if I could. I
laid my hands on him, and stroked the protuberant bones that humped a
hide smooth and thin, and shiny as satin--so shiny that the very shape
of the moon was reflected in it; I fondled his sharp-pointed ears,
whispered words in them, and breathed into his red nostrils the breath
of a man’s life. He in return breathed into mine the breath of a horse’s
life, and we loved one another. What eyes he had! Blue-filmy like the
eyes of the dead, behind each was a glowing coal! The raven, with wings
half extended, looked on pleased at my love-making to his magnificent
horse.

“That is well! be friends with him,” he said: “he will carry you all the
better to-morrow!--Now we must hurry home!”

My desire to ride the horse had grown passionate.

“May I not mount him at once, Mr. Raven?” I cried.

“By all means!” he answered. “Mount, and ride him home.”

The horse bent his head over my shoulder lovingly. I twisted my hands
in his mane and scrambled onto his back, not without aid from certain
protuberant bones.

“He would outspeed any leopard in creation!” I cried.

“Not that way at night,” answered the raven; “the road is
difficult.--But come; loss now will be gain then! To wait is harder
than to run, and its meed is the fuller. Go on, my son--straight to
the cottage. I shall be there as soon as you. It will rejoice my wife’s
heart to see son of hers on that horse!”

I sat silent. The horse stood like a block of marble.

“Why do you linger?” asked the raven.

“I long so much to ride after the leopardess,” I answered, “that I can
scarce restrain myself!”

“You have promised!”

“My debt to the Little Ones appears, I confess, a greater thing than my
bond to you.”

“Yield to the temptation and you will bring mischief upon them--and on
yourself also.”

“What matters it for me? I love them; and love works no evil. I will
go.”

But the truth was, I forgot the children, infatuate with the horse.

Eyes flashed through the darkness, and I knew that Adam stood in his
own shape beside me. I knew also by his voice that he repressed an
indignation almost too strong for him.

“Mr. Vane,” he said, “do you not know why you have not yet done anything
worth doing?”

“Because I have been a fool,” I answered.

“Wherein?”

“In everything.”

“Which do you count your most indiscreet action?”

“Bringing the princess to life: I ought to have left her to her just
fate.”

“Nay, now you talk foolishly! You could not have done otherwise than you
did, not knowing she was evil!--But you never brought any one to life!
How could you, yourself dead?”

“I dead?” I cried.

“Yes,” he answered; “and you will be dead, so long as you refuse to
die.”

“Back to the old riddling!” I returned scornfully.

“Be persuaded, and go home with me,” he continued gently. “The
most--nearly the only foolish thing you ever did, was to run from our
dead.”

I pressed the horse’s ribs, and he was off like a sudden wind. I gave
him a pat on the side of the neck, and he went about in a sharp-driven
curve, “close to the ground, like a cat when scratchingly she wheels
about after a mouse,” leaning sideways till his mane swept the tops of
the heather.

Through the dark I heard the wings of the raven. Five quick flaps I
heard, and he perched on the horse’s head. The horse checked himself
instantly, ploughing up the ground with his feet.

“Mr. Vane,” croaked the raven, “think what you are doing! Twice already
has evil befallen you--once from fear, and once from heedlessness:
breach of word is far worse; it is a crime.”

“The Little Ones are in frightful peril, and I brought it upon them!” I
cried. “--But indeed I will not break my word to you. I will return, and
spend in your house what nights--what days--what years you please.”

“I tell you once more you will do them other than good if you go
to-night,” he insisted.

But a false sense of power, a sense which had no root and was merely
vibrated into me from the strength of the horse, had, alas, rendered me
too stupid to listen to anything he said!

“Would you take from me my last chance of reparation?” I cried. “This
time there shall be no shirking! It is my duty, and I will go--if I
perish for it!”

“Go, then, foolish boy!” he returned, with anger in his croak. “Take the
horse, and ride to failure! May it be to humility!”

He spread his wings and flew. Again I pressed the lean ribs under me.

“After the spotted leopardess!” I whispered in his ear.

He turned his head this way and that, snuffing the air; then started,
and went a few paces in a slow, undecided walk. Suddenly he quickened
his walk; broke into a trot; began to gallop, and in a few moments his
speed was tremendous. He seemed to see in the dark; never stumbled, not
once faltered, not once hesitated. I sat as on the ridge of a wave. I
felt under me the play of each individual muscle: his joints were so
elastic, and his every movement glided so into the next, that not once
did he jar me. His growing swiftness bore him along until he flew rather
than ran. The wind met and passed us like a tornado.

Across the evil hollow we sped like a bolt from an arblast. No monster
lifted its neck; all knew the hoofs that thundered over their heads! We
rushed up the hills, we shot down their farther slopes; from the rocky
chasms of the river-bed he did not swerve; he held on over them his
fierce, terrible gallop. The moon, half-way up the heaven, gazed with
a solemn trouble in her pale countenance. Rejoicing in the power of my
steed and in the pride of my life, I sat like a king and rode.

We were near the middle of the many channels, my horse every other
moment clearing one, sometimes two in his stride, and now and then
gathering himself for a great bounding leap, when the moon reached the
key-stone of her arch. Then came a wonder and a terror: she began to
descend rolling like the nave of Fortune’s wheel bowled by the gods, and
went faster and faster. Like our own moon, this one had a human face,
and now the broad forehead now the chin was uppermost as she rolled. I
gazed aghast.

Across the ravines came the howling of wolves. An ugly fear began to
invade the hollow places of my heart; my confidence was on the wane! The
horse maintained his headlong swiftness, with ears pricked forward, and
thirsty nostrils exulting in the wind his career created. But there was
the moon jolting like an old chariot-wheel down the hill of heaven, with
awful boding! She rolled at last over the horizon-edge and disappeared,
carrying all her light with her.

The mighty steed was in the act of clearing a wide shallow channel when
we were caught in the net of the darkness. His head dropped; its impetus
carried his helpless bulk across, but he fell in a heap on the margin,
and where he fell he lay. I got up, kneeled beside him, and felt him all
over. Not a bone could I find broken, but he was a horse no more. I sat
down on the body, and buried my face in my hands.




CHAPTER XXXII. THE LOVERS AND THE BAGS

Bitterly cold grew the night. The body froze under me. The cry of the
wolves came nearer; I heard their feet soft-padding on the rocky ground;
their quick panting filled the air. Through the darkness I saw the many
glowing eyes; their half-circle contracted around me. My time was come!
I sprang to my feet.--Alas, I had not even a stick!

They came in a rush, their eyes flashing with fury of greed, their black
throats agape to devour me. I stood hopelessly waiting them. One moment
they halted over the horse--then came at me.

With a sound of swiftness all but silence, a cloud of green eyes came
down on their flank. The heads that bore them flew at the wolves with a
cry feebler yet fiercer than their howling snarl, and by the cry I knew
them: they were cats, led by a huge gray one. I could see nothing of
him but his eyes, yet I knew him--and so knew his colour and bigness. A
terrific battle followed, whose tale alone came to me through the night.
I would have fled, for surely it was but a fight which should have
me!--only where was the use? my first step would be a fall! and my foes
of either kind could both see and scent me in the dark!

All at once I missed the howling, and the caterwauling grew wilder. Then
came the soft padding, and I knew it meant flight: the cats had defeated
the wolves! In a moment the sharpest of sharp teeth were in my legs;
a moment more and the cats were all over me in a live cataract,
biting wherever they could bite, furiously scratching me anywhere and
everywhere. A multitude clung to my body; I could not flee. Madly I fell
on the hateful swarm, every finger instinct with destruction. I tore
them off me, I throttled at them in vain: when I would have flung them
from me, they clung to my hands like limpets. I trampled them under my
feet, thrust my fingers in their eyes, caught them in jaws stronger
than theirs, but could not rid myself of one. Without cease they kept
discovering upon me space for fresh mouthfuls; they hauled at my skin
with the widespread, horribly curved pincers of clutching claws; they
hissed and spat in my face--but never touched it until, in my despair, I
threw myself on the ground, when they forsook my body, and darted at
my face. I rose, and immediately they left it, the more to occupy
themselves with my legs. In an agony I broke from them and ran, careless
whither, cleaving the solid dark. They accompanied me in a surrounding
torrent, now rubbing, now leaping up against me, but tormenting me no
more. When I fell, which was often, they gave me time to rise; when from
fear of falling I slackened my pace, they flew afresh at my legs.
All that miserable night they kept me running--but they drove me by a
comparatively smooth path, for I tumbled into no gully, and passing the
Evil Wood without seeing it, left it behind in the dark. When at length
the morning appeared, I was beyond the channels, and on the verge of the
orchard valley. In my joy I would have made friends with my persecutors,
but not a cat was to be seen. I threw myself on the moss, and fell fast
asleep.

I was waked by a kick, to find myself bound hand and foot, once more the
thrall of the giants!

“What fitter?” I said to myself; “to whom else should I belong?” and I
laughed in the triumph of self-disgust. A second kick stopped my false
merriment; and thus recurrently assisted by my captors, I succeeded at
length in rising to my feet.

Six of them were about me. They undid the rope that tied my legs
together, attached a rope to each of them, and dragged me away. I walked
as well as I could, but, as they frequently pulled both ropes at once,
I fell repeatedly, whereupon they always kicked me up again. Straight to
my old labour they took me, tied my leg-ropes to a tree, undid my arms,
and put the hateful flint in my left hand. Then they lay down and pelted
me with fallen fruit and stones, but seldom hit me. If I could have
freed my legs, and got hold of a stick I spied a couple of yards from
me, I would have fallen upon all six of them! “But the Little Ones will
come at night!” I said to myself, and was comforted.

All day I worked hard. When the darkness came, they tied my hands, and
left me fast to the tree. I slept a good deal, but woke often, and every
time from a dream of lying in the heart of a heap of children. With the
morning my enemies reappeared, bringing their kicks and their bestial
company.

It was about noon, and I was nearly failing from fatigue and hunger,
when I heard a sudden commotion in the brushwood, followed by a burst of
the bell-like laughter so dear to my heart. I gave a loud cry of delight
and welcome. Immediately rose a trumpeting as of baby-elephants, a
neighing as of foals, and a bellowing as of calves, and through the
bushes came a crowd of Little Ones, on diminutive horses, on small
elephants, on little bears; but the noises came from the riders, not the
animals. Mingled with the mounted ones walked the bigger of the boys
and girls, among the latter a woman with a baby crowing in her arms. The
giants sprang to their lumbering feet, but were instantly saluted with a
storm of sharp stones; the horses charged their legs; the bears rose and
hugged them at the waist; the elephants threw their trunks round their
necks, pulled them down, and gave them such a trampling as they had
sometimes given, but never received before. In a moment my ropes were
undone, and I was in the arms, seemingly innumerable, of the Little
Ones. For some time I saw no more of the giants.

They made me sit down, and my Lona came, and without a word began to
feed me with the loveliest red and yellow fruits. I sat and ate, the
whole colony mounting guard until I had done. Then they brought up two
of the largest of their elephants, and having placed them side by side,
hooked their trunks and tied their tails together. The docile creatures
could have untied their tails with a single shake, and unhooked their
trunks by forgetting them; but tails and trunks remained as their little
masters had arranged them, and it was clear the elephants understood
that they must keep their bodies parallel. I got up, and laid myself in
the hollow between their two backs; when the wise animals, counteracting
the weight that pushed them apart, leaned against each other, and made
for me a most comfortable litter. My feet, it is true, projected beyond
their tails, but my head lay pillowed on an ear of each. Then some of
the smaller children, mounting for a bodyguard, ranged themselves in
a row along the back of each of my bearers; the whole assembly formed
itself in train; and the procession began to move.

Whither they were carrying me, I did not try to conjecture; I yielded
myself to their pleasure, almost as happy as they. Chattering and
laughing and playing glad tricks innumerable at first, the moment they
saw I was going to sleep, they became still as judges.

I woke: a sudden musical uproar greeted the opening of my eyes.

We were travelling through the forest in which they found the babies,
and which, as I had suspected, stretched all the way from the valley to
the hot stream.

A tiny girl sat with her little feet close to my face, and looked down
at me coaxingly for a while, then spoke, the rest seeming to hang on her
words.

“We make a petisson to king,” she said.

“What is it, my darling?” I asked.

“Shut eyes one minute,” she answered.

“Certainly I will! Here goes!” I replied, and shut my eyes close.

“No, no! not fore I tell oo!” she cried.

I opened them again, and we talked and laughed together for quite
another hour.

“Close eyes!” she said suddenly.

I closed my eyes, and kept them close. The elephants stood still. I
heard a soft scurry, a little rustle, and then a silence--for in that
world SOME silences ARE heard.

“Open eyes!” twenty voices a little way off shouted at once; but when I
obeyed, not a creature was visible except the elephants that bore me.
I knew the children marvellously quick in getting out of the way--the
giants had taught them that; but when I raised myself, and looking about
in the open shrubless forest, could descry neither hand nor heel, I
stared in “blank astonishment.”

The sun was set, and it was fast getting dark, yet presently a multitude
of birds began to sing. I lay down to listen, pretty sure that, if I
left them alone, the hiders would soon come out again.

The singing grew to a little storm of bird-voices. “Surely the children
must have something to do with it!--And yet how could they set the
birds singing?” I said to myself as I lay and listened. Soon, however,
happening to look up into the tree under which my elephants stood,
I thought I spied a little motion among the leaves, and looked more
keenly. Sudden white spots appeared in the dark foliage, the music died
down, a gale of childish laughter rippled the air, and white spots came
out in every direction: the trees were full of children! In the wildest
merriment they began to descend, some dropping from bough to bough
so rapidly that I could scarce believe they had not fallen. I left my
litter, and was instantly surrounded--a mark for all the artillery of
their jubilant fun. With stately composure the elephants walked away to
bed.

“But,” said I, when their uproarious gladness had had scope for a while,
“how is it that I never before heard you sing like the birds? Even when
I thought it must be you, I could hardly believe it!”

“Ah,” said one of the wildest, “but we were not birds then! We were
run-creatures, not fly-creatures! We had our hide-places in the bushes
then; but when we came to no-bushes, only trees, we had to build nests!
When we built nests, we grew birds, and when we were birds, we had to do
birds! We asked them to teach us their noises, and they taught us, and
now we are real birds!--Come and see my nest. It’s not big enough for
king, but it’s big enough for king to see me in it!”

I told him I could not get up a tree without the sun to show me the way;
when he came, I would try.

“Kings seldom have wings!” I added.

“King! king!” cried one, “oo knows none of us hasn’t no wings--foolis
feddery tings! Arms and legs is better.”

“That is true. I can get up without wings--and carry straws in my mouth
too, to build my nest with!”

“Oo knows!” he answered, and went away sucking his thumb.

A moment after, I heard him calling out of his nest, a great way up a
walnut tree of enormous size,

“Up adain, king! Dood night! I seepy!”

And I heard no more of him till he woke me in the morning.




CHAPTER XXXIII. LONA’S NARRATIVE

I lay down by a tree, and one and one or in little groups, the children
left me and climbed to their nests. They were always so tired at night
and so rested in the morning, that they were equally glad to go to sleep
and to get up again. I, although tired also, lay awake: Lona had not bid
me good night, and I was sure she would come.

I had been struck, the moment I saw her again, with her resemblance to
the princess, and could not doubt her the daughter of whom Adam had
told me; but in Lona the dazzling beauty of Lilith was softened by
childlikeness, and deepened by the sense of motherhood. “She is
occupied probably,” I said to myself, “with the child of the woman I met
fleeing!” who, she had already told me, was not half mother enough.

She came at length, sat down beside me, and after a few moments of
silent delight, expressed mainly by stroking my face and hands, began to
tell me everything that had befallen since I went. The moon appeared as
we talked, and now and then, through the leaves, lighted for a quivering
moment her beautiful face--full of thought, and a care whose love
redeemed and glorified it. How such a child should have been born of
such a mother--such a woman of such a princess, was hard to understand;
but then, happily, she had two parents--say rather, three! She drew my
heart by what in me was likest herself, and I loved her as one who, grow
to what perfection she might, could only become the more a child. I knew
now that I loved her when I left her, and that the hope of seeing
her again had been my main comfort. Every word she spoke seemed to go
straight to my heart, and, like the truth itself, make it purer.

She told me that after I left the orchard valley, the giants began to
believe a little more in the actual existence of their neighbours, and
became in consequence more hostile to them. Sometimes the Little
Ones would see them trampling furiously, perceiving or imagining some
indication of their presence, while they indeed stood beside, and
laughed at their foolish rage. By and by, however, their animosity
assumed a more practical shape: they began to destroy the trees on
whose fruit the Little Ones lived. This drove the mother of them all to
meditate counteraction. Setting the sharpest of them to listen at
night, she learned that the giants thought I was hidden somewhere near,
intending, as soon as I recovered my strength, to come in the dark and
kill them sleeping. Thereupon she concluded that the only way to stop
the destruction was to give them ground for believing that they had
abandoned the place. The Little Ones must remove into the forest--beyond
the range of the giants, but within reach of their own trees, which they
must visit by night! The main objection to the plan was, that the forest
had little or no undergrowth to shelter--or conceal them if necessary.

But she reflected that where birds, there the Little Ones could find
habitation. They had eager sympathies with all modes of life, and could
learn of the wildest creatures: why should they not take refuge from the
cold and their enemies in the tree-tops? why not, having lain in the
low brushwood, seek now the lofty foliage? why not build nests where
it would not serve to scoop hollows? All that the birds could do, the
Little Ones could learn--except, indeed, to fly!

She spoke to them on the subject, and they heard with approval. They
could already climb the trees, and they had often watched the birds
building their nests! The trees of the forest, although large, did not
look bad! They went up much nearer the sky than those of the giants,
and spread out their arms--some even stretched them down--as if inviting
them to come and live with them! Perhaps, in the top of the tallest,
they might find that bird that laid the baby-eggs, and sat upon them
till they were ripe, then tumbled them down to let the little ones out!
Yes; they would build sleep-houses in the trees, where no giant would
see them, for never by any chance did one throw back his dull head to
look up! Then the bad giants would be sure they had left the country,
and the Little Ones would gather their own apples and pears and figs and
mesples and peaches when they were asleep!

Thus reasoned the Lovers, and eagerly adopted Lona’s suggestion--with
the result that they were soon as much at home in the tree-tops as the
birds themselves, and that the giants came ere long to the conclusion
that they had frightened them out of the country--whereupon they forgot
their trees, and again almost ceased to believe in the existence of
their small neighbours.

Lona asked me whether I had not observed that many of the children were
grown. I answered I had not, but could readily believe it. She assured
me it was so, but said the certain evidence that their minds too had
grown since their migration upward, had gone far in mitigation of the
alarm the discovery had occasioned her.

In the last of the short twilight, and later when the moon was shining,
they went down to the valley, and gathered fruit enough to serve them
the next day; for the giants never went out in the twilight: that to
them was darkness; and they hated the moon: had they been able, they
would have extinguished her. But soon the Little Ones found that fruit
gathered in the night was not altogether good the next day; so the
question arose whether it would not be better, instead of pretending to
have left the country, to make the bad giants themselves leave it.

They had already, she said, in exploring the forest, made acquaintance
with the animals in it, and with most of them personally. Knowing
therefore how strong as well as wise and docile some of them were, and
how swift as well as manageable many others, they now set themselves
to secure their aid against the giants, and with loving, playful
approaches, had soon made more than friends of most of them, from
the first addressing horse or elephant as Brother or Sister Elephant,
Brother or Sister Horse, until before long they had an individual name
for each. It was some little time longer before they said Brother or
Sister Bear, but that came next, and the other day she had heard one
little fellow cry, “Ah, Sister Serpent!” to a snake that bit him as he
played with it too roughly. Most of them would have nothing to do with a
caterpillar, except watch it through its changes; but when at length it
came from its retirement with wings, all would immediately address it as
Sister Butterfly, congratulating it on its metamorphosis--for which
they used a word that meant something like REPENTANCE--and evidently
regarding it as something sacred.

One moonlit evening, as they were going to gather their fruit, they came
upon a woman seated on the ground with a baby in her lap--the woman
I had met on my way to Bulika. They took her for a giantess that had
stolen one of their babies, for they regarded all babies as their
property. Filled with anger they fell upon her multitudinously, beating
her after a childish, yet sufficiently bewildering fashion. She would
have fled, but a boy threw himself down and held her by the feet.
Recovering her wits, she recognised in her assailants the children whose
hospitality she sought, and at once yielded the baby. Lona appeared, and
carried it away in her bosom.

But while the woman noted that in striking her they were careful not to
hurt the child, the Little Ones noted that, as she surrendered her,
she hugged and kissed her just as they wanted to do, and came to the
conclusion that she must be a giantess of the same kind as the good
giant. The moment Lona had the baby, therefore, they brought the mother
fruit, and began to show her every sort of childish attention.

Now the woman had been in perplexity whither to betake herself, not
daring to go back to the city, because the princess was certain to find
out who had lamed her leopardess: delighted with the friendliness of
the little people, she resolved to remain with them for the present:
she would have no trouble with her infant, and might find some way
of returning to her husband, who was rich in money and gems, and very
seldom unkind to her.

Here I must supplement, partly from conjecture, what Lona told me about
the woman. With the rest of the inhabitants of Bulika, she was aware
of the tradition that the princess lived in terror of the birth of an
infant destined to her destruction. They were all unacquainted, however,
with the frightful means by which she preserved her youth and beauty;
and her deteriorating physical condition requiring a larger use of those
means, they took the apparent increase of her hostility to children for
a sign that she saw her doom approaching. This, although no one dreamed
of any attempt against her, nourished in them hopes of change.

Now arose in the mind of the woman the idea of furthering the fulfilment
of the shadowy prediction, or of using the myth at least for her own
restoration to her husband. For what seemed more probable than that
the fate foretold lay with these very children? They were marvellously
brave, and the Bulikans cowards, in abject terror of animals! If she
could rouse in the Little Ones the ambition of taking the city, then
in the confusion of the attack, she would escape from the little army,
reach her house unrecognised, and there lying hidden, await the result!

Should the children now succeed in expelling the giants, she would
begin at once, while they were yet flushed with victory, to suggest the
loftier aim! By disposition, indeed, they were unfit for warfare; they
hardly ever quarrelled, and never fought; loved every live thing, and
hated either to hurt or to suffer. Still, they were easily influenced,
and could certainly be taught any exercise within their strength!--At
once she set some of the smaller ones throwing stones at a mark; and
soon they were all engrossed with the new game, and growing skilful in
it.

The first practical result was their use of stones in my rescue. While
gathering fruit, they found me asleep, went home, held a council, came
the next day with their elephants and horses, overwhelmed the few
giants watching me, and carried me off. Jubilant over their victory,
the smaller boys were childishly boastful, the bigger boys less
ostentatious, while the girls, although their eyes flashed more, were
not so talkative as usual. The woman of Bulika no doubt felt encouraged.

We talked the greater part of the night, chiefly about the growth of the
children, and what it might indicate. With Lona’s power of recognising
truth I had long been familiar; now I began to be astonished at her
practical wisdom. Probably, had I been more of a child myself, I should
have wondered less.

It was yet far from morning when I became aware of a slight fluttering
and scrambling. I rose on my elbow, and looking about me, saw many
Little Ones descend from their nests. They disappeared, and in a few
moments all was again still.

“What are they doing?” I asked.

“They think,” answered Lona, “that, stupid as they are, the giants
will search the wood, and they are gone to gather stones with which to
receive them. Stones are not plentiful in the forest, and they have to
scatter far to find enow. They will carry them to their nests, and from
the trees attack the giants as they come within reach. Knowing their
habits, they do not expect them before the morning. If they do come, it
will be the opening of a war of expulsion: one or the other people must
go. The result, however, is hardly doubtful. We do not mean to
kill them; indeed, their skulls are so thick that I do not think we
could!--not that killing would do them much harm; they are so little
alive! If one were killed, his giantess would not remember him beyond
three days!”

“Do the children then throw so well that the thing MIGHT happen?” I
asked.

“Wait till you see them!” she answered, with a touch of pride. “--But I
have not yet told you,” she went on, “of a strange thing that happened
the night before last!--We had come home from gathering our fruit, and
were asleep in our nests, when we were roused by the horrid noises
of beasts fighting. The moon was bright, and in a moment our trees
glittered with staring little eyes, watching two huge leopardesses, one
perfectly white, the other covered with black spots, which worried and
tore each other with I do not know how many teeth and claws. To judge by
her back, the spotted creature must have been climbing a tree when the
other sprang upon her. When first I saw them, they were just under my
own tree, rolling over and over each other. I got down on the lowest
branch, and saw them perfectly. The children enjoyed the spectacle,
siding some with this one, some with that, for we had never seen such
beasts before, and thought they were only at play. But by degrees their
roaring and growling almost ceased, and I saw that they were in deadly
earnest, and heartily wished neither might be left able to climb a
tree. But when the children saw the blood pouring from their flanks and
throats, what do you think they did? They scurried down to comfort them,
and gathering in a great crowd about the terrible creatures, began to
pat and stroke them. Then I got down as well, for they were much too
absorbed to heed my calling to them; but before I could reach them, the
white one stopped fighting, and sprang among them with such a hideous
yell that they flew up into the trees like birds. Before I got back into
mine, the wicked beasts were at it again tooth and claw. Then Whitey
had the best of it; Spotty ran away as fast as she could run, and Whitey
came and lay down at the foot of my tree. But in a minute or two she was
up again, and walking about as if she thought Spotty might be lurking
somewhere. I waked often, and every time I looked out, I saw her. In the
morning she went away.”

“I know both the beasts,” I said. “Spotty is a bad beast. She hates the
children, and would kill every one of them. But Whitey loves them. She
ran at them only to frighten them away, lest Spotty should get hold of
any of them. No one needs be afraid of Whitey!”

By this time the Little Ones were coming back, and with much noise, for
they had no care to keep quiet now that they were at open war with the
giants, and laden with good stones. They mounted to their nests again,
though with difficulty because of their burdens, and in a minute were
fast asleep. Lona retired to her tree. I lay where I was, and slept
the better that I thought most likely the white leopardess was still
somewhere in the wood.

I woke soon after the sun, and lay pondering. Two hours passed, and then
in truth the giants began to appear, in straggling companies of three
and four, until I counted over a hundred of them. The children were
still asleep, and to call them would draw the attention of the giants: I
would keep quiet so long as they did not discover me. But by and by one
came blundering upon me, stumbled, fell, and rose again. I thought he
would pass heedless, but he began to search about. I sprang to my feet,
and struck him in the middle of his huge body. The roar he gave roused
the children, and a storm as of hail instantly came on, of which not a
stone struck me, and not one missed the giant. He fell and lay. Others
drew near, and the storm extended, each purblind creature becoming,
as he entered the range of a garrisoned tree, a target for converging
stones. In a short time almost every giant was prostrate, and a jubilant
pæan of bird-song rose from the tops of fifty trees.

Many elephants came hurrying up, and the children descending the trees
like monkeys, in a moment every elephant had three or four of them on
his back, and thus loaded, began to walk over the giants, who lay and
roared. Losing patience at length with their noise, the elephants gave
them a few blows of their trunks, and left them.

Until night the bad giants remained where they had fallen, silent and
motionless. The next morning they had disappeared every one, and the
children saw no more of them. They removed to the other end of the
orchard valley, and never after ventured into the forest.




CHAPTER XXXIV. PREPARATION

Victory thus gained, the woman of Bulika began to speak about the city,
and talked much of its defenceless condition, of the wickedness of
its princess, of the cowardice of its inhabitants. In a few days the
children chattered of nothing but Bulika, although indeed they had not
the least notion of what a city was. Then first I became aware of the
design of the woman, although not yet of its motive.

The idea of taking possession of the place, recommended itself greatly
to Lona--and to me also. The children were now so rapidly developing
faculty, that I could see no serious obstacle to the success of the
enterprise. For the terrible Lilith--woman or leopardess, I knew her one
vulnerable point, her doom through her daughter, and the influence
the ancient prophecy had upon the citizens: surely whatever in the
enterprise could be called risk, was worth taking! Successful,--and who
could doubt their success?--must not the Little Ones, from a crowd
of children, speedily become a youthful people, whose government and
influence would be all for righteousness? Ruling the wicked with a rod
of iron, would they not be the redemption of the nation?

At the same time, I have to confess that I was not without views of
personal advantage, not without ambition in the undertaking. It was
just, it seemed to me, that Lona should take her seat on the throne
that had been her mother’s, and natural that she should make of me her
consort and minister. For me, I would spend my life in her service; and
between us, what might we not do, with such a core to it as the Little
Ones, for the development of a noble state?

I confess also to an altogether foolish dream of opening a commerce in
gems between the two worlds--happily impossible, for it could have done
nothing but harm to both.

Calling to mind the appeal of Adam, I suggested to Lona that to find
them water might perhaps expedite the growth of the Little Ones. She
judged it prudent, however, to leave that alone for the present, as we
did not know what its first consequences might be; while, in the course
of time, it would almost certainly subject them to a new necessity.

“They are what they are without it!” she said: “when we have the city,
we will search for water!”

We began, therefore, and pushed forward our preparations, constantly
reviewing the merry troops and companies. Lona gave her attention
chiefly to the commissariat, while I drilled the little soldiers,
exercised them in stone-throwing, taught them the use of some other
weapons, and did all I could to make warriors of them. The main
difficulty was to get them to rally to their flag the instant the call
was sounded. Most of them were armed with slings, some of the bigger
boys with bows and arrows. The bigger girls carried aloe-spikes,
strong as steel and sharp as needles, fitted to longish shafts--rather
formidable weapons. Their sole duty was the charge of such as were too
small to fight.

Lona had herself grown a good deal, but did not seem aware of it:
she had always been, as she still was, the tallest! Her hair was
much longer, and she was become almost a woman, but not one beauty of
childhood had she outgrown. When first we met after our long separation,
she laid down her infant, put her arms round my neck, and clung to me
silent, her face glowing with gladness: the child whimpered; she
sprang to him, and had him in her bosom instantly. To see her with
any thoughtless, obstinate, or irritable little one, was to think of
a tender grandmother. I seemed to have known her for ages--for
always--from before time began! I hardly remembered my mother, but in my
mind’s eye she now looked like Lona; and if I imagined sister or child,
invariably she had the face of Lona! My every imagination flew to her;
she was my heart’s wife! She hardly ever sought me, but was almost
always within sound of my voice. What I did or thought, I referred
constantly to her, and rejoiced to believe that, while doing her work in
absolute independence, she was most at home by my side. Never for me did
she neglect the smallest child, and my love only quickened my sense
of duty. To love her and to do my duty, seemed, not indeed one, but
inseparable. She might suggest something I should do; she might ask me
what she ought to do; but she never seemed to suppose that I, any more
than she, would like to do, or could care about anything except what
must be done. Her love overflowed upon me--not in caresses, but in a
closeness of recognition which I can compare to nothing but the devotion
of a divine animal.

I never told her anything about her mother.

The wood was full of birds, the splendour of whose plumage, while it
took nothing from their song, seemed almost to make up for the lack of
flowers--which, apparently, could not grow without water. Their glorious
feathers being everywhere about in the forest, it came into my heart to
make from them a garment for Lona. While I gathered, and bound them in
overlapping rows, she watched me with evident appreciation of my choice
and arrangement, never asking what I was fashioning, but evidently
waiting expectant the result of my work. In a week or two it was
finished--a long loose mantle, to fasten at the throat and waist, with
openings for the arms.

I rose and put it on her. She rose, took it off, and laid it at my
feet--I imagine from a sense of propriety. I put it again on her
shoulders, and showed her where to put her arms through. She smiled,
looked at the feathers a little and stroked them--again took it off and
laid it down, this time by her side. When she left me, she carried it
with her, and I saw no more of it for some days. At length she came to
me one morning wearing it, and carrying another garment which she had
fashioned similarly, but of the dried leaves of a tough evergreen. It
had the strength almost of leather, and the appearance of scale-armour.
I put it on at once, and we always thereafter wore those garments when
on horseback.

For, on the outskirts of the forest, had appeared one day a troop of
full-grown horses, with which, as they were nowise alarmed at creatures
of a shape so different from their own, I had soon made friends, and two
of the finest I had trained for Lona and myself. Already accustomed to
ride a small one, her delight was great when first she looked down from
the back of an animal of the giant kind; and the horse showed himself
proud of the burden he bore. We exercised them every day until they had
such confidence in us as to obey instantly and fear nothing; after which
we always rode them at parade and on the march.

The undertaking did indeed at times appear to me a foolhardy one,
but the confidence of the woman of Bulika, real or simulated, always
overcame my hesitancy. The princess’s magic, she insisted, would prove
powerless against the children; and as to any force she might muster,
our animal-allies alone would assure our superiority: she was herself,
she said, ready, with a good stick, to encounter any two men of Bulika.
She confessed to not a little fear of the leopardess, but I was myself
ready for her. I shrank, however, from carrying ALL the children with
us.

“Would it not be better,” I said, “that you remained in the forest with
your baby and the smallest of the Little Ones?”

She answered that she greatly relied on the impression the sight of them
would make on the women, especially the mothers.

“When they see the darlings,” she said, “their hearts will be taken by
storm; and I must be there encouraging them to make a stand! If there be
a remnant of hardihood in the place, it will be found among the women!”

“YOU must not encumber yourself,” I said to Lona, “with any of the
children; you will be wanted everywhere!”

For there were two babies besides the woman’s, and even on horseback she
had almost always one in her arms.

“I do not remember ever being without a child to take care of,” she
answered; “but when we reach the city, it shall be as you wish!”

Her confidence in one who had failed so unworthily, shamed me. But
neither had I initiated the movement, nor had I any ground for opposing
it; I had no choice, but must give it the best help I could! For myself,
I was ready to live or die with Lona. Her humility as well as her trust
humbled me, and I gave myself heartily to her purposes.

Our way lying across a grassy plain, there was no need to take food for
the horses, or the two cows which would accompany us for the infants;
but the elephants had to be provided for. True, the grass was as good
for them as for those other animals, but it was short, and with their
one-fingered long noses, they could not pick enough for a single meal.
We had, therefore, set the whole colony to gather grass and make hay, of
which the elephants themselves could carry a quantity sufficient to last
them several days, with the supplement of what we would gather fresh
every time we halted. For the bears we stored nuts, and for ourselves
dried plenty of fruits. We had caught and tamed several more of the
big horses, and now having loaded them and the elephants with these
provisions, we were prepared to set out.

Then Lona and I held a general review, and I made them a little speech.
I began by telling them that I had learned a good deal about them, and
knew now where they came from. “We did not come from anywhere,” they
cried, interrupting me; “we are here!”

I told them that every one of them had a mother of his own, like the
mother of the last baby; that I believed they had all been brought from
Bulika when they were so small that they could not now remember it; that
the wicked princess there was so afraid of babies, and so determined to
destroy them, that their mothers had to carry them away and leave them
where she could not find them; and that now we were going to Bulika, to
find their mothers, and deliver them from the bad giantess.

“But I must tell you,” I continued, “that there is danger before us,
for, as you know, we may have to fight hard to take the city.”

“We can fight! we are ready!” cried the boys.

“Yes, you can,” I returned, “and I know you will: mothers are worth
fighting for! Only mind, you must all keep together.”

“Yes, yes; we’ll take care of each other,” they answered. “Nobody shall
touch one of us but his own mother!”

“You must mind, every one, to do immediately what your officers tell
you!”

“We will, we will!--Now we’re quite ready! Let us go!”

“Another thing you must not forget,” I went on: “when you strike, be
sure you make it a downright swinging blow; when you shoot an arrow,
draw it to the head; when you sling a stone, sling it strong and
straight.”

“That we will!” they cried with jubilant, fearless shout.

“Perhaps you will be hurt!”

“We don’t mind that!--Do we, boys?”

“Not a bit!”

“Some of you may very possibly be killed!” I said.

“I don’t mind being killed!” cried one of the finest of the smaller
boys: he rode a beautiful little bull, which galloped and jumped like a
horse.

“I don’t either! I don’t either!” came from all sides.

Then Lona, queen and mother and sister of them all, spoke from her big
horse by my side:

“I would give my life,” she said, “to have my mother! She might kill me
if she liked! I should just kiss her and die!”

“Come along, boys!” cried a girl. “We’re going to our mothers!”

A pang went through my heart.--But I could not draw back; it would be
moral ruin to the Little Ones!




Chapter XXXV. THE LITTLE ONES IN BULIKA

It was early in the morning when we set out, making, between the blue
sky and the green grass, a gallant show on the wide plain. We would
travel all the morning, and rest the afternoon; then go on at night,
rest the next day, and start again in the short twilight. The latter
part of our journey we would endeavour so to divide as to arrive at the
city with the first of the morning, and be already inside the gates when
discovered.

It seemed as if all the inhabitants of the forest would migrate with us.
A multitude of birds flew in front, imagining themselves, no doubt,
the leading division; great companies of butterflies and other insects
played about our heads; and a crowd of four-footed creatures followed
us. These last, when night came, left us almost all; but the birds and
the butterflies, the wasps and the dragon-flies, went with us to the
very gates of the city.

We halted and slept soundly through the afternoon: it was our first real
march, but none were tired. In the night we went faster, because it was
cold. Many fell asleep on the backs of their beasts, and woke in the
morning quite fresh. None tumbled off. Some rode shaggy, shambling
bears, which yet made speed enough, going as fast as the elephants.
Others were mounted on different kinds of deer, and would have been
racing all the way had I not prevented it. Those atop of the hay on the
elephants, unable to see the animals below them, would keep talking to
them as long as they were awake. Once, when we had halted to feed, I
heard a little fellow, as he drew out the hay to give him, commune thus
with his “darling beast”:

“Nosy dear, I am digging you out of the mountain, and shall soon get
down to you: be patient; I’m a coming! Very soon now you’ll send up your
nose to look for me, and then we’ll kiss like good elephants, we will!”

The same night there burst out such a tumult of elephant-trumpeting,
horse-neighing, and child-imitation, ringing far over the silent levels,
that, uncertain how near the city might not be, I quickly stilled the
uproar lest it should give warning of our approach.

Suddenly, one morning, the sun and the city rose, as it seemed,
together. To the children the walls appeared only a great mass of
rock, but when I told them the inside was full of nests of stone, I saw
apprehension and dislike at once invade their hearts: for the first time
in their lives, I believe--many of them long little lives--they knew
fear. The place looked to them bad: how were they to find mothers in
such a place? But they went on bravely, for they had confidence in
Lona--and in me too, little as I deserved it.

We rode through the sounding archway. Sure never had such a drumming of
hoofs, such a padding of paws and feet been heard on its old pavement!
The horses started and looked scared at the echo of their own steps;
some halted a moment, some plunged wildly and wheeled about; but they
were soon quieted, and went on. Some of the Little Ones shivered, and
all were still as death. The three girls held closer the infants they
carried. All except the bears and butterflies manifested fear.

On the countenance of the woman lay a dark anxiety; nor was I myself
unaffected by the general dread, for the whole army was on my hands and
on my conscience: I had brought it up to the danger whose shadow was
now making itself felt! But I was supported by the thought of the coming
kingdom of the Little Ones, with the bad giants its slaves, and the
animals its loving, obedient friends! Alas, I who dreamed thus, had not
myself learned to obey! Untrusting, unfaithful obstinacy had set me at
the head of that army of innocents! I was myself but a slave, like any
king in the world I had left who does or would do only what pleases him!
But Lona rode beside me a child indeed, therefore a free woman--calm,
silent, watchful, not a whit afraid!

We were nearly in the heart of the city before any of its inhabitants
became aware of our presence. But now windows began to open, and sleepy
heads to look out. Every face wore at first a dull stare of wonderless
astonishment, which, as soon as the starers perceived the animals,
changed to one of consternation. In spite of their fear, however, when
they saw that their invaders were almost all children, the women came
running into the streets, and the men followed. But for a time all of
them kept close to the houses, leaving open the middle of the way, for
they durst not approach the animals.

At length a boy, who looked about five years old, and was full of the
idea of his mother, spying in the crowd a woman whose face attracted
him, threw himself upon her from his antelope, and clung about her neck;
nor was she slow to return his embrace and kisses. But the hand of a man
came over her shoulder, and seized him by the neck. Instantly a girl ran
her sharp spear into the fellow’s arm. He sent forth a savage howl, and
immediately stabbed by two or three more, fled yelling.

“They are just bad giants!” said Lona, her eyes flashing as she drove
her horse against one of unusual height who, having stirred up the
little manhood in him, stood barring her way with a club. He dared not
abide the shock, but slunk aside, and the next moment went down, struck
by several stones. Another huge fellow, avoiding my charger, stepped
suddenly, with a speech whose rudeness alone was intelligible, between
me and the boy who rode behind me. The boy told him to address the king;
the giant struck his little horse on the head with a hammer, and he
fell. Before the brute could strike again, however, one of the elephants
behind laid him prostrate, and trampled on him so that he did not
attempt to get up until hundreds of feet had walked over him, and the
army was gone by.

But at sight of the women what a dismay clouded the face of Lona! Hardly
one of them was even pleasant to look upon! Were her darlings to find
mothers among such as these?

Hardly had we halted in the central square, when two girls rode up in
anxious haste, with the tidings that two of the boys had been hurried
away by some women. We turned at once, and then first discovered that
the woman we befriended had disappeared with her baby.

But at the same moment we descried a white leopardess come bounding
toward us down a narrow lane that led from the square to the palace. The
Little Ones had not forgotten the fight of the two leopardesses in the
forest: some of them looked terrified, and their ranks began to waver;
but they remembered the order I had just given them, and stood fast.

We stopped to see the result; when suddenly a small boy, called Odu,
remarkable for his speed and courage, who had heard me speak of the
goodness of the white leopardess, leaped from the back of his bear,
which went shambling after him, and ran to meet her. The leopardess,
to avoid knocking him down, pulled herself up so suddenly that she went
rolling over and over: when she recovered her feet she found the child
on her back. Who could doubt the subjugation of a people which saw an
urchin of the enemy bestride an animal of which they lived in daily
terror? Confident of the effect on the whole army, we rode on.

As we stopped at the house to which our guides led us, we heard a
scream; I sprang down, and thundered at the door. My horse came and
pushed me away with his nose, turned about, and had begun to batter the
door with his heels, when up came little Odu on the leopardess, and at
sight of her he stood still, trembling. But she too had heard the cry,
and forgetting the child on her back, threw herself at the door; the
boy was dashed against it, and fell senseless. Before I could reach him,
Lona had him in her arms, and as soon as he came to himself, set him on
the back of his bear, which had still followed him.

When the leopardess threw herself the third time against the door, it
gave way, and she darted in. We followed, but she had already vanished.
We sprang up a stair, and went all over the house, to find no one.
Darting down again, we spied a door under the stair, and got into a
labyrinth of excavations. We had not gone far, however, when we met the
leopardess with the child we sought across her back.

He told us that the woman he took for his mother threw him into a hole,
saying she would give him to the leopardess. But the leopardess was a
good one, and took him out.

Following in search of the other boy, we got into the next house more
easily, but to find, alas, that we were too late: one of the savages
had just killed the little captive! It consoled Lona, however, to learn
which he was, for she had been expecting him to grow a bad giant, from
which worst of fates death had saved him. The leopardess sprang upon
his murderer, took him by the throat, dragged him into the street, and
followed Lona with him, like a cat with a great rat in her jaws.

“Let us leave the horrible place,” said Lona; “there are no mothers
here! This people is not worth delivering.”

The leopardess dropped her burden, and charged into the crowd, this
way and that, wherever it was thickest. The slaves cried out and ran,
tumbling over each other in heaps.

When we got back to the army, we found it as we had left it, standing in
order and ready.

But I was far from easy: the princess gave no sign, and what she might
be plotting we did not know! Watch and ward must be kept the night
through!

The Little Ones were such hardy creatures that they could repose
anywhere: we told them to lie down with their animals where they were,
and sleep till they were called. In one moment they were down, and
in another lapt in the music of their sleep, a sound as of water over
grass, or a soft wind among leaves. Their animals slept more lightly,
ever on the edge of waking. The bigger boys and girls walked softly
hither and thither among the dreaming multitude. All was still; the
whole wicked place appeared at rest.




CHAPTER XXXVI. MOTHER AND DAUGHTER

Lona was so disgusted with the people, and especially with the women,
that she wished to abandon the place as soon as possible; I, on the
contrary, felt very strongly that to do so would be to fail wilfully
where success was possible; and, far worse, to weaken the hearts of
the Little Ones, and so bring them into much greater danger. If we
retreated, it was certain the princess would not leave us unassailed!
if we encountered her, the hope of the prophecy went with us! Mother
and daughter must meet: it might be that Lona’s loveliness would take
Lilith’s heart by storm! if she threatened violence, I should be there
between them! If I found that I had no other power over her, I was
ready, for the sake of my Lona, to strike her pitilessly on the closed
hand! I knew she was doomed: most likely it was decreed that her doom
should now be brought to pass through us!

Still without hint of the relation in which she stood to the princess,
I stated the case to Lona as it appeared to me. At once she agreed to
accompany me to the palace.

From the top of one of its great towers, the princess had, in the early
morning, while the city yet slept, descried the approach of the army of
the Little Ones. The sight awoke in her an over-mastering terror: she
had failed in her endeavour to destroy them, and they were upon her! The
prophecy was about to be fulfilled!

When she came to herself, she descended to the black hall, and seated
herself in the north focus of the ellipse, under the opening in the
roof.

For she must think! Now what she called THINKING required a clear
consciousness of herself, not as she was, but as she chose to believe
herself; and to aid her in the realisation of this consciousness, she
had suspended, a little way from and above her, itself invisible in the
darkness of the hall, a mirror to receive the full sunlight reflected
from her person. For the resulting vision of herself in the splendour of
her beauty, she sat waiting the meridional sun.

Many a shadow moved about her in the darkness, but as often as, with a
certain inner eye which she had, she caught sight of one, she refused
to regard it. Close under the mirror stood the Shadow which attended her
walks, but, self-occupied, him she did not see.

The city was taken; the inhabitants were cowering in terror; the Little
Ones and their strange cavalry were encamped in the square; the sun
shone upon the princess, and for a few minutes she saw herself glorious.
The vision passed, but she sat on. The night was now come, and darkness
clothed and filled the glass, yet she did not move. A gloom that swarmed
with shadows, wallowed in the palace; the servants shivered and shook,
but dared not leave it because of the beasts of the Little Ones; all
night long the princess sat motionless: she must see her beauty again!
she must try again to think! But courage and will had grown weary of
her, and would dwell with her no more!

In the morning we chose twelve of the tallest and bravest of the boys
to go with us to the palace. We rode our great horses, and they small
horses and elephants.

The princess sat waiting the sun to give her the joy of her own
presence. The tide of the light was creeping up the shore of the sky,
but until the sun stood overhead, not a ray could enter the black hall.

He rose to our eyes, and swiftly ascended. As we climbed the steep way
to the palace, he climbed the dome of its great hall. He looked in at
the eye of it--and with sudden radiance the princess flashed upon her
own sight. But she sprang to her feet with a cry of despair: alas her
whiteness! the spot covered half her side, and was black as the marble
around her! She clutched her robe, and fell back in her chair. The
Shadow glided out, and she saw him go.

We found the gate open as usual, passed through the paved grove up to
the palace door, and entered the vestibule. There in her cage lay the
spotted leopardess, apparently asleep or lifeless. The Little Ones
paused a moment to look at her. She leaped up rampant against the cage.
The horses reared and plunged; the elephants retreated a step. The
next instant she fell supine, writhed in quivering spasms, and lay
motionless. We rode into the great hall.

The princess yet leaned back in her chair in the shaft of sunlight, when
from the stones of the court came to her ears the noise of the horses’
hoofs. She started, listened, and shook: never had such sound been
heard in her palace! She pressed her hand to her side, and gasped. The
trampling came nearer and nearer; it entered the hall itself; moving
figures that were not shadows approached her through the darkness!

For us, we saw a splendour, a glorious woman centring the dark. Lona
sprang from her horse, and bounded to her. I sprang from mine, and
followed Lona.

“Mother! mother!” she cried, and her clear, lovely voice echoed in the
dome.

The princess shivered; her face grew almost black with hate, her
eyebrows met on her forehead. She rose to her feet, and stood.

“Mother! mother!” cried Lona again, as she leaped on the daïs, and flung
her arms around the princess.

An instant more and I should have reached them!--in that instant I saw
Lona lifted high, and dashed on the marble floor. Oh, the horrible sound
of her fall! At my feet she fell, and lay still. The princess sat down
with the smile of a demoness.

I dropped on my knees beside Lona, raised her from the stones, and
pressed her to my bosom. With indignant hate I glanced at the princess;
she answered me with her sweetest smile. I would have sprung upon her,
taken her by the throat, and strangled her, but love of the child was
stronger than hate of the mother, and I clasped closer my precious
burden. Her arms hung helpless; her blood trickled over my hands, and
fell on the floor with soft, slow little plashes.

The horses scented it--mine first, then the small ones. Mine reared,
shivering and wild-eyed, went about, and thundered blindly down the dark
hall, with the little horses after him. Lona’s stood gazing down at his
mistress, and trembling all over. The boys flung themselves from their
horses’ backs, and they, not seeing the black wall before them, dashed
themselves, with mine, to pieces against it. The elephants came on to
the foot of the daïs, and stopped, wildly trumpeting; the Little Ones
sprang upon it, and stood horrified; the princess lay back in her seat,
her face that of a corpse, her eyes alone alive, wickedly flaming. She
was again withered and wasted to what I found in the wood, and her side
was as if a great branding hand had been laid upon it. But Lona saw
nothing, and I saw but Lona.

“Mother! mother!” she sighed, and her breathing ceased.

I carried her into the court: the sun shone upon a white face, and the
pitiful shadow of a ghostly smile. Her head hung back. She was “dead as
earth.”

I forgot the Little Ones, forgot the murdering princess, forgot the
body in my arms, and wandered away, looking for my Lona. The doors and
windows were crowded with brute-faces jeering at me, but not daring to
speak, for they saw the white leopardess behind me, hanging her head
close at my heel. I spurned her with my foot. She held back a moment,
and followed me again.

I reached the square: the little army was gone! Its emptiness roused me.
Where were the Little Ones, HER Little Ones? I had lost her children!
I stared helpless about me, staggered to the pillar, and sank upon its
base.

But as I sat gazing on the still countenance, it seemed to smile a live
momentary smile. I never doubted it an illusion, yet believed what it
said: I should yet see her alive! It was not she, it was I who was lost,
and she would find me!

I rose to go after the Little Ones, and instinctively sought the gate
by which we had entered. I looked around me, but saw nothing of the
leopardess.

The street was rapidly filling with a fierce crowd. They saw me
encumbered with my dead, but for a time dared not assail me. Ere I
reached the gate, however, they had gathered courage. The women began
to hustle me; I held on heedless. A man pushed against my sacred burden:
with a kick I sent him away howling. But the crowd pressed upon me, and
fearing for the dead that was beyond hurt, I clasped my treasure closer,
and freed my right arm. That instant, however, a commotion arose in the
street behind me; the crowd broke; and through it came the Little Ones I
had left in the palace. Ten of them were upon four of the elephants; on
the two other elephants lay the princess, bound hand and foot, and quite
still, save that her eyes rolled in their ghastly sockets. The two other
Little Ones rode behind her on Lona’s horse. Every now and then the wise
creatures that bore her threw their trunks behind and felt her cords.

I walked on in front, and out of the city. What an end to the hopes with
which I entered the evil place! We had captured the bad princess, and
lost our all-beloved queen! My life was bare! my heart was empty!




CHAPTER XXXVII. THE SHADOW

A murmur of pleasure from my companions roused me: they had caught sight
of their fellows in the distance! The two on Lona’s horse rode on to
join them. They were greeted with a wavering shout--which immediately
died away. As we drew near, the sound of their sobs reached us like the
breaking of tiny billows.

When I came among them, I saw that something dire had befallen them: on
their childish faces was the haggard look left by some strange terror.
No possible grief could have wrought the change. A few of them came
slowly round me, and held out their arms to take my burden. I yielded
it; the tender hopelessness of the smile with which they received it,
made my heart swell with pity in the midst of its own desolation. In
vain were their sobs over their mother-queen; in vain they sought to
entice from her some recognition of their love; in vain they kissed and
fondled her as they bore her away: she would not wake! On each side one
carried an arm, gently stroking it; as many as could get near, put their
arms under her body; those who could not, crowded around the bearers. On
a spot where the grass grew thicker and softer they laid her down, and
there all the Little Ones gathered sobbing.

Outside the crowd stood the elephants, and I near them, gazing at my
Lona over the many little heads between. Those next me caught sight of
the princess, and stared trembling. Odu was the first to speak.

“I have seen that woman before!” he whispered to his next neighbour.
“It was she who fought the white leopardess, the night they woke us with
their yelling!”

“Silly!” returned his companion. “That was a wild beast, with spots!”

“Look at her eyes!” insisted Odu. “I know she is a bad giantess, but she
is a wild beast all the same. I know she is the spotted one!”

The other took a step nearer; Odu drew him back with a sharp pull.

“Don’t look at her!” he cried, shrinking away, yet fascinated by the
hate-filled longing in her eyes. “She would eat you up in a moment! It
was HER shadow! She is the wicked princess!”

“That cannot be! they said she was beautiful!”

“Indeed it is the princess!” I interposed. “Wickedness has made her
ugly!”

She heard, and what a look was hers!

“It was very wrong of me to run away!” said Odu thoughtfully.

“What made you run away?” I asked. “I expected to find you where I left
you!”

He did not reply at once.

“I don’t know what made me run,” answered another. “I was frightened!”

“It was a man that came down the hill from the palace,” said a third.

“How did he frighten you?”

“I don’t know.”

“He wasn’t a man,” said Odu; “he was a shadow; he had no thick to him!”

“Tell me more about him.”

“He came down the hill very black, walking like a bad giant, but spread
flat. He was nothing but blackness. We were frightened the moment we saw
him, but we did not run away; we stood and watched him. He came on as if
he would walk over us. But before he reached us, he began to spread and
spread, and grew bigger end bigger, till at last he was so big that he
went out of our sight, and we saw him no more, and then he was upon us!”

“What do you mean by that?”

“He was all black through between us, and we could not see one another;
and then he was inside us.”

“How did you know he was inside you?”

“He did me quite different. I felt like bad. I was not Odu any more--not
the Odu I knew. I wanted to tear Sozo to pieces--not really, but like!”

He turned and hugged Sozo.

“It wasn’t me, Sozo,” he sobbed. “Really, deep down, it was Odu, loving
you always! And Odu came up, and knocked Naughty away. I grew sick, and
thought I must kill myself to get out of the black. Then came a horrible
laugh that had heard my think, and it set the air trembling about me.
And then I suppose I ran away, but I did not know I had run away until
I found myself running, fast as could, and all the rest running too.
I would have stopped, but I never thought of it until I was out of the
gate among the grass. Then I knew that I had run away from a shadow that
wanted to be me and wasn’t, and that I was the Odu that loved Sozo. It
was the shadow that got into me, and hated him from inside me; it was
not my own self me! And now I know that I ought not to have run away!
But indeed I did not quite know what I was doing until it was done! My
legs did it, I think: they grew frightened, and forgot me, and ran away!
Naughty legs! There! and there!”

Thus ended Odu, with a kick to each of his naughty legs.

“What became of the shadow?” I asked.

“I do not know,” he answered. “I suppose he went home into the night
where there is no moon.”

I fell a wondering where Lona was gone, and dropping on the grass, took
the dead thing in my lap, and whispered in its ear, “Where are you,
Lona? I love you!” But its lips gave no answer. I kissed them, not quite
cold, laid the body down again, and appointing a guard over it, rose to
provide for the safety of Lona’s people during the night.

Before the sun went down, I had set a watch over the princess outside
the camp, and sentinels round it: intending to walk about it myself
all night long, I told the rest of the army to go to sleep. They threw
themselves on the grass and were asleep in a moment.

When the moon rose I caught a glimpse of something white; it was the
leopardess. She swept silently round the sleeping camp, and I saw her
pass three times between the princess and the Little Ones. Thereupon I
made the watch lie down with the others, and stretched myself beside the
body of Lona.




CHAPTER XXXVIII. TO THE HOUSE OF BITTERNESS

In the morning we set out, and made for the forest as fast as we could.
I rode Lona’s horse, and carried her body. I would take it to her
father: he would give it a couch in the chamber of his dead! or, if he
would not, seeing she had not come of herself, I would watch it in the
desert until it mouldered away! But I believed he would, for surely she
had died long ago! Alas, how bitterly must I not humble myself before
him!

To Adam I must take Lilith also. I had no power to make her repent! I
had hardly a right to slay her--much less a right to let her loose in
the world! and surely I scarce merited being made for ever her gaoler!

Again and again, on the way, I offered her food; but she answered only
with a look of hungering hate. Her fiery eyes kept rolling to and fro,
nor ever closed, I believe, until we reached the other side of the
hot stream. After that they never opened until we came to the House of
Bitterness.

One evening, as we were camping for the night, I saw a little girl go
up to her, and ran to prevent mischief. But ere I could reach them, the
child had put something to the lips of the princess, and given a scream
of pain.

“Please, king,” she whimpered, “suck finger. Bad giantess make hole in
it!”

I sucked the tiny finger.

“Well now!” she cried, and a minute after was holding a second fruit
to a mouth greedy of other fare. But this time she snatched her hand
quickly away, and the fruit fell to the ground. The child’s name was
Luva.

The next day we crossed the hot stream. Again on their own ground,
the Little Ones were jubilant. But their nests were still at a great
distance, and that day we went no farther than the ivy-hall, where,
because of its grapes, I had resolved to spend the night. When they saw
the great clusters, at once they knew them good, rushed upon them, ate
eagerly, and in a few minutes were all fast asleep on the green floor
and in the forest around the hall. Hoping again to see the dance, and
expecting the Little Ones to sleep through it, I had made them leave a
wide space in the middle. I lay down among them, with Lona by my side,
but did not sleep.

The night came, and suddenly the company was there. I was wondering with
myself whether, night after night, they would thus go on dancing to all
eternity, and whether I should not one day have to join them because of
my stiff-neckedness, when the eyes of the children came open, and they
sprang to their feet, wide awake. Immediately every one caught hold of
a dancer, and away they went, bounding and skipping. The spectres seemed
to see and welcome them: perhaps they knew all about the Little Ones,
for they had themselves long been on their way back to childhood!
Anyhow, their innocent gambols must, I thought, bring refreshment to
weary souls who, their present taken from them and their future dark,
had no life save the shadow of their vanished past. Many a merry but
never a rude prank did the children play; and if they did at times cause
a momentary jar in the rhythm of the dance, the poor spectres, who had
nothing to smile withal, at least manifested no annoyance.

Just ere the morning began to break, I started to see the
skeleton-princess in the doorway, her eyes open and glowing, the fearful
spot black on her side. She stood for a moment, then came gliding in,
as if she would join the dance. I sprang to my feet. A cry of repugnant
fear broke from the children, and the lights vanished. But the low
moon looked in, and I saw them clinging to each other. The ghosts
were gone--at least they were no longer visible. The princess too had
disappeared. I darted to the spot where I had left her: she lay with
her eyes closed, as if she had never moved. I returned to the hall. The
Little Ones were already on the floor, composing themselves to sleep.

The next morning, as we started, we spied, a little way from us, two
skeletons moving about in a thicket. The Little Ones broke their ranks,
and ran to them. I followed; and, although now walking at ease, without
splint or ligature, I was able to recognise the pair I had before seen
in that neighbourhood. The children at once made friends with them,
laying hold of their arms, and stroking the bones of their long fingers;
and it was plain the poor creatures took their attentions kindly. The
two seemed on excellent terms with each other. Their common deprivation
had drawn them together! the loss of everything had been the beginning
of a new life to them!

Perceiving that they had gathered handfuls of herbs, and were looking
for more--presumably to rub their bones with, for in what other way
could nourishment reach their system so rudimentary?--the Little Ones,
having keenly examined those they held, gathered of the same sorts, and
filled the hands the skeletons held out to receive them. Then they bid
them goodbye, promising to come and see them again, and resumed their
journey, saying to each other they had not known there were such nice
people living in the same forest.

When we came to the nest-village, I remained there a night with them, to
see them resettled; for Lona still looked like one just dead, and there
seemed no need of haste.

The princess had eaten nothing, and her eyes remained shut: fearing she
might die ere we reached the end of our journey, I went to her in the
night, and laid my bare arm upon her lips. She bit into it so fiercely
that I cried out. How I got away from her I do not know, but I came to
myself lying beyond her reach. It was then morning, and immediately I
set about our departure.

Choosing twelve Little Ones, not of the biggest and strongest, but of
the sweetest and merriest, I mounted them on six elephants, and took
two more of the wise CLUMSIES, as the children called them, to bear the
princess. I still rode Lona’s horse, and carried her body wrapt in
her cloak before me. As nearly as I could judge I took the direct way,
across the left branch of the river-bed, to the House of Bitterness,
where I hoped to learn how best to cross the broader and rougher branch,
and how to avoid the basin of monsters: I dreaded the former for the
elephants, the latter for the children.

I had one terrible night on the way--the third, passed in the desert
between the two branches of the dead river.

We had stopped the elephants in a sheltered place, and there let the
princess slip down between them, to lie on the sand until the morning.
She seemed quite dead, but I did not think she was. I laid myself a
little way from her, with the body of Lona by my other side, thus
to keep watch at once over the dead and the dangerous. The moon was
half-way down the west, a pale, thoughtful moon, mottling the desert
with shadows. Of a sudden she was eclipsed, remaining visible, but
sending forth no light: a thick, diaphanous film covered her patient
beauty, and she looked troubled. The film swept a little aside, and
I saw the edge of it against her clearness--the jagged outline of
a bat-like wing, torn and hooked. Came a cold wind with a burning
sting--and Lilith was upon me. Her hands were still bound, but with her
teeth she pulled from my shoulder the cloak Lona made for me, and fixed
them in my flesh. I lay as one paralysed.

Already the very life seemed flowing from me into her, when I
remembered, and struck her on the hand. She raised her head with a
gurgling shriek, and I felt her shiver. I flung her from me, and sprang
to my feet.

She was on her knees, and rocked herself to and fro. A second blast of
hot-stinging cold enveloped us; the moon shone out clear, and I saw her
face--gaunt and ghastly, besmeared with red.

“Down, devil!” I cried.

“Where are you taking me?” she asked, with the voice of a dull echo from
a sepulchre.

“To your first husband,” I answered.

“He will kill me!” she moaned.

“At least he will take you off my hands!”

“Give me my daughter,” she suddenly screamed, grinding her teeth.

“Never! Your doom is upon you at last!”

“Loose my hands for pity’s sake!” she groaned. “I am in torture. The
cords are sunk in my flesh.”

“I dare not. Lie down!” I said.

She threw herself on the ground like a log.

The rest of the night passed in peace, and in the morning she again
seemed dead.

Before evening we came in sight of the House of Bitterness, and the next
moment one of the elephants came alongside of my horse.

“Please, king, you are not going to that place?” whispered the Little
One who rode on his neck.

“Indeed I am! We are going to stay the night there,” I answered.

“Oh, please, don’t! That must be where the cat-woman lives!”

“If you had ever seen her, you would not call her by that name!”

“Nobody ever sees her: she has lost her face! Her head is back and side
all round.”

“She hides her face from dull, discontented people!--Who taught you to
call her the cat-woman?”

“I heard the bad giants call her so.”

“What did they say about her?”

“That she had claws to her toes.”

“It is not true. I know the lady. I spent a night at her house.”

“But she MAY have claws to her toes! You might see her feet, and her
claws be folded up inside their cushions!”

“Then perhaps you think that I have claws to my toes?”

“Oh, no; that can’t be! you are good!”

“The giants might have told you so!” I pursued.

“We shouldn’t believe them about you!”

“Are the giants good?”

“No; they love lying.”

“Then why do you believe them about her? I know the lady is good; she
cannot have claws.”

“Please how do you know she is good?”

“How do you know I am good?”

I rode on, while he waited for his companions, and told them what I had
said.

They hastened after me, and when they came up,--

“I would not take you to her house if I did not believe her good,” I
said.

“We know you would not,” they answered.

“If I were to do something that frightened you--what would you say?”

“The beasts frightened us sometimes at first, but they never hurt us!”
 answered one.

“That was before we knew them!” added another.

“Just so!” I answered. “When you see the woman in that cottage, you will
know that she is good. You may wonder at what she does, but she will
always be good. I know her better than you know me. She will not hurt
you,--or if she does,----”

“Ah, you are not sure about it, king dear! You think she MAY hurt us!”

“I am sure she will never be unkind to you, even if she do hurt you!”

They were silent for a while.

“I’m not afraid of being hurt--a little!--a good deal!” cried Odu. “But
I should not like scratches in the dark! The giants say the cat-woman
has claw-feet all over her house!”

“I am taking the princess to her,” I said.

“Why?”

“Because she is her friend.”

“How can she be good then?”

“Little Tumbledown is a friend of the princess,” I answered; “so is
Luva: I saw them both, more than once, trying to feed her with grapes!”

“Little Tumbledown is good! Luva is very good!”

“That is why they are her friends.”

“Will the cat-woman--I mean the woman that isn’t the cat-woman, and has
no claws to her toes--give her grapes?”

“She is more likely to give her scratches!”

“Why?--You say she is her friend!”

“That is just why.--A friend is one who gives us what we need, and the
princess is sorely in need of a terrible scratching.”

They were silent again.

“If any of you are afraid,” I said, “you may go home; I shall not
prevent you. But I cannot take one with me who believes the giants
rather than me, or one who will call a good lady the cat-woman!”

“Please, king,” said one, “I’m so afraid of being afraid!”

“My boy,” I answered, “there is no harm in being afraid. The only harm
is in doing what Fear tells you. Fear is not your master! Laugh in his
face and he will run away.”

“There she is--in the door waiting for us!” cried one, and put his hands
over his eyes.

“How ugly she is!” cried another, and did the same.

“You do not see her,” I said; “her face is covered!”

“She has no face!” they answered.

“She has a very beautiful face. I saw it once.--It is indeed as
beautiful as Lona’s!” I added with a sigh.

“Then what makes her hide it?”

“I think I know:--anyhow, she has some good reason for it!”

“I don’t like the cat-woman! she is frightful!”

“You cannot like, and you ought not to dislike what you have never
seen.--Once more, you must not call her the cat-woman!”

“What are we to call her then, please?”

“Lady Mara.”

“That is a pretty name!” said a girl; “I will call her ‘lady Mara’; then
perhaps she will show me her beautiful face!”

Mara, drest and muffled in white, was indeed standing in the doorway to
receive us.

“At last!” she said. “Lilith’s hour has been long on the way, but it
is come! Everything comes. Thousands of years have I waited--and not in
vain!”

She came to me, took my treasure from my arms, carried it into the
house, and returning, took the princess. Lilith shuddered, but made no
resistance. The beasts lay down by the door. We followed our hostess,
the Little Ones looking very grave. She laid the princess on a rough
settle at one side of the room, unbound her, and turned to us.

“Mr. Vane,” she said, “and you, Little Ones, I thank you! This woman
would not yield to gentler measures; harder must have their turn. I must
do what I can to make her repent!”

The pitiful-hearted Little Ones began to sob sorely.

“Will you hurt her very much, lady Mara?” said the girl I have just
mentioned, putting her warm little hand in mine.

“Yes; I am afraid I must; I fear she will make me!” answered Mara. “It
would be cruel to hurt her too little. It would have all to be done
again, only worse.”

“May I stop with her?”

“No, my child. She loves no one, therefore she cannot be WITH any one.
There is One who will be with her, but she will not be with Him.”

“Will the shadow that came down the hill be with her?”

“The great Shadow will be in her, I fear, but he cannot be WITH her, or
with any one. She will know I am beside her, but that will not comfort
her.”

“Will you scratch her very deep?” asked Odu, going near, and putting his
hand in hers. “Please, don’t make the red juice come!”

She caught him up, turned her back to the rest of us, drew the muffling
down from her face, and held him at arms’ length that he might see her.

As if his face had been a mirror, I saw in it what he saw. For one
moment he stared, his little mouth open; then a divine wonder arose in
his countenance, and swiftly changed to intense delight. For a minute he
gazed entranced, then she set him down. Yet a moment he stood looking up
at her, lost in contemplation--then ran to us with the face of a prophet
that knows a bliss he cannot tell. Mara rearranged her mufflings, and
turned to the other children.

“You must eat and drink before you go to sleep,” she said; “you have had
a long journey!”

She set the bread of her house before them, and a jug of cold water.
They had never seen bread before, and this was hard and dry, but they
ate it without sign of distaste. They had never seen water before,
but they drank without demur, one after the other looking up from
the draught with a face of glad astonishment. Then she led away the
smallest, and the rest went trooping after her. With her own gentle
hands, they told me, she put them to bed on the floor of the garret.




CHAPTER XXXIX. THAT NIGHT

Their night was a troubled one, and they brought a strange report of
it into the day. Whether the fear of their sleep came out into their
waking, or their waking fear sank with them into their dreams, awake or
asleep they were never at rest from it. All night something seemed going
on in the house--something silent, something terrible, something they
were not to know. Never a sound awoke; the darkness was one with the
silence, and the silence was the terror.

Once, a frightful wind filled the house, and shook its inside, they
said, so that it quivered and trembled like a horse shaking himself;
but it was a silent wind that made not even a moan in their chamber, and
passed away like a soundless sob.

They fell asleep. But they woke again with a great start. They thought
the house was filling with water such as they had been drinking. It came
from below, and swelled up until the garret was full of it to the very
roof. But it made no more sound than the wind, and when it sank away,
they fell asleep dry and warm.

The next time they woke, all the air, they said, inside and out, was
full of cats. They swarmed--up and down, along and across, everywhere
about the room. They felt their claws trying to get through the
night-gowns lady Mara had put on them, but they could not; and in the
morning not one of them had a scratch. Through the dark suddenly, came
the only sound they heard the night long--the far-off howl of the huge
great-grandmother-cat in the desert: she must have been calling her
little ones, they thought, for that instant the cats stopped, and all
was still. Once more they fell fast asleep, and did not wake till the
sun was rising.

Such was the account the children gave of their experiences. But I was
with the veiled woman and the princess all through the night: something
of what took place I saw; much I only felt; and there was more which eye
could not see, and heart only could in a measure understand.

As soon as Mara left the room with the children, my eyes fell on the
white leopardess: I thought we had left her behind us, but there she
was, cowering in a corner. Apparently she was in mortal terror of what
she might see. A lamp stood on the high chimney-piece, and sometimes
the room seemed full of lamp-shadows, sometimes of cloudy forms. The
princess lay on the settle by the wall, and seemed never to have moved
hand or foot. It was a fearsome waiting.

When Mara returned, she drew the settle with Lilith upon it to the
middle of the room, then sat down opposite me, at the other side of the
hearth. Between us burned a small fire.

Something terrible was on its way! The cloudy presences flickered and
shook. A silvery creature like a slowworm came crawling out from among
them, slowly crossed the clay floor, and crept into the fire. We sat
motionless. The something came nearer.

But the hours passed, midnight drew nigh, and there was no change. The
night was very still. Not a sound broke the silence, not a rustle from
the fire, not a crack from board or beam. Now and again I felt a sort of
heave, but whether in the earth or in the air or in the waters under the
earth, whether in my own body or in my soul--whether it was anywhere,
I could not tell. A dread sense of judgment was upon me. But I was not
afraid, for I had ceased to care for aught save the thing that must be
done.

Suddenly it was midnight. The muffled woman rose, turned toward the
settle, and slowly unwound the long swathes that hid her face: they
dropped on the ground, and she stepped over them. The feet of the
princess were toward the hearth; Mara went to her head, and turning,
stood behind it. Then I saw her face. It was lovely beyond speech--white
and sad, heart-and-soul sad, but not unhappy, and I knew it never could
be unhappy. Great tears were running down her cheeks: she wiped them
away with her robe; her countenance grew very still, and she wept no
more. But for the pity in every line of her expression, she would have
seemed severe. She laid her hand on the head of the princess--on the
hair that grew low on the forehead, and stooping, breathed on the sallow
brow. The body shuddered.

“Will you turn away from the wicked things you have been doing so long?”
 said Mara gently.

The princess did not answer. Mara put the question again, in the same
soft, inviting tone.

Still there was no sign of hearing. She spoke the words a third time.

Then the seeming corpse opened its mouth and answered, its words
appearing to frame themselves of something else than sound.--I cannot
shape the thing further: sounds they were not, yet they were words to
me.

“I will not,” she said. “I will be myself and not another!”

“Alas, you are another now, not yourself! Will you not be your real
self?”

“I will be what I mean myself now.”

“If you were restored, would you not make what amends you could for the
misery you have caused?”

“I would do after my nature.”

“You do not know it: your nature is good, and you do evil!”

“I will do as my Self pleases--as my Self desires.”

“You will do as the Shadow, overshadowing your Self inclines you?”

“I will do what I will to do.”

“You have killed your daughter, Lilith!”

“I have killed thousands. She is my own!”

“She was never yours as you are another’s.”

“I am not another’s; I am my own, and my daughter is mine.”

“Then, alas, your hour is come!”

“I care not. I am what I am; no one can take from me myself!”

“You are not the Self you imagine.”

“So long as I feel myself what it pleases me to think myself, I care
not. I am content to be to myself what I would be. What I choose to seem
to myself makes me what I am. My own thought makes me me; my own thought
of myself is me. Another shall not make me!”

“But another has made you, and can compel you to see what you have made
yourself. You will not be able much longer to look to yourself anything
but what he sees you! You will not much longer have satisfaction in the
thought of yourself. At this moment you are aware of the coming change!”

“No one ever made me. I defy that Power to unmake me from a free woman!
You are his slave, and I defy you! You may be able to torture me--I do
not know, but you shall not compel me to anything against my will!”

“Such a compulsion would be without value. But there is a light that
goes deeper than the will, a light that lights up the darkness behind
it: that light can change your will, can make it truly yours and not
another’s--not the Shadow’s. Into the created can pour itself the
creating will, and so redeem it!”

“That light shall not enter me: I hate it!--Begone, slave!”

“I am no slave, for I love that light, and will with the deeper will
which created mine. There is no slave but the creature that wills
against its creator. Who is a slave but her who cries, ‘I am free,’ yet
cannot cease to exist!”

“You speak foolishness from a cowering heart! You imagine me given over
to you: I defy you! I hold myself against you! What I choose to be, you
cannot change. I will not be what you think me--what you say I am!”

“I am sorry: you must suffer!”

“But be free!”

“She alone is free who would make free; she loves not freedom who would
enslave: she is herself a slave. Every life, every will, every heart
that came within your ken, you have sought to subdue: you are the slave
of every slave you have made--such a slave that you do not know it!--See
your own self!”

She took her hand from the head of the princess, and went two backward
paces from her.

A soundless presence as of roaring flame possessed the house--the same,
I presume, that was to the children a silent wind. Involuntarily I
turned to the hearth: its fire was a still small moveless glow. But I
saw the worm-thing come creeping out, white-hot, vivid as incandescent
silver, the live heart of essential fire. Along the floor it crawled
toward the settle, going very slow. Yet more slowly it crept up on
it, and laid itself, as unwilling to go further, at the feet of the
princess. I rose and stole nearer. Mara stood motionless, as one that
waits an event foreknown. The shining thing crawled on to a bare bony
foot: it showed no suffering, neither was the settle scorched where the
worm had lain. Slowly, very slowly, it crept along her robe until it
reached her bosom, where it disappeared among the folds.

The face of the princess lay stonily calm, the eyelids closed as over
dead eyes; and for some minutes nothing followed. At length, on the dry,
parchment-like skin, began to appear drops as of the finest dew: in a
moment they were as large as seed-pearls, ran together, and began to
pour down in streams. I darted forward to snatch the worm from the poor
withered bosom, and crush it with my foot. But Mara, Mother of Sorrow,
stepped between, and drew aside the closed edges of the robe: no serpent
was there--no searing trail; the creature had passed in by the centre
of the black spot, and was piercing through the joints and marrow to
the thoughts and intents of the heart. The princess gave one writhing,
contorted shudder, and I knew the worm was in her secret chamber.

“She is seeing herself!” said Mara; and laying her hand on my arm, she
drew me three paces from the settle.

Of a sudden the princess bent her body upward in an arch, then sprang to
the floor, and stood erect. The horror in her face made me tremble lest
her eyes should open, and the sight of them overwhelm me. Her bosom
heaved and sank, but no breath issued. Her hair hung and dripped; then
it stood out from her head and emitted sparks; again hung down, and
poured the sweat of her torture on the floor.

I would have thrown my arms about her, but Mara stopped me.

“You cannot go near her,” she said. “She is far away from us, afar in
the hell of her self-consciousness. The central fire of the universe is
radiating into her the knowledge of good and evil, the knowledge of what
she is. She sees at last the good she is not, the evil she is. She knows
that she is herself the fire in which she is burning, but she does not
know that the Light of Life is the heart of that fire. Her torment is
that she is what she is. Do not fear for her; she is not forsaken. No
gentler way to help her was left. Wait and watch.”

It may have been five minutes or five years that she stood thus--I
cannot tell; but at last she flung herself on her face.

Mara went to her, and stood looking down upon her. Large tears fell from
her eyes on the woman who had never wept, and would not weep.

“Will you change your way?” she said at length.

“Why did he make me such?” gasped Lilith. “I would have made myself--oh,
so different! I am glad it was he that made me and not I myself!
He alone is to blame for what I am! Never would I have made such a
worthless thing! He meant me such that I might know it and be miserable!
I will not be made any longer!”

“Unmake yourself, then,” said Mara.

“Alas, I cannot! You know it, and mock me! How often have I not agonised
to cease, but the tyrant keeps me being! I curse him!--Now let him kill
me!”

The words came in jets as from a dying fountain.

“Had he not made you,” said Mara, gently and slowly, “you could not even
hate him. But he did not make you such. You have made yourself what you
are.--Be of better cheer: he can remake you.”

“I will not be remade!”

“He will not change you; he will only restore you to what you were.”

“I will not be aught of his making.”

“Are you not willing to have that set right which you have set wrong?”

She lay silent; her suffering seemed abated.

“If you are willing, put yourself again on the settle.”

“I will not,” she answered, forcing the words through her clenched
teeth.

A wind seemed to wake inside the house, blowing without sound or impact;
and a water began to rise that had no lap in its ripples, no sob in its
swell. It was cold, but it did not benumb. Unseen and noiseless it came.
It smote no sense in me, yet I knew it rising. I saw it lift at last and
float her. Gently it bore her, unable to resist, and left rather than
laid her on the settle. Then it sank swiftly away.

The strife of thought, accusing and excusing, began afresh, and
gathered fierceness. The soul of Lilith lay naked to the torture of pure
interpenetrating inward light. She began to moan, and sigh deep sighs,
then murmur as holding colloquy with a dividual self: her queendom was
no longer whole; it was divided against itself. One moment she would
exult as over her worst enemy, and weep; the next she would writhe as in
the embrace of a friend whom her soul hated, and laugh like a demon.
At length she began what seemed a tale about herself, in a language
so strange, and in forms so shadowy, that I could but here and there
understand a little. Yet the language seemed the primeval shape of one
I knew well, and the forms to belong to dreams which had once been mine,
but refused to be recalled. The tale appeared now and then to touch upon
things that Adam had read from the disparted manuscript, and often to
make allusion to influences and forces--vices too, I could not help
suspecting--with which I was unacquainted.

She ceased, and again came the horror in her hair, the sparkling and
flowing alternate. I sent a beseeching look to Mara.

“Those, alas, are not the tears of repentance!” she said. “The true
tears gather in the eyes. Those are far more bitter, and not so good.
Self-loathing is not sorrow. Yet it is good, for it marks a step in
the way home, and in the father’s arms the prodigal forgets the self he
abominates. Once with his father, he is to himself of no more account.
It will be so with her.”

She went nearer and said,

“Will you restore that which you have wrongfully taken?”

“I have taken nothing,” answered the princess, forcing out the words
in spite of pain, “that I had not the right to take. My power to take
manifested my right.”

Mara left her.

Gradually my soul grew aware of an invisible darkness, a something
more terrible than aught that had yet made itself felt. A horrible
Nothingness, a Negation positive infolded her; the border of its being
that was yet no being, touched me, and for one ghastly instant I seemed
alone with Death Absolute! It was not the absence of everything I felt,
but the presence of Nothing. The princess dashed herself from the settle
to the floor with an exceeding great and bitter cry. It was the recoil
of Being from Annihilation.

“For pity’s sake,” she shrieked, “tear my heart out, but let me live!”

With that there fell upon her, and upon us also who watched with her,
the perfect calm as of a summer night. Suffering had all but reached the
brim of her life’s cup, and a hand had emptied it! She raised her head,
half rose, and looked around her. A moment more, and she stood erect,
with the air of a conqueror: she had won the battle! Dareful she had met
her spiritual foes; they had withdrawn defeated! She raised her withered
arm above her head, a pæan of unholy triumph in her throat--when
suddenly her eyes fixed in a ghastly stare.--What was she seeing?

I looked, and saw: before her, cast from unseen heavenly mirror, stood
the reflection of herself, and beside it a form of splendent beauty, She
trembled, and sank again on the floor helpless. She knew the one what
God had intended her to be, the other what she had made herself.

The rest of the night she lay motionless altogether.

With the gray dawn growing in the room, she rose, turned to Mara, and
said, in prideful humility, “You have conquered. Let me go into the
wilderness and bewail myself.”

Mara saw that her submission was not feigned, neither was it real. She
looked at her a moment, and returned:

“Begin, then, and set right in the place of wrong.”

“I know not how,” she replied--with the look of one who foresaw and
feared the answer.

“Open thy hand, and let that which is in it go.”

A fierce refusal seemed to struggle for passage, but she kept it
prisoned.

“I cannot,” she said. “I have no longer the power. Open it for me.”

She held out the offending hand. It was more a paw than a hand. It
seemed to me plain that she could not open it.

Mara did not even look at it.

“You must open it yourself,” she said quietly.

“I have told you I cannot!”

“You can if you will--not indeed at once, but by persistent effort. What
you have done, you do not yet wish undone--do not yet intend to undo!”

“You think so, I dare say,” rejoined the princess with a flash of
insolence, “but I KNOW that I cannot open my hand!”

“I know you better than you know yourself, and I know you can. You have
often opened it a little way. Without trouble and pain you cannot open
it quite, but you CAN open it. At worst you could beat it open! I pray
you, gather your strength, and open it wide.”

“I will not try what I know impossible. It would be the part of a fool!”

“Which you have been playing all your life! Oh, you are hard to teach!”

Defiance reappeared on the face of the princess. She turned her back on
Mara, saying, “I know what you have been tormenting me for! You have not
succeeded, nor shall you succeed! You shall yet find me stronger than
you think! I will yet be mistress of myself! I am still what I have
always known myself--queen of Hell, and mistress of the worlds!”

Then came the most fearful thing of all. I did not know what it was; I
knew myself unable to imagine it; I knew only that if it came near me I
should die of terror! I now know that it was LIFE IN DEATH--life dead,
yet existent; and I knew that Lilith had had glimpses, but only glimpses
of it before: it had never been with her until now.

She stood as she had turned. Mara went and sat down by the fire. Fearing
to stand alone with the princess, I went also and sat again by the
hearth. Something began to depart from me. A sense of cold, yet not what
we call cold, crept, not into, but out of my being, and pervaded it. The
lamp of life and the eternal fire seemed dying together, and I about
to be left with naught but the consciousness that I had been alive.
Mercifully, bereavement did not go so far, and my thought went back to
Lilith.

Something was taking place in her which we did not know. We knew we did
not feel what she felt, but we knew we felt something of the misery
it caused her. The thing itself was in her, not in us; its reflex, her
misery, reached us, and was again reflected in us: she was in the outer
darkness, we present with her who was in it! We were not in the outer
darkness; had we been, we could not have been WITH her; we should have
been timelessly, spacelessly, absolutely apart. The darkness knows
neither the light nor itself; only the light knows itself and the
darkness also. None but God hates evil and understands it.

Something was gone from her, which then first, by its absence, she knew
to have been with her every moment of her wicked years. The source of
life had withdrawn itself; all that was left her of conscious being was
the dregs of her dead and corrupted life.

She stood rigid. Mara buried her head in her hands. I gazed on the face
of one who knew existence but not love--knew nor life, nor joy, nor
good; with my eyes I saw the face of a live death! She knew life only to
know that it was dead, and that, in her, death lived. It was not merely
that life had ceased in her, but that she was consciously a dead thing.
She had killed her life, and was dead--and knew it. She must DEATH IT
for ever and ever! She had tried her hardest to unmake herself, and
could not! she was a dead life! she could not cease! she must BE! In her
face I saw and read beyond its misery--saw in its dismay that the dismay
behind it was more than it could manifest. It sent out a livid gloom;
the light that was in her was darkness, and after its kind it shone. She
was what God could not have created. She had usurped beyond her share
in self-creation, and her part had undone His! She saw now what she had
made, and behold, it was not good! She was as a conscious corpse, whose
coffin would never come to pieces, never set her free! Her bodily eyes
stood wide open, as if gazing into the heart of horror essential--her
own indestructible evil. Her right hand also was now clenched--upon
existent Nothing--her inheritance!

But with God all things are possible: He can save even the rich!

Without change of look, without sign of purpose, Lilith walked toward
Mara. She felt her coming, and rose to meet her.

“I yield,” said the princess. “I cannot hold out. I am defeated.--Not
the less, I cannot open my hand.”

“Have you tried?”

“I am trying now with all my might.”

“I will take you to my father. You have wronged him worst of the
created, therefore he best of the created can help you.”

“How can HE help me?”

“He will forgive you.”

“Ah, if he would but help me to cease! Not even that am I capable of! I
have no power over myself; I am a slave! I acknowledge it. Let me die.”

“A slave thou art that shall one day be a child!” answered
Mara.--“Verily, thou shalt die, but not as thou thinkest. Thou shalt
die out of death into life. Now is the Life for, that never was against
thee!”

Like her mother, in whom lay the motherhood of all the world, Mara put
her arms around Lilith, and kissed her on the forehead. The fiery-cold
misery went out of her eyes, and their fountains filled. She lifted, and
bore her to her own bed in a corner of the room, laid her softly upon
it, and closed her eyes with caressing hands.

Lilith lay and wept. The Lady of Sorrow went to the door and opened it.

Morn, with the Spring in her arms, waited outside. Softly they stole in
at the opened door, with a gentle wind in the skirts of their garments.
It flowed and flowed about Lilith, rippling the unknown, upwaking sea of
her life eternal; rippling and to ripple it, until at length she who had
been but as a weed cast on the dry sandy shore to wither, should know
herself an inlet of the everlasting ocean, henceforth to flow into her
for ever, and ebb no more. She answered the morning wind with reviving
breath, and began to listen. For in the skirts of the wind had come
the rain--the soft rain that heals the mown, the many-wounded
grass--soothing it with the sweetness of all music, the hush that lives
between music and silence. It bedewed the desert places around the
cottage, and the sands of Lilith’s heart heard it, and drank it in. When
Mara returned to sit by her bed, her tears were flowing softer than the
rain, and soon she was fast asleep.




CHAPTER XL. THE HOUSE OF DEATH

The Mother of Sorrows rose, muffled her face, and went to call the
Little Ones. They slept as if all the night they had not moved, but
the moment she spoke they sprang to their feet, fresh as if new-made.
Merrily down the stair they followed her, and she brought them where the
princess lay, her tears yet flowing as she slept. Their glad faces grew
grave. They looked from the princess out on the rain, then back at the
princess.

“The sky is falling!” said one.

“The white juice is running out of the princess!” cried another, with an
awed look.

“Is it rivers?” asked Odu, gazing at the little streams that flowed
adown her hollow cheeks.

“Yes,” answered Mara, “--the most wonderful of all rivers.”

“I thought rivers was bigger, and rushed, like a lot of Little Ones,
making loud noises!” he returned, looking at me, from whom alone he had
heard of rivers.

“Look at the rivers of the sky!” said Mara. “See how they come down
to wake up the waters under the earth! Soon will the rivers be flowing
everywhere, merry and loud, like thousands and thousands of happy
children. Oh, how glad they will make you, Little Ones! You have never
seen any, and do not know how lovely is the water!”

“That will be the glad of the ground that the princess is grown good,”
 said Odu. “See the glad of the sky!”

“Are the rivers the glad of the princess?” asked Luva. “They are not her
juice, for they are not red!”

“They are the juice inside the juice,” answered Mara.

Odu put one finger to his eye, looked at it, and shook his head.

“Princess will not bite now!” said Luva.

“No; she will never do that again,” replied Mara. “--But now we must
take her nearer home.”

“Is that a nest?” asked Sozo.

“Yes; a very big nest. But we must take her to another place first.”

“What is that?”

“It is the biggest room in all this world.--But I think it is going to
be pulled down: it will soon be too full of little nests.--Go and get
your clumsies.”

“Please are there any cats in it?”

“Not one. The nests are too full of lovely dreams for one cat to get
in.”

“We shall be ready in a minute,” said Odu, and ran out, followed by all
except Luva.

Lilith was now awake, and listening with a sad smile.

“But her rivers are running so fast!” said Luva, who stood by her side
and seemed unable to take her eyes from her face. “Her robe is all--I
don’t know what. Clumsies won’t like it!”

“They won’t mind it,” answered Mara. “Those rivers are so clean that
they make the whole world clean.”

I had fallen asleep by the fire, but for some time had been awake and
listening, and now rose.

“It is time to mount, Mr. Vane,” said our hostess.

“Tell me, please,” I said, “is there not a way by which to avoid the
channels and the den of monsters?”

“There is an easy way across the river-bed, which I will show you,” she
answered; “but you must pass once more through the monsters.”

“I fear for the children,” I said.

“Fear will not once come nigh them,” she rejoined.

We left the cottage. The beasts stood waiting about the door. Odu was
already on the neck of one of the two that were to carry the princess. I
mounted Lona’s horse; Mara brought her body, and gave it me in my arms.
When she came out again with the princess, a cry of delight arose from
the children: she was no longer muffled! Gazing at her, and entranced
with her loveliness, the boys forgot to receive the princess from her;
but the elephants took Lilith tenderly with their trunks, one round her
body and one round her knees, and, Mara helping, laid her along between
them.

“Why does the princess want to go?” asked a small boy. “She would keep
good if she staid here!”

“She wants to go, and she does not want to go: we are helping her,”
 answered Mara. “She will not keep good here.”

“What are you helping her to do?” he went on.

“To go where she will get more help--help to open her hand, which has
been closed for a thousand years.”

“So long? Then she has learned to do without it: why should she open it
now?”

“Because it is shut upon something that is not hers.”

“Please, lady Mara, may we have some of your very dry bread before we
go?” said Luva.

Mara smiled, and brought them four loaves and a great jug of water.

“We will eat as we go,” they said. But they drank the water with
delight.

“I think,” remarked one of them, “it must be elephant-juice! It makes me
so strong!”

We set out, the Lady of Sorrow walking with us, more beautiful than the
sun, and the white leopardess following her. I thought she meant but to
put us in the path across the channels, but I soon found she was going
with us all the way. Then I would have dismounted that she might ride,
but she would not let me.

“I have no burden to carry,” she said. “The children and I will walk
together.”

It was the loveliest of mornings; the sun shone his brightest, and the
wind blew his sweetest, but they did not comfort the desert, for it had
no water.

We crossed the channels without difficulty, the children gamboling about
Mara all the way, but did not reach the top of the ridge over the bad
burrow until the sun was already in the act of disappearing. Then I made
the Little Ones mount their elephants, for the moon might be late, and I
could not help some anxiety about them.

The Lady of Sorrow now led the way by my side; the elephants
followed--the two that bore the princess in the centre; the leopardess
brought up the rear; and just as we reached the frightful margin, the
moon looked up and showed the shallow basin lying before us untroubled.
Mara stepped into it; not a movement answered her tread or the feet
of my horse. But the moment that the elephants carrying the princess
touched it, the seemingly solid earth began to heave and boil, and the
whole dread brood of the hellish nest was commoved. Monsters uprose on
all sides, every neck at full length, every beak and claw outstretched,
every mouth agape. Long-billed heads, horribly jawed faces, knotty
tentacles innumerable, went out after Lilith. She lay in an agony of
fear, nor dared stir a finger. Whether the hideous things even saw the
children, I doubt; certainly not one of them touched a child; not one
loathly member passed the live rampart of her body-guard, to lay hold of
her.

“Little Ones,” I cried, “keep your elephants close about the princess.
Be brave; they will not touch you.”

“What will not touch us? We don’t know what to be brave at!” they
answered; and I perceived they were unaware of one of the deformities
around them.

“Never mind then,” I returned; “only keep close.”

They were panoplied in their blindness! Incapacity to see was their
safety. What they could nowise be aware of, could not hurt them.

But the hideous forms I saw that night! Mara was a few paces in front
of me when a solitary, bodiless head bounced on the path between us. The
leopardess came rushing under the elephants from behind, and would have
seized it, but, with frightful contortions of visage and a loathsome
howl, it gave itself a rapid rotatory twist, sprang from her, and buried
itself in the ground. The death in my arms assoiling me from fear, I
regarded them all unmoved, although never, sure, was elsewhere beheld
such a crew accursed!

Mara still went in front of me, and the leopardess now walked close
behind her, shivering often, for it was very cold, when suddenly the
ground before me to my left began to heave, and a low wave of earth came
slinking toward us. It rose higher as it drew hear; out of it slouched
a dreadful head with fleshy tubes for hair, and opening a great oval
mouth, snapped at me. The leopardess sprang, but fell baffled beyond it.

Almost under our feet, shot up the head of an enormous snake, with a
lamping wallowing glare in its eyes. Again the leopardess rushed to the
attack, but found nothing. At a third monster she darted with like fury,
and like failure--then sullenly ceased to heed the phantom-horde. But I
understood the peril and hastened the crossing--the rather that the moon
was carrying herself strangely. Even as she rose she seemed ready to
drop and give up the attempt as hopeless; and since, I saw her sink back
once fully her own breadth. The arc she made was very low, and now she
had begun to descend rapidly.

We were almost over, when, between us and the border of the basin, arose
a long neck, on the top of which, like the blossom of some Stygian lily,
sat what seemed the head of a corpse, its mouth half open, and full of
canine teeth. I went on; it retreated, then drew aside. The lady stepped
on the firm land, but the leopardess between us, roused once more,
turned, and flew at the throat of the terror. I remained where I was to
see the elephants, with the princess and the children, safe on the bank.
Then I turned to look after the leopardess. That moment the moon
went down, For an instant I saw the leopardess and the snake-monster
convolved in a cloud of dust; then darkness hid them. Trembling with
fright, my horse wheeled, and in three bounds overtook the elephants.

As we came up with them, a shapeless jelly dropped on the princess. A
white dove dropped immediately on the jelly, stabbing it with its beak.
It made a squelching, sucking sound, and fell off. Then I heard the
voice of a woman talking with Mara, and I knew the voice.

“I fear she is dead!” said Mara.

“I will send and find her,” answered the mother. “But why, Mara,
shouldst thou at all fear for her or for any one? Death cannot hurt her
who dies doing the work given her to do.”

“I shall miss her sorely; she is good and wise. Yet I would not have her
live beyond her hour!”

“She has gone down with the wicked; she will rise with the righteous. We
shall see her again ere very long.”

“Mother,” I said, although I did not see her, “we come to you many, but
most of us are Little Ones. Will you be able to receive us all?”

“You are welcome every one,” she answered. “Sooner or later all will be
little ones, for all must sleep in my house! It is well with those that
go to sleep young and willing!--My husband is even now preparing her
couch for Lilith. She is neither young nor quite willing, but it is well
indeed that she is come.”

I heard no more. Mother and daughter had gone away together through
the dark. But we saw a light in the distance, and toward it we went
stumbling over the moor.

Adam stood in the door, holding the candle to guide us, and talking with
his wife, who, behind him, laid bread and wine on the table within.

“Happy children,” I heard her say, “to have looked already on the face
of my daughter! Surely it is the loveliest in the great world!”

When we reached the door, Adam welcomed us almost merrily. He set the
candle on the threshold, and going to the elephants, would have taken
the princess to carry her in; but she repulsed him, and pushing her
elephants asunder, stood erect between them. They walked from beside
her, and left her with him who had been her husband--ashamed indeed of
her gaunt uncomeliness, but unsubmissive. He stood with a welcome in his
eyes that shone through their severity.

“We have long waited for thee, Lilith!” he said.

She returned him no answer.

Eve and her daughter came to the door.

“The mortal foe of my children!” murmured Eve, standing radiant in her
beauty.

“Your children are no longer in her danger,” said Mara; “she has turned
from evil.”

“Trust her not hastily, Mara,” answered her mother; “she has deceived a
multitude!”

“But you will open to her the mirror of the Law of Liberty, mother, that
she may go into it, and abide in it! She consents to open her hand and
restore: will not the great Father restore her to inheritance with His
other children?”

“I do not know Him!” murmured Lilith, in a voice of fear and doubt.

“Therefore it is that thou art miserable,” said Adam.

“I will go back whence I came!” she cried, and turned, wringing her
hands, to depart.

“That is indeed what I would have thee do, where I would have thee
go--to Him from whom thou camest! In thy agony didst thou not cry out
for Him?”

“I cried out for Death--to escape Him and thee!”

“Death is even now on his way to lead thee to Him. Thou knowest neither
Death nor the Life that dwells in Death! Both befriend thee. I am dead,
and would see thee dead, for I live and love thee. Thou art weary and
heavy-laden: art thou not ashamed? Is not the being thou hast corrupted
become to thee at length an evil thing? Wouldst thou yet live on in
disgrace eternal? Cease thou canst not: wilt thou not be restored and
BE?”

She stood silent with bowed head.

“Father,” said Mara, “take her in thine arms, and carry her to her
couch. There she will open her hand, and die into life.”

“I will walk,” said the princess.

Adam turned and led the way. The princess walked feebly after him into
the cottage.

Then Eve came out to me where I sat with Lona in my bosom. She reached
up her arms, took her from me, and carried her in. I dismounted, and the
children also. The horse and the elephants stood shivering; Mara patted
and stroked them every one; they lay down and fell asleep. She led us
into the cottage, and gave the Little Ones of the bread and wine on the
table. Adam and Lilith were standing there together, but silent both.

Eve came from the chamber of death, where she had laid Lona down, and
offered of the bread and wine to the princess.

“Thy beauty slays me! It is death I would have, not food!” said Lilith,
and turned from her.

“This food will help thee to die,” answered Eve.

But Lilith would not taste of it.

“If thou wilt nor eat nor drink, Lilith,” said Adam, “come and see the
place where thou shalt lie in peace.”

He led the way through the door of death, and she followed submissive.
But when her foot crossed the threshold she drew it back, and pressed
her hand to her bosom, struck through with the cold immortal.

A wild blast fell roaring on the roof, and died away in a moan. She
stood ghastly with terror.

“It is he!” said her voiceless lips: I read their motion.

“Who, princess!” I whispered.

“The great Shadow,” she murmured.

“Here he cannot enter,” said Adam. “Here he can hurt no one. Over him
also is power given me.”

“Are the children in the house?” asked Lilith, and at the word the heart
of Eve began to love her.

“He never dared touch a child,” she said. “Nor have you either ever hurt
a child. Your own daughter you have but sent into the loveliest sleep,
for she was already a long time dead when you slew her. And now Death
shall be the atonemaker; you shall sleep together.”

“Wife,” said Adam, “let us first put the children to bed, that she may
see them safe!”

He came back to fetch them. As soon as he was gone, the princess knelt
to Eve, clasped her knees, and said,

“Beautiful Eve, persuade your husband to kill me: to you he will listen!
Indeed I would but cannot open my hand.”

“You cannot die without opening it. To kill you would not serve you,”
 answered Eve. “But indeed he cannot! no one can kill you but the Shadow;
and whom he kills never knows she is dead, but lives to do his will, and
thinks she is doing her own.”

“Show me then to my grave; I am so weary I can live no longer. I must go
to the Shadow--yet I would not!”

She did not, could not understand!

She struggled to rise, but fell at the feet of Eve. The Mother lifted,
and carried her inward.

I followed Adam and Mara and the children into the chamber of death. We
passed Eve with Lilith in her arms, and went farther in.

“You shall not go to the Shadow,” I heard Eve say, as we passed them.
“Even now is his head under my heel!”

The dim light in Adam’s hand glimmered on the sleeping faces, and as he
went on, the darkness closed over them. The very air seemed dead: was it
because none of the sleepers breathed it? Profoundest sleep filled the
wide place. It was as if not one had waked since last I was there, for
the forms I had then noted lay there still. My father was just as I had
left him, save that he seemed yet nearer to a perfect peace. The woman
beside him looked younger.

The darkness, the cold, the silence, the still air, the faces of the
lovely dead, made the hearts of the children beat softly, but their
little tongues would talk--with low, hushed voices.

“What a curious place to sleep in!” said one, “I would rather be in my
nest!” “It is SO cold!” said another.

“Yes, it is cold,” answered our host; “but you will not be cold in your
sleep.”

“Where are our nests?” asked more than one, looking round and seeing no
couch unoccupied.

“Find places, and sleep where you choose,” replied Adam.

Instantly they scattered, advancing fearlessly beyond the light, but we
still heard their gentle voices, and it was plain they saw where I could
not.

“Oh,” cried one, “here is such a beautiful lady!--may I sleep beside
her? I will creep in quietly, and not wake her.”

“Yes, you may,” answered the voice of Eve behind us; and we came to the
couch while the little fellow was yet creeping slowly and softly under
the sheet. He laid his head beside the lady’s, looked up at us, and was
still. His eyelids fell; he was asleep.

We went a little farther, and there was another who had climbed up on
the couch of a woman.

“Mother! mother!” he cried, kneeling over her, his face close to hers.
“--She’s so cold she can’t speak,” he said, looking up to us; “but I
will soon make her warm!”

He lay down, and pressing close to her, put his little arm over her. In
an instant he too was asleep, smiling an absolute content.

We came to a third Little One; it was Luva. She stood on tiptoe, leaning
over the edge of a couch.

“My own mother wouldn’t have me,” she said softly: “will you?”

Receiving no reply, she looked up at Eve. The great mother lifted her to
the couch, and she got at once under the snowy covering.

Each of the Little Ones had by this time, except three of the boys,
found at least an unobjecting bedfellow, and lay still and white beside
a still, white woman. The little orphans had adopted mothers! One tiny
girl had chosen a father to sleep with, and that was mine. A boy lay
by the side of the beautiful matron with the slow-healing hand. On the
middle one of the three couches hitherto unoccupied, lay Lona.

Eve set Lilith down beside it. Adam pointed to the vacant couch on
Lona’s right hand, and said,

“There, Lilith, is the bed I have prepared for you!”

She glanced at her daughter lying before her like a statue carved in
semi-transparent alabaster, and shuddered from head to foot. “How cold
it is!” she murmured.

“You will soon begin to find comfort in the cold,” answered Adam.

“Promises to the dying are easy!” she said.

“But I know it: I too have slept. I am dead!”

“I believed you dead long ago; but I see you alive!”

“More alive than you know, or are able to understand. I was scarce alive
when first you knew me. Now I have slept, and am awake; I am dead, and
live indeed!”

“I fear that child,” she said, pointing to Lona: “she will rise and
terrify me!”

“She is dreaming love to you.”

“But the Shadow!” she moaned; “I fear the Shadow! he will be wroth with
me!”

“He at sight of whom the horses of heaven start and rear, dares not
disturb one dream in this quiet chamber!”

“I shall dream then?”

“You will dream.”

“What dreams?”

“That I cannot tell, but none HE can enter into. When the Shadow comes
here, it will be to lie down and sleep also.--His hour will come, and he
knows it will.”

“How long shall I sleep?”

“You and he will be the last to wake in the morning of the universe.”

The princess lay down, drew the sheet over her, stretched herself out
straight, and lay still with open eyes.

Adam turned to his daughter. She drew near.

“Lilith,” said Mara, “you will not sleep, if you lie there a thousand
years, until you have opened your hand, and yielded that which is not
yours to give or to withhold.”

“I cannot,” she answered. “I would if I could, and gladly, for I am
weary, and the shadows of death are gathering about me.”

“They will gather and gather, but they cannot infold you while yet your
hand remains unopened. You may think you are dead, but it will be only
a dream; you may think you have come awake, but it will still be only a
dream. Open your hand, and you will sleep indeed--then wake indeed.”

“I am trying hard, but the fingers have grown together and into the
palm.”

“I pray you put forth the strength of your will. For the love of life,
draw together your forces and break its bonds!”

“I have struggled in vain; I can do no more. I am very weary, and sleep
lies heavy upon my lids.”

“The moment you open your hand, you will sleep. Open it, and make an
end.”

A tinge of colour arose in the parchment-like face; the contorted hand
trembled with agonised effort. Mara took it, and sought to aid her.

“Hold, Mara!” cried her father. “There is danger!”

The princess turned her eyes upon Eve, beseechingly.

“There was a sword I once saw in your husband’s hands,” she murmured. “I
fled when I saw it. I heard him who bore it say it would divide whatever
was not one and indivisible!”

“I have the sword,” said Adam. “The angel gave it me when he left the
gate.”

“Bring it, Adam,” pleaded Lilith, “and cut me off this hand that I may
sleep.”

“I will,” he answered.

He gave the candle to Eve, and went. The princess closed her eyes.

In a few minutes Adam returned with an ancient weapon in his hand. The
scabbard looked like vellum grown dark with years, but the hilt shone
like gold that nothing could tarnish. He drew out the blade. It flashed
like a pale blue northern streamer, and the light of it made the
princess open her eyes. She saw the sword, shuddered, and held out her
hand. Adam took it. The sword gleamed once, there was one little gush of
blood, and he laid the severed hand in Mara’s lap. Lilith had given one
moan, and was already fast asleep. Mara covered the arm with the sheet,
and the three turned away.

“Will you not dress the wound?” I said.

“A wound from that sword,” answered Adam, “needs no dressing. It is
healing and not hurt.”

“Poor lady!” I said, “she will wake with but one hand!”

“Where the dead deformity clung,” replied Mara, “the true, lovely hand
is already growing.”

We heard a childish voice behind us, and turned again. The candle in
Eve’s hand shone on the sleeping face of Lilith, and the waking faces
of the three Little Ones, grouped on the other side of her couch. “How
beautiful she is grown!” said one of them.

“Poor princess!” said another; “I will sleep with her. She will not bite
any more!”

As he spoke he climbed into her bed, and was immediately fast asleep.
Eve covered him with the sheet.

“I will go on her other side,” said the third. “She shall have two to
kiss her when she wakes!”

“And I am left alone!” said the first mournfully.

“I will put you to bed,” said Eve.

She gave the candle to her husband, and led the child away.

We turned once more to go back to the cottage. I was very sad, for no
one had offered me a place in the house of the dead. Eve joined us as we
went, and walked on before with her husband. Mara by my side carried the
hand of Lilith in the lap of her robe.

“Ah, you have found her!” we heard Eve say as we stepped into the
cottage.

The door stood open; two elephant-trunks came through it out of the
night beyond.

“I sent them with the lantern,” she went on to her husband, “to look for
Mara’s leopardess: they have brought her.”

I followed Adam to the door, and between us we took the white creature
from the elephants, and carried her to the chamber we had just left,
the women preceding us, Eve with the light, and Mara still carrying
the hand. There we laid the beauty across the feet of the princess, her
fore-paws outstretched, and her head couching between them.




CHAPTER XLI. I AM SENT

Then I turned and said to Eve,

“Mother, one couch next to Lona is empty: I know I am unworthy, but may
I not sleep this night in your chamber with my dead? Will you not pardon
both my cowardice and my self-confidence, and take me in? I give me up.
I am sick of myself, and would fain sleep the sleep!”

“The couch next to Lona is the one already prepared for you,” she
answered; “but something waits to be done ere you sleep.”

“I am ready,” I replied.

“How do you know you can do it?” she asked with a smile.

“Because you require it,” I answered. “What is it?”

She turned to Adam:

“Is he forgiven, husband?”

“From my heart.”

“Then tell him what he has to do.”

Adam turned to his daughter.

“Give me that hand, Mara, my child.”

She held it out to him in her lap. He took it tenderly.

“Let us go to the cottage,” he said to me; “there I will instruct you.”

As we went, again arose a sudden stormful blast, mingled with a great
flapping on the roof, but it died away as before in a deep moan.

When the door of the death-chamber was closed behind us, Adam seated
himself, and I stood before him.

“You will remember,” he said, “how, after leaving my daughter’s house,
you came to a dry rock, bearing the marks of an ancient cataract; you
climbed that rock, and found a sandy desert: go to that rock now, and
from its summit walk deep into the desert. But go not many steps ere you
lie down, and listen with your head on the sand. If you hear the murmur
of water beneath, go a little farther, and listen again. If you still
hear the sound, you are in the right direction. Every few yards you must
stop, lie down, and hearken. If, listening thus, at any time you hear
no sound of water, you are out of the way, and must hearken in every
direction until you hear it again. Keeping with the sound, and careful
not to retrace your steps, you will soon hear it louder, and the growing
sound will lead you to where it is loudest: that is the spot you seek.
There dig with the spade I will give you, and dig until you come to
moisture: in it lay the hand, cover it to the level of the desert, and
come home.--But give good heed, and carry the hand with care. Never lay
it down, in what place of seeming safety soever; let nothing touch it;
stop nor turn aside for any attempt to bar your way; never look behind
you; speak to no one, answer no one, walk straight on.--It is yet dark,
and the morning is far distant, but you must set out at once.”

He gave me the hand, and brought me a spade.

“This is my gardening spade,” he said; “with it I have brought many a
lovely thing to the sun.”

I took it, and went out into the night.

It was very cold, and pitch-dark. To fall would be a dread thing, and
the way I had to go was a difficult one even in the broad sunlight! But
I had not set myself the task, and the minute I started I learned that I
was left to no chance: a pale light broke from the ground at every step,
and showed me where next to set my foot. Through the heather and the low
rocks I walked without once even stumbling. I found the bad burrow quite
still; not a wave arose, not a head appeared as I crossed it.

A moon came, and herself showed me the easy way: toward morning I was
almost over the dry channels of the first branch of the river-bed, and
not far, I judged, from Mara’s cottage.

The moon was very low, and the sun not yet up, when I saw before me in
the path, here narrowed by rocks, a figure covered from head to foot as
with a veil of moonlit mist. I kept on my way as if I saw nothing. The
figure threw aside its veil.

“Have you forgotten me already?” said the princess--or what seemed she.

I neither hesitated nor answered; I walked straight on.

“You meant then to leave me in that horrible sepulchre! Do you not yet
understand that where I please to be, there I am? Take my hand: I am
alive as you!”

I was on the point of saying, “Give me your left hand,” but bethought
myself, held my peace, and steadily advanced.

“Give me my hand,” she suddenly shrieked, “or I will tear you in pieces:
you are mine!”

She flung herself upon me. I shuddered, but did not falter. Nothing
touched me, and I saw her no more.

With measured tread along the path, filling it for some distance, came a
body of armed men. I walked through them--nor know whether they gave way
to me, or were bodiless things. But they turned and followed me; I heard
and felt their march at my very heels; but I cast no look behind, and
the sound of their steps and the clash of their armour died away.

A little farther on, the moon being now close to the horizon and the way
in deep shadow, I descried, seated where the path was so narrow that I
could not pass her, a woman with muffled face.

“Ah,” she said, “you are come at last! I have waited here for you an
hour or more! You have done well! Your trial is over. My father sent me
to meet you that you might have a little rest on the way. Give me your
charge, and lay your head in my lap; I will take good care of both until
the sun is well risen. I am not bitterness always, neither to all men!”

Her words were terrible with temptation, for I was very weary. And what
more likely to be true! If I were, through slavish obedience to the
letter of the command and lack of pure insight, to trample under my
feet the very person of the Lady of Sorrow! My heart grew faint at the
thought, then beat as if it would burst my bosom.

Nevertheless my will hardened itself against my heart, and my step did
not falter. I took my tongue between my teeth lest I should unawares
answer, and kept on my way. If Adam had sent her, he could not complain
that I would not heed her! Nor would the Lady of Sorrow love me the less
that even she had not been able to turn me aside!

Just ere I reached the phantom, she pulled the covering from her face:
great indeed was her loveliness, but those were not Mara’s eyes! no lie
could truly or for long imitate them! I advanced as if the thing were
not there, and my foot found empty room.

I had almost reached the other side when a Shadow--I think it was The
Shadow, barred my way. He seemed to have a helmet upon his head, but as
I drew closer I perceived it was the head itself I saw--so distorted as
to bear but a doubtful resemblance to the human. A cold wind smote me,
dank and sickening--repulsive as the air of a charnel-house; firmness
forsook my joints, and my limbs trembled as if they would drop in a
helpless heap. I seemed to pass through him, but I think now that he
passed through me: for a moment I was as one of the damned. Then a soft
wind like the first breath of a new-born spring greeted me, and before
me arose the dawn.

My way now led me past the door of Mara’s cottage. It stood wide open,
and upon the table I saw a loaf of bread and a pitcher of water. In or
around the cottage was neither howl nor wail.

I came to the precipice that testified to the vanished river. I climbed
its worn face, and went on into the desert. There at last, after much
listening to and fro, I determined the spot where the hidden water was
loudest, hung Lilith’s hand about my neck, and began to dig. It was a
long labour, for I had to make a large hole because of the looseness
of the sand; but at length I threw up a damp spadeful. I flung the
sexton-tool on the verge, and laid down the hand. A little water was
already oozing from under its fingers. I sprang out, and made haste to
fill the grave. Then, utterly fatigued, I dropped beside it, and fell
asleep.




CHAPTER XLII. I SLEEP THE SLEEP

When I woke, the ground was moist about me, and my track to the grave
was growing a quicksand. In its ancient course the river was swelling,
and had begun to shove at its burden. Soon it would be roaring down
the precipice, and, divided in its fall, rushing with one branch to
resubmerge the orchard valley, with the other to drown perhaps the
monster horde, and between them to isle the Evil Wood. I set out at once
on my return to those who sent me.

When I came to the precipice, I took my way betwixt the branches, for I
would pass again by the cottage of Mara, lest she should have returned:
I longed to see her once more ere I went to sleep; and now I knew where
to cross the channels, even if the river should have overtaken me and
filled them. But when I reached it, the door stood open still; the bread
and the water were still on the table; and deep silence was within and
around it. I stopped and called aloud at the door, but no voice replied,
and I went my way.

A little farther, I came where sat a grayheaded man on the sand,
weeping.

“What ails you, sir?” I asked. “Are you forsaken?”

“I weep,” he answered, “because they will not let me die. I have been to
the house of death, and its mistress, notwithstanding my years, refuses
me. Intercede for me, sir, if you know her, I pray you.”

“Nay, sir,” I replied, “that I cannot; for she refuses none whom it is
lawful for her to receive.”

“How know you this of her? You have never sought death! you are much too
young to desire it!”

“I fear your words may indicate that, were you young again, neither
would you desire it.”

“Indeed, young sir, I would not! and certain I am that you cannot.”

“I may not be old enough to desire to die, but I am young enough to
desire to live indeed! Therefore I go now to learn if she will at length
take me in. You wish to die because you do not care to live: she will
not open her door to you, for no one can die who does not long to live.”

“It ill becomes your youth to mock a friendless old man. Pray, cease
your riddles!”

“Did not then the Mother tell you something of the same sort?”

“In truth I believe she did; but I gave little heed to her excuses.”

“Ah, then, sir,” I rejoined, “it is but too plain you have not yet
learned to die, and I am heartily grieved for you. Such had I too been
but for the Lady of Sorrow. I am indeed young, but I have wept many
tears; pardon me, therefore, if I presume to offer counsel:--Go to the
Lady of Sorrow, and ‘take with both hands’ * what she will give you.
Yonder lies her cottage. She is not in it now, but her door stands open,
and there is bread and water on her table. Go in; sit down; eat of the
bread; drink of the water; and wait there until she appear. Then ask
counsel of her, for she is true, and her wisdom is great.”

He fell to weeping afresh, and I left him weeping. What I said, I fear
he did not heed. But Mara would find him!

The sun was down, and the moon unrisen, when I reached the abode of the
monsters, but it was still as a stone till I passed over. Then I heard
a noise of many waters, and a great cry behind me, but I did not turn my
head.

Ere I reached the house of death, the cold was bitter and the darkness
dense; and the cold and the darkness were one, and entered into my bones
together. But the candle of Eve, shining from the window, guided me, and
kept both frost and murk from my heart.

The door stood open, and the cottage lay empty. I sat down disconsolate.

And as I sat, there grew in me such a sense of loneliness as never yet
in my wanderings had I felt. Thousands were near me, not one was with
me! True, it was I who was dead, not they; but, whether by their life or
by my death, we were divided! They were alive, but I was not dead enough
even to know them alive: doubt WOULD come. They were, at best, far from
me, and helpers I had none to lay me beside them!

Never before had I known, or truly imagined desolation! In vain I took
myself to task, saying the solitude was but a seeming: I was awake, and
they slept--that was all! it was only that they lay so still and did not
speak! they were with me now, and soon, soon I should be with them!

I dropped Adam’s old spade, and the dull sound of its fall on the clay
floor seemed reverberated from the chamber beyond: a childish terror
seized me; I sat and stared at the coffin-door.--But father Adam, mother
Eve, sister Mara would soon come to me, and then--welcome the cold world
and the white neighbours! I forgot my fears, lived a little, and loved
my dead.

Something did move in the chamber of the dead! There came from it what
was LIKE a dim, far-off sound, yet was not what I knew as sound. My soul
sprang into my ears. Was it a mere thrill of the dead air, too slight
to be heard, but quivering in every spiritual sense? I KNEW without
hearing, without feeling it!

The something was coming! it drew nearer! In the bosom of my
desertion awoke an infant hope. The noiseless thrill reached the
coffin-door--became sound, and smote on my ear.

The door began to move--with a low, soft creaking of its hinges. It was
opening! I ceased to listen, and stared expectant.

It opened a little way, and a face came into the opening. It was Lona’s.
Its eyes were closed, but the face itself was upon me, and seemed to see
me. It was white as Eve’s, white as Mara’s, but did not shine like their
faces. She spoke, and her voice was like a sleepy night-wind in the
grass.

“Are you coming, king?” it said. “I cannot rest until you are with me,
gliding down the river to the great sea, and the beautiful dream-land.
The sleepiness is full of lovely things: come and see them.”

“Ah, my darling!” I cried. “Had I but known!--I thought you were dead!”

She lay on my bosom--cold as ice frozen to marble. She threw her arms,
so white, feebly about me, and sighed--

“Carry me back to my bed, king. I want to sleep.”

I bore her to the death-chamber, holding her tight lest she should
dissolve out of my arms. Unaware that I saw, I carried her straight to
her couch.

“Lay me down,” she said, “and cover me from the warm air; it hurts--a
little. Your bed is there, next to mine. I shall see you when I wake.”

She was already asleep. I threw myself on my couch--blessed as never was
man on the eve of his wedding.

“Come, sweet cold,” I said, “and still my heart speedily.”

But there came instead a glimmer of light in the chamber, and I saw the
face of Adam approaching. He had not the candle, yet I saw him. At the
side of Lona’s couch, he looked down on her with a questioning smile,
and then greeted me across it.

“We have been to the top of the hill to hear the waters on their way,”
 he said. “They will be in the den of the monsters to-night.--But why did
you not await our return?”

“My child could not sleep,” I answered.

“She is fast asleep!” he rejoined.

“Yes, now!” I said; “but she was awake when I laid her down.”

“She was asleep all the time!” he insisted. “She was perhaps dreaming
about you--and came to you?”

“She did.”

“And did you not see that her eyes were closed?”

“Now I think of it, I did.”

“If you had looked ere you laid her down, you would have seen her asleep
on the couch.”

“That would have been terrible!”

“You would only have found that she was no longer in your arms.”

“That would have been worse!”

“It is, perhaps, to think of; but to see it would not have troubled
you.”

“Dear father,” I said, “how is it that I am not sleepy? I thought I
should go to sleep like the Little Ones the moment I laid my head down!”

“Your hour is not quite come. You must have food ere you sleep.”

“Ah, I ought not to have lain down without your leave, for I cannot
sleep without your help! I will get up at once!”

But I found my own weight more than I could move.

“There is no need: we will serve you here,” he answered. “--You do not
feel cold, do you?”

“Not too cold to lie still, but perhaps too cold to eat!”

He came to the side of my couch, bent over me, and breathed on my heart.
At once I was warm.

As he left me, I heard a voice, and knew it was the Mother’s. She was
singing, and her song was sweet and soft and low, and I thought she sat
by my bed in the dark; but ere it ceased, her song soared aloft, and
seemed to come from the throat of a woman-angel, high above all the
region of larks, higher than man had ever yet lifted up his heart. I
heard every word she sang, but could keep only this:--

     “Many a wrong, and its curing song;
        Many a road, and many an inn;
      Room to roam, but only one home
        For all the world to win!”

and I thought I had heard the song before.

Then the three came to my couch together, bringing me bread and wine,
and I sat up to partake of it. Adam stood on one side of me, Eve and
Mara on the other.

“You are good indeed, father Adam, mother Eve, sister Mara,” I said, “to
receive me! In my soul I am ashamed and sorry!”

“We knew you would come again!” answered Eve.

“How could you know it?” I returned.

“Because here was I, born to look after my brothers and sisters!”
 answered Mara with a smile.

“Every creature must one night yield himself and lie down,” answered
Adam: “he was made for liberty, and must not be left a slave!”

“It will be late, I fear, ere all have lain down!” I said.

“There is no early or late here,” he rejoined. “For him the true time
then first begins who lays himself down. Men are not coming home fast;
women are coming faster. A desert, wide and dreary, parts him who lies
down to die from him who lies down to live. The former may well make
haste, but here is no haste.”

“To our eyes,” said Eve, “you were coming all the time: we knew Mara
would find you, and you must come!”

“How long is it since my father lay down?” I asked.

“I have told you that years are of no consequence in this house,”
 answered Adam; “we do not heed them. Your father will wake when his
morning comes. Your mother, next to whom you are lying,----”

“Ah, then, it IS my mother!” I exclaimed.

“Yes--she with the wounded hand,” he assented; “--she will be up and
away long ere your morning is ripe.”

“I am sorry.”

“Rather be glad.”

“It must be a sight for God Himself to see such a woman come awake!”

“It is indeed a sight for God, a sight that makes her Maker glad! He
sees of the travail of His soul, and is satisfied!--Look at her once
more, and sleep.”

He let the rays of his candle fall on her beautiful face.

“She looks much younger!” I said.

“She IS much younger,” he replied. “Even Lilith already begins to look
younger!”

I lay down, blissfully drowsy.

“But when you see your mother again,” he continued, “you will not
at first know her. She will go on steadily growing younger until she
reaches the perfection of her womanhood--a splendour beyond foresight.
Then she will open her eyes, behold on one side her husband, on the
other her son--and rise and leave them to go to a father and a brother
more to her than they.”

I heard as one in a dream. I was very cold, but already the cold caused
me no suffering. I felt them put on me the white garment of the dead.
Then I forgot everything. The night about me was pale with sleeping
faces, but I was asleep also, nor knew that I slept.




CHAPTER XLIII. THE DREAMS THAT CAME

I grew aware of existence, aware also of the profound, the infinite
cold. I was intensely blessed--more blessed, I know, than my heart,
imagining, can now recall. I could not think of warmth with the least
suggestion of pleasure. I knew that I had enjoyed it, but could not
remember how. The cold had soothed every care, dissolved every pain,
comforted every sorrow. COMFORTED? Nay; sorrow was swallowed up in the
life drawing nigh to restore every good and lovely thing a hundredfold!
I lay at peace, full of the quietest expectation, breathing the damp
odours of Earth’s bountiful bosom, aware of the souls of primroses,
daisies and snowdrops, patiently waiting in it for the Spring.

How convey the delight of that frozen, yet conscious sleep! I had no
more to stand up! had only to lie stretched out and still! How cold I
was, words cannot tell; yet I grew colder and colder--and welcomed the
cold yet more and more. I grew continuously less conscious of myself,
continuously more conscious of bliss, unimaginable yet felt. I had
neither made it nor prayed for it: it was mine in virtue of existence!
and existence was mine in virtue of a Will that dwelt in mine.

Then the dreams began to arrive--and came crowding.--I lay naked on a
snowy peak. The white mist heaved below me like a billowy sea. The cold
moon was in the air with me, and above the moon and me the colder sky,
in which the moon and I dwelt. I was Adam, waiting for God to breathe
into my nostrils the breath of life.--I was not Adam, but a child in
the bosom of a mother white with a radiant whiteness. I was a youth on
a white horse, leaping from cloud to cloud of a blue heaven, hasting
calmly to some blessed goal. For centuries I dreamed--or was it
chiliads? or only one long night?--But why ask? for time had nothing to
do with me; I was in the land of thought--farther in, higher up than the
seven dimensions, the ten senses: I think I was where I am--in the heart
of God.--I dreamed away dim cycles in the centre of a melting glacier,
the spectral moon drawing nearer and nearer, the wind and the welter
of a torrent growing in my ears. I lay and heard them: the wind and
the water and the moon sang a peaceful waiting for a redemption drawing
nigh. I dreamed cycles, I say, but, for aught I knew or can tell, they
were the solemn, æonian march of a second, pregnant with eternity.

Then, of a sudden, but not once troubling my conscious bliss, all the
wrongs I had ever done, from far beyond my earthly memory down to the
present moment, were with me. Fully in every wrong lived the conscious
I, confessing, abjuring, lamenting the dead, making atonement with each
person I had injured, hurt, or offended. Every human soul to which I had
caused a troubled thought, was now grown unspeakably dear to me, and I
humbled myself before it, agonising to cast from between us the clinging
offence. I wept at the feet of the mother whose commands I had slighted;
with bitter shame I confessed to my father that I had told him two lies,
and long forgotten them: now for long had remembered them, and kept them
in memory to crush at last at his feet. I was the eager slave of all
whom I had thus or anyhow wronged. Countless services I devised to
render them! For this one I would build such a house as had never grown
from the ground! for that one I would train such horses as had never yet
been seen in any world! For a third I would make such a garden as had
never bloomed, haunted with still pools, and alive with running waters!
I would write songs to make their hearts swell, and tales to make
them glow! I would turn the forces of the world into such channels of
invention as to make them laugh with the joy of wonder! Love possessed
me! Love was my life! Love was to me, as to him that made me, all in
all!

Suddenly I found myself in a solid blackness, upon which the ghost of
light that dwells in the caverns of the eyes could not cast one fancied
glimmer. But my heart, which feared nothing and hoped infinitely, was
full of peace. I lay imagining what the light would be when it came,
and what new creation it would bring with it--when, suddenly, without
conscious volition, I sat up and stared about me.

The moon was looking in at the lowest, horizontal, crypt-like windows
of the death-chamber, her long light slanting, I thought, across
the fallen, but still ripening sheaves of the harvest of the great
husbandman.--But no; that harvest was gone! Gathered in, or swept away
by chaotic storm, not a sacred sheaf was there! My dead were gone! I was
alone!--In desolation dread lay depths yet deeper than I had hitherto
known!--Had there never been any ripening dead? Had I but dreamed them
and their loveliness? Why then these walls? why the empty couches? No;
they were all up! they were all abroad in the new eternal day, and had
forgotten me! They had left me behind, and alone! Tenfold more terrible
was the tomb its inhabitants away! The quiet ones had made me quiet with
their presence--had pervaded my mind with their blissful peace; now I
had no friend, and my lovers were far from me! A moment I sat and stared
horror-stricken. I had been alone with the moon on a mountain top in the
sky; now I was alone with her in a huge cenotaph: she too was staring
about, seeking her dead with ghastly gaze! I sprang to my feet, and
staggered from the fearful place.

The cottage was empty. I ran out into the night.

No moon was there! Even as I left the chamber, a cloudy rampart had
risen and covered her. But a broad shimmer came from far over the heath,
mingled with a ghostly murmuring music, as if the moon were raining
a light that plashed as it fell. I ran stumbling across the moor, and
found a lovely lake, margined with reeds and rushes: the moon behind
the cloud was gazing upon the monsters’ den, full of clearest, brightest
water, and very still.--But the musical murmur went on, filling the
quiet air, and drawing me after it.

I walked round the border of the little mere, and climbed the range of
hills. What a sight rose to my eyes! The whole expanse where, with hot,
aching feet, I had crossed and recrossed the deep-scored channels and
ravines of the dry river-bed, was alive with streams, with torrents,
with still pools--“a river deep and wide”! How the moon flashed on the
water! how the water answered the moon with flashes of its own--white
flashes breaking everywhere from its rock-encountered flow! And a great
jubilant song arose from its bosom, the song of new-born liberty. I
stood a moment gazing, and my heart also began to exult: my life was not
all a failure! I had helped to set this river free!--My dead were not
lost! I had but to go after and find them! I would follow and follow
until I came whither they had gone! Our meeting might be thousands of
years away, but at last--AT LAST I should hold them! Wherefore else did
the floods clap their hands?

I hurried down the hill: my pilgrimage was begun! In what direction to
turn my steps I knew not, but I must go and go till I found my living
dead! A torrent ran swift and wide at the foot of the range: I rushed
in, it laid no hold upon me; I waded through it. The next I sprang
across; the third I swam; the next I waded again.

I stopped to gaze on the wondrous loveliness of the ceaseless flash and
flow, and to hearken to the multitudinous broken music. Every now and
then some incipient air would seem about to draw itself clear of the
dulcet confusion, only to merge again in the consorted roar. At moments
the world of waters would invade as if to overwhelm me--not with the
force of its seaward rush, or the shouting of its liberated throng, but
with the greatness of the silence wandering into sound.

As I stood lost in delight, a hand was laid on my shoulder. I turned,
and saw a man in the prime of strength, beautiful as if fresh from the
heart of the glad creator, young like him who cannot grow old. I looked:
it was Adam. He stood large and grand, clothed in a white robe, with the
moon in his hair.

“Father,” I cried, “where is she? Where are the dead? Is the great
resurrection come and gone? The terror of my loneliness was upon me;
I could not sleep without my dead; I ran from the desolate
chamber.--Whither shall I go to find them?”

“You mistake, my son,” he answered, in a voice whose very breath was
consolation. “You are still in the chamber of death, still upon your
couch, asleep and dreaming, with the dead around you.”

“Alas! when I but dream how am I to know it? The dream best dreamed is
the likest to the waking truth!”

“When you are quite dead, you will dream no false dream. The soul that
is true can generate nothing that is not true, neither can the false
enter it.”

“But, sir,” I faltered, “how am I to distinguish betwixt the true and
the false where both alike seem real?”

“Do you not understand?” he returned, with a smile that might have slain
all the sorrows of all his children. “You CANNOT perfectly distinguish
between the true and the false while you are not yet quite dead; neither
indeed will you when you are quite dead--that is, quite alive, for then
the false will never present itself. At this moment, believe me, you are
on your bed in the house of death.”

“I am trying hard to believe you, father. I do indeed believe you,
although I can neither see nor feel the truth of what you say.”

“You are not to blame that you cannot. And because even in a dream you
believe me, I will help you.--Put forth your left hand open, and close
it gently: it will clasp the hand of your Lona, who lies asleep where
you lie dreaming you are awake.”

I put forth my hand: it closed on the hand of Lona, firm and soft and
deathless.

“But, father,” I cried, “she is warm!”

“Your hand is as warm to hers. Cold is a thing unknown in our country.
Neither she nor you are yet in the fields of home, but each to each is
alive and warm and healthful.”

Then my heart was glad. But immediately supervened a sharp-stinging
doubt.

“Father,” I said, “forgive me, but how am I to know surely that this
also is not a part of the lovely dream in which I am now walking with
thyself?”

“Thou doubtest because thou lovest the truth. Some would willingly
believe life but a phantasm, if only it might for ever afford them a
world of pleasant dreams: thou art not of such! Be content for a while
not to know surely. The hour will come, and that ere long, when, being
true, thou shalt behold the very truth, and doubt will be for ever dead.
Scarce, then, wilt thou be able to recall the features of the phantom.
Thou wilt then know that which thou canst not now dream. Thou hast
not yet looked the Truth in the face, hast as yet at best but seen him
through a cloud. That which thou seest not, and never didst see save
in a glass darkly--that which, indeed, never can be known save by its
innate splendour shining straight into pure eyes--that thou canst not
but doubt, and art blameless in doubting until thou seest it face to
face, when thou wilt no longer be able to doubt it. But to him who has
once seen even a shadow only of the truth, and, even but hoping he has
seen it when it is present no longer, tries to obey it--to him the real
vision, the Truth himself, will come, and depart no more, but abide with
him for ever.”

“I think I see, father,” I said; “I think I understand.”

“Then remember, and recall. Trials yet await thee, heavy, of a nature
thou knowest not now. Remember the things thou hast seen. Truly thou
knowest not those things, but thou knowest what they have seemed, what
they have meant to thee! Remember also the things thou shalt yet see.
Truth is all in all; and the truth of things lies, at once hid and
revealed, in their seeming.”

“How can that be, father?” I said, and raised my eyes with the question;
for I had been listening with downbent head, aware of nothing but the
voice of Adam.

He was gone; in my ears was nought but the sounding silence of the
swift-flowing waters. I stretched forth my hands to find him, but no
answering touch met their seeking. I was alone--alone in the land of
dreams! To myself I seemed wide awake, but I believed I was in a dream,
because he had told me so.

Even in a dream, however, the dreamer must do something! he cannot sit
down and refuse to stir until the dream grow weary of him and depart: I
took up my wandering, and went on.

Many channels I crossed, and came to a wider space of rock; there,
dreaming I was weary, I laid myself down, and longed to be awake.

I was about to rise and resume my journey, when I discovered that I lay
beside a pit in the rock, whose mouth was like that of a grave. It was
deep and dark; I could see no bottom.

Now in the dreams of my childhood I had found that a fall invariably
woke me, and would, therefore, when desiring to discontinue a dream,
seek some eminence whence to cast myself down that I might wake: with
one glance at the peaceful heavens, and one at the rushing waters, I
rolled myself over the edge of the pit.

For a moment consciousness left me. When it returned, I stood in the
garret of my own house, in the little wooden chamber of the cowl and the
mirror.

Unspeakable despair, hopelessness blank and dreary, invaded me with the
knowledge: between me and my Lona lay an abyss impassable! stretched a
distance no chain could measure! Space and Time and Mode of Being, as
with walls of adamant unscalable, impenetrable, shut me in from that
gulf! True, it might yet be in my power to pass again through the door
of light, and journey back to the chamber of the dead; and if so, I was
parted from that chamber only by a wide heath, and by the pale,
starry night betwixt me and the sun, which alone could open for me the
mirror-door, and was now far away on the other side of the world! but an
immeasurably wider gulf sank between us in this--that she was asleep and
I was awake! that I was no longer worthy to share with her that sleep,
and could no longer hope to awake from it with her! For truly I was much
to blame: I had fled from my dream! The dream was not of my making,
any more than was my life: I ought to have seen it to the end! and in
fleeing from it, I had left the holy sleep itself behind me!--I would go
back to Adam, tell him the truth, and bow to his decree!

I crept to my chamber, threw myself on my bed, and passed a dreamless
night.

I rose, and listlessly sought the library. On the way I met no one; the
house seemed dead. I sat down with a book to await the noontide: not
a sentence could I understand! The mutilated manuscript offered itself
from the masked door: the sight of it sickened me; what to me was the
princess with her devilry!

I rose and looked out of a window. It was a brilliant morning. With a
great rush the fountain shot high, and fell roaring back. The sun sat in
its feathery top. Not a bird sang, not a creature was to be seen. Raven
nor librarian came near me. The world was dead about me. I took another
book, sat down again, and went on waiting.

Noon was near. I went up the stairs to the dumb, shadowy roof. I closed
behind me the door into the wooden chamber, and turned to open the door
out of a dreary world.

I left the chamber with a heart of stone. Do what I might, all was
fruitless. I pulled the chains; adjusted and re-adjusted the hood;
arranged and re-arranged the mirrors; no result followed. I waited and
waited to give the vision time; it would not come; the mirror stood
blank; nothing lay in its dim old depth but the mirror opposite and my
haggard face.

I went back to the library. There the books were hateful to me--for I
had once loved them.

That night I lay awake from down-lying to uprising, and the next day
renewed my endeavours with the mystic door. But all was yet in vain. How
the hours went I cannot think. No one came nigh me; not a sound from the
house below entered my ears. Not once did I feel weary--only desolate,
drearily desolate.

I passed a second sleepless night. In the morning I went for the last
time to the chamber in the roof, and for the last time sought an open
door: there was none. My heart died within me. I had lost my Lona!

Was she anywhere? had she ever been, save in the mouldering cells of
my brain? “I must die one day,” I thought, “and then, straight from my
death-bed, I will set out to find her! If she is not, I will go to
the Father and say--‘Even thou canst not help me: let me cease, I pray
thee!’”




CHAPTER XLIV. THE WAKING

The fourth night I seemed to fall asleep, and that night woke indeed. I
opened my eyes and knew, although all was dark around me, that I lay in
the house of death, and that every moment since there I fell asleep
I had been dreaming, and now first was awake. “At last!” I said to my
heart, and it leaped for joy. I turned my eyes; Lona stood by my couch,
waiting for me! I had never lost her!--only for a little time lost the
sight of her! Truly I needed not have lamented her so sorely!

It was dark, as I say, but I saw her: SHE was not dark! Her eyes shone
with the radiance of the Mother’s, and the same light issued from her
face--nor from her face only, for her death-dress, filled with the light
of her body now tenfold awake in the power of its resurrection, was
white as snow and glistering. She fell asleep a girl; she awoke a woman,
ripe with the loveliness of the life essential. I folded her in my arms,
and knew that I lived indeed.

“I woke first!” she said, with a wondering smile.

“You did, my love, and woke me!”

“I only looked at you and waited,” she answered.

The candle came floating toward us through the dark, and in a few
moments Adam and Eve and Mara were with us. They greeted us with a quiet
good-morning and a smile: they were used to such wakings!

“I hope you have had a pleasant darkness!” said the Mother.

“Not very,” I answered, “but the waking from it is heavenly.”

“It is but begun,” she rejoined; “you are hardly yet awake!”

“He is at least clothed-upon with Death, which is the radiant garment of
Life,” said Adam.

He embraced Lona his child, put an arm around me, looked a moment or two
inquiringly at the princess, and patted the head of the leopardess.

“I think we shall meet you two again before long,” he said, looking
first at Lona, then at me.

“Have we to die again?” I asked.

“No,” he answered, with a smile like the Mother’s; “you have died into
life, and will die no more; you have only to keep dead. Once dying as we
die here, all the dying is over. Now you have only to live, and that you
must, with all your blessed might. The more you live, the stronger you
become to live.”

“But shall I not grow weary with living so strong?” I said. “What if I
cease to live with all my might?”

“It needs but the will, and the strength is there!” said the Mother.
“Pure life has no weakness to grow weary withal. THE Life keeps
generating ours.--Those who will not die, die many times, die
constantly, keep dying deeper, never have done dying; here all is
upwardness and love and gladness.”

She ceased with a smile and a look that seemed to say, “We are mother
and son; we understand each other! Between us no farewell is possible.”

Mara kissed me on the forehead, and said, gayly,

“I told you, brother, all would be well!--When next you would comfort,
say, ‘What will be well, is even now well.’”

She gave a little sigh, and I thought it meant, “But they will not
believe you!”

“--You know me now!” she ended, with a smile like her mother’s.

“I know you!” I answered: “you are the voice that cried in the
wilderness before ever the Baptist came! you are the shepherd whose
wolves hunt the wandering sheep home ere the shadow rise and the night
grow dark!”

“My work will one day be over,” she said, “and then I shall be glad with
the gladness of the great shepherd who sent me.”

“All the night long the morning is at hand,” said Adam.

“What is that flapping of wings I hear?” I asked.

“The Shadow is hovering,” replied Adam: “there is one here whom he
counts his own! But ours once, never more can she be his!”

I turned to look on the faces of my father and mother, and kiss them ere
we went: their couches were empty save of the Little Ones who had with
love’s boldness appropriated their hospitality! For an instant that
awful dream of desolation overshadowed me, and I turned aside.

“What is it, my heart?” said Lona.

“Their empty places frightened me,” I answered.

“They are up and away long ago,” said Adam. “They kissed you ere they
went, and whispered, ‘Come soon.’”

“And I neither to feel nor hear them!” I murmured.

“How could you--far away in your dreary old house! You thought the
dreadful place had you once more! Now go and find them.--Your parents,
my child,” he added, turning to Lona, “must come and find you!”

The hour of our departure was at hand. Lona went to the couch of the
mother who had slain her, and kissed her tenderly--then laid herself in
her father’s arms.

“That kiss will draw her homeward, my Lona!” said Adam.

“Who were her parents?” asked Lona.

“My father,” answered Adam, “is her father also.”

She turned and laid her hand in mine.

I kneeled and humbly thanked the three for helping me to die. Lona knelt
beside me, and they all breathed upon us.

“Hark! I hear the sun,” said Adam.

I listened: he was coming with the rush as of a thousand times ten
thousand far-off wings, with the roar of a molten and flaming world
millions upon millions of miles away. His approach was a crescendo chord
of a hundred harmonies.

The three looked at each other and smiled, and that smile went floating
heavenward a three-petaled flower, the family’s morning thanksgiving.
From their mouths and their faces it spread over their bodies and shone
through their garments. Ere I could say, “Lo, they change!” Adam and
Eve stood before me the angels of the resurrection, and Mara was the
Magdalene with them at the sepulchre. The countenance of Adam was like
lightning, and Eve held a napkin that flung flakes of splendour about
the place.

A wind began to moan in pulsing gusts.

“You hear his wings now!” said Adam; and I knew he did not mean the
wings of the morning.

“It is the great Shadow stirring to depart,” he went on. “Wretched
creature, he has himself within him, and cannot rest!”

“But is there not in him something deeper yet?” I asked.

“Without a substance,” he answered, “a shadow cannot be--yea, or without
a light behind the substance!”

He listened for a moment, then called out, with a glad smile, “Hark
to the golden cock! Silent and motionless for millions of years has
he stood on the clock of the universe; now at last he is flapping his
wings! now will he begin to crow! and at intervals will men hear him
until the dawn of the day eternal.”

I listened. Far away--as in the heart of an æonian silence, I heard the
clear jubilant outcry of the golden throat. It hurled defiance at
death and the dark; sang infinite hope, and coming calm. It was the
“expectation of the creature” finding at last a voice; the cry of a
chaos that would be a kingdom!

Then I heard a great flapping.

“The black bat is flown!” said Mara.

“Amen, golden cock, bird of God!” cried Adam, and the words rang through
the house of silence, and went up into the airy regions.

At his AMEN--like doves arising on wings of silver from among the
potsherds, up sprang the Little Ones to their knees on their beds,
calling aloud,

“Crow! crow again, golden cock!”--as if they had both seen and heard him
in their dreams.

Then each turned and looked at the sleeping bedfellow, gazed a moment
with loving eyes, kissed the silent companion of the night, and sprang
from the couch. The Little Ones who had lain down beside my father and
mother gazed blank and sad for a moment at their empty places, then slid
slowly to the floor. There they fell each into the other’s arms, as if
then first, each by the other’s eyes, assured they were alive and awake.
Suddenly spying Lona, they came running, radiant with bliss, to embrace
her. Odu, catching sight of the leopardess on the feet of the princess,
bounded to her next, and throwing an arm over the great sleeping head,
fondled and kissed it.

“Wake up, wake up, darling!” he cried; “it is time to wake!”

The leopardess did not move.

“She has slept herself cold!” he said to Mara, with an upcast look of
appealing consternation.

“She is waiting for the princess to wake, my child,” said Mara.

Odu looked at the princess, and saw beside her, still asleep, two of his
companions. He flew at them.

“Wake up! wake up!” he cried, and pushed and pulled, now this one, now
that.

But soon he began to look troubled, and turned to me with misty eyes.

“They will not wake!” he said. “And why are they so cold?”

“They too are waiting for the princess,” I answered.

He stretched across, and laid his hand on her face.

“She is cold too! What is it?” he cried--and looked round in wondering
dismay.

Adam went to him.

“Her wake is not ripe yet,” he said: “she is busy forgetting. When she
has forgotten enough to remember enough, then she will soon be ripe, and
wake.”

“And remember?”

“Yes--but not too much at once though.”

“But the golden cock has crown!” argued the child, and fell again upon
his companions.

“Peter! Peter! Crispy!” he cried. “Wake up, Peter! wake up, Crispy! We
are all awake but you two! The gold cock has crown SO loud! The sun is
awake and coming! Oh, why WON’T you wake?”

But Peter would not wake, neither would Crispy, and Odu wept outright at
last.

“Let them sleep, darling!” said Adam. “You would not like the princess
to wake and find nobody? They are quite happy. So is the leopardess.”

He was comforted, and wiped his eyes as if he had been all his life
used to weeping and wiping, though now first he had tears wherewith to
weep--soon to be wiped altogether away.

We followed Eve to the cottage. There she offered us neither bread nor
wine, but stood radiantly desiring our departure. So, with never a word
of farewell, we went out. The horse and the elephants were at the door,
waiting for us. We were too happy to mount them, and they followed us.




CHAPTER XLV. THE JOURNEY HOME

It had ceased to be dark; we walked in a dim twilight, breathing through
the dimness the breath of the spring. A wondrous change had passed upon
the world--or was it not rather that a change more marvellous had
taken place in us? Without light enough in the sky or the air to reveal
anything, every heather-bush, every small shrub, every blade of grass
was perfectly visible--either by light that went out from it, as fire
from the bush Moses saw in the desert, or by light that went out of our
eyes. Nothing cast a shadow; all things interchanged a little light.
Every growing thing showed me, by its shape and colour, its indwelling
idea--the informing thought, that is, which was its being, and sent it
out. My bare feet seemed to love every plant they trod upon. The world
and my being, its life and mine, were one. The microcosm and macrocosm
were at length atoned, at length in harmony! I lived in everything;
everything entered and lived in me. To be aware of a thing, was to know
its life at once and mine, to know whence we came, and where we were at
home--was to know that we are all what we are, because Another is what
he is! Sense after sense, hitherto asleep, awoke in me--sense after
sense indescribable, because no correspondent words, no likenesses or
imaginations exist, wherewithal to describe them. Full indeed--yet ever
expanding, ever making room to receive--was the conscious being where
things kept entering by so many open doors! When a little breeze
brushing a bush of heather set its purple bells a ringing, I was myself
in the joy of the bells, myself in the joy of the breeze to which
responded their sweet TIN-TINNING**, myself in the joy of the sense, and
of the soul that received all the joys together. To everything glad I
lent the hall of my being wherein to revel. I was a peaceful ocean
upon which the ground-swell of a living joy was continually lifting new
waves; yet was the joy ever the same joy, the eternal joy, with tens of
thousands of changing forms. Life was a cosmic holiday.

Now I knew that life and truth were one; that life mere and pure is
in itself bliss; that where being is not bliss, it is not life, but
life-in-death. Every inspiration of the dark wind that blew where it
listed, went out a sigh of thanksgiving. At last I was! I lived, and
nothing could touch my life! My darling walked beside me, and we were on
our way home to the Father!

So much was ours ere ever the first sun rose upon our freedom: what must
not the eternal day bring with it!

We came to the fearful hollow where once had wallowed the monsters of
the earth: it was indeed, as I had beheld it in my dream, a lovely lake.
I gazed into its pellucid depths. A whirlpool had swept out the soil in
which the abortions burrowed, and at the bottom lay visible the whole
horrid brood: a dim greenish light pervaded the crystalline water, and
revealed every hideous form beneath it. Coiled in spires, folded in
layers, knotted on themselves, or “extended long and large,” they
weltered in motionless heaps--shapes more fantastic in ghoulish,
blasting dismay, than ever wine-sodden brain of exhausted poet fevered
into misbeing. He who dived in the swirling Maelstrom saw none to
compare with them in horror: tentacular convolutions, tumid bulges,
glaring orbs of sepian deformity, would have looked to him innocence
beside such incarnations of hatefulness--every head the wicked
flower that, bursting from an abominable stalk, perfected its evil
significance.

Not one of them moved as we passed. But they were not dead. So long as
exist men and women of unwholesome mind, that lake will still be peopled
with loathsomenesses.

But hark the herald of the sun, the auroral wind, softly trumpeting
his approach! The master-minister of the human tabernacle is at hand!
Heaping before his prow a huge ripple-fretted wave of crimson and gold,
he rushes aloft, as if new launched from the urging hand of his maker
into the upper sea--pauses, and looks down on the world. White-raving
storm of molten metals, he is but a coal from the altar of the Father’s
never-ending sacrifice to his children. See every little flower
straighten its stalk, lift up its neck, and with outstretched head
stand expectant: something more than the sun, greater than the light, is
coming, is coming--none the less surely coming that it is long upon the
road! What matters to-day, or to-morrow, or ten thousand years to Life
himself, to Love himself! He is coming, is coming, and the necks of all
humanity are stretched out to see him come! Every morning will they thus
outstretch themselves, every evening will they droop and wait--until he
comes.--Is this but an air-drawn vision? When he comes, will he indeed
find them watching thus?

It was a glorious resurrection-morning. The night had been spent in
preparing it!

The children went gamboling before, and the beasts came after us.
Fluttering butterflies, darting dragon-flies hovered or shot hither and
thither about our heads, a cloud of colours and flashes, now descending
upon us like a snow-storm of rainbow flakes, now rising into the humid
air like a rolling vapour of embodied odours. It was a summer-day more
like itself, that is, more ideal, than ever man that had not died
found summer-day in any world. I walked on the new earth, under the new
heaven, and found them the same as the old, save that now they opened
their minds to me, and I saw into them. Now, the soul of everything I
met came out to greet me and make friends with me, telling me we came
from the same, and meant the same. I was going to him, they said, with
whom they always were, and whom they always meant; they were, they said,
lightnings that took shape as they flashed from him to his. The dark
rocks drank like sponges the rays that showered upon them; the great
world soaked up the light, and sent out the living. Two joy-fires were
Lona and I. Earth breathed heavenward her sweet-savoured smoke; we
breathed homeward our longing desires. For thanksgiving, our very
consciousness was that.

We came to the channels, once so dry and wearyful: they ran and flashed
and foamed with living water that shouted in its gladness! Far as the
eye could see, all was a rushing, roaring, dashing river of water made
vocal by its rocks.

We did not cross it, but “walked in glory and in joy” up its right bank,
until we reached the great cataract at the foot of the sandy desert,
where, roaring and swirling and dropping sheer, the river divided into
its two branches. There we climbed the height--and found no desert:
through grassy plains, between grassy banks, flowed the deep, wide,
silent river full to the brim. Then first to the Little Ones was
revealed the glory of God in the limpid flow of water. Instinctively
they plunged and swam, and the beasts followed them.

The desert rejoiced and blossomed as the rose. Wide forests had sprung
up, their whole undergrowth flowering shrubs peopled with song-birds.
Every thicket gave birth to a rivulet, and every rivulet to its
water-song.

The place of the buried hand gave no sign. Beyond and still beyond, the
river came in full volume from afar. Up and up we went, now along grassy
margin, and now through forest of gracious trees. The grass grew sweeter
and its flowers more lovely and various as we went; the trees grew
larger, and the wind fuller of messages.

We came at length to a forest whose trees were greater, grander, and
more beautiful than any we had yet seen. Their live pillars upheaved a
thick embowed roof, betwixt whose leaves and blossoms hardly a sunbeam
filtered. Into the rafters of this aerial vault the children climbed,
and through them went scrambling and leaping in a land of bloom,
shouting to the unseen elephants below, and hearing them trumpet their
replies. The conversations between them Lona understood while I but
guessed at them blunderingly. The Little Ones chased the squirrels,
and the squirrels, frolicking, drew them on--always at length allowing
themselves to be caught and petted. Often would some bird, lovely
in plumage and form, light upon one of them, sing a song of what was
coming, and fly away. Not one monkey of any sort could they see.




CHAPTER XLVI. THE CITY

Lona and I, who walked below, heard at last a great shout overhead, and
in a moment or two the Little Ones began to come dropping down from the
foliage with the news that, climbing to the top of a tree yet taller
than the rest, they had descried, far across the plain, a curious
something on the side of a solitary mountain--which mountain, they said,
rose and rose, until the sky gathered thick to keep it down, and knocked
its top off.

“It may be a city,” they said, “but it is not at all like Bulika.”

I went up to look, and saw a great city, ascending into blue clouds,
where I could not distinguish mountain from sky and cloud, or rocks from
dwellings. Cloud and mountain and sky, palace and precipice mingled in a
seeming chaos of broken shadow and shine.

I descended, the Little Ones came with me, and together we sped on
faster. They grew yet merrier as they went, leading the way, and never
looking behind them. The river grew lovelier and lovelier, until I knew
that never before had I seen real water. Nothing in this world is more
than LIKE it.

By and by we could from the plain see the city among the blue clouds.
But other clouds were gathering around a lofty tower--or was it a
rock?--that stood above the city, nearer the crest of the mountain.
Gray, and dark gray, and purple, they writhed in confused, contrariant
motions, and tossed up a vaporous foam, while spots in them gyrated like
whirlpools. At length issued a dazzling flash, which seemed for a
moment to play about the Little Ones in front of us. Blinding darkness
followed, but through it we heard their voices, low with delight.

“Did you see?”

“I saw.”

“What did you see?”

“The beautifullest man.”

“I heard him speak!”

“I didn’t: what did he say?”

Here answered the smallest and most childish of the voices--that of
Luva:--

“He said, ‘’Ou’s all mine’s, ‘ickle ones: come along!’”

I had seen the lightning, but heard no words; Lona saw and heard with
the children. A second flash came, and my eyes, though not my ears,
were opened. The great quivering light was compact of angel-faces. They
lamped themselves visible, and vanished.

A third flash came; its substance and radiance were human.

“I see my mother!” I cried.

“I see lots o’ mothers!” said Luva.

Once more the cloud flashed--all kinds of creatures--horses and
elephants, lions and dogs--oh, such beasts! And such birds!--great birds
whose wings gleamed singly every colour gathered in sunset or rainbow!
little birds whose feathers sparkled as with all the precious stones
of the hoarding earth!--silvery cranes; red flamingoes; opal pigeons;
peacocks gorgeous in gold and green and blue; jewelly humming
birds!--great-winged butterflies; lithe-volumed creeping things--all in
one heavenly flash!

“I see that serpents grow birds here, as caterpillars used to grow
butterflies!” remarked Lona.

“I saw my white pony, that died when I was a child.--I needn’t have been
so sorry; I should just have waited!” I said.

Thunder, clap or roll, there had been none. And now came a sweet rain,
filling the atmosphere with a caressing coolness. We breathed deep, and
stepped out with stronger strides. The falling drops flashed the colours
of all the waked up gems of the earth, and a mighty rainbow spanned the
city.

The blue clouds gathered thicker; the rain fell in torrents; the
children exulted and ran; it was all we could do to keep them in sight.

With silent, radiant roll, the river swept onward, filling to the margin
its smooth, soft, yielding channel. For, instead of rock or shingle or
sand, it flowed over grass in which grew primroses and daisies, crocuses
and narcissi, pimpernels and anemones, a starry multitude, large and
bright through the brilliant water. The river had gathered no turbid
cloudiness from the rain, not even a tinge of yellow or brown; the
delicate mass shone with the pale berylline gleam that ascended from its
deep, dainty bed.

Drawing nearer to the mountain, we saw that the river came from its very
peak, and rushed in full volume through the main street of the city.
It descended to the gate by a stair of deep and wide steps, mingled of
porphyry and serpentine, which continued to the foot of the mountain.
There arriving we found shallower steps on both banks, leading up to
the gate, and along the ascending street. Without the briefest halt, the
Little Ones ran straight up the stair to the gate, which stood open.

Outside, on the landing, sat the portress, a woman-angel of dark visage,
leaning her shadowed brow on her idle hand. The children rushed upon
her, covering her with caresses, and ere she understood, they had taken
heaven by surprise, and were already in the city, still mounting the
stair by the side of the descending torrent. A great angel, attended
by a company of shining ones, came down to meet and receive them, but
merrily evading them all, up still they ran. In merry dance, however,
a group of woman-angels descended upon them, and in a moment they were
fettered in heavenly arms. The radiants carried them away, and I saw
them no more.

“Ah!” said the mighty angel, continuing his descent to meet us who were
now almost at the gate and within hearing of his words, “this is well!
these are soldiers to take heaven itself by storm!--I hear of a horde of
black bats on the frontiers: these will make short work with such!”

Seeing the horse and the elephants clambering up behind us--

“Take those animals to the royal stables,” he added; “there tend them;
then turn them into the king’s forest.”

“Welcome home!” he said to us, bending low with the sweetest smile.

Immediately he turned and led the way higher. The scales of his armour
flashed like flakes of lightning.

Thought cannot form itself to tell what I felt, thus received by the
officers of heaven***. All I wanted and knew not, must be on its way to
me!

We stood for a moment at the gate whence issued roaring the radiant
river. I know not whence came the stones that fashioned it, but among
them I saw the prototypes of all the gems I had loved on earth--far more
beautiful than they, for these were living stones--such in which I saw,
not the intent alone, but the intender too; not the idea alone, but the
imbodier present, the operant outsender: nothing in this kingdom was
dead; nothing was mere; nothing only a thing.

We went up through the city and passed out. There was no wall on the
upper side, but a huge pile of broken rocks, upsloping like the moraine
of an eternal glacier; and through the openings between the rocks, the
river came billowing out. On their top I could dimly discern what seemed
three or four great steps of a stair, disappearing in a cloud white as
snow; and above the steps I saw, but with my mind’s eye only, as it were
a grand old chair, the throne of the Ancient of Days. Over and under and
between those steps issued, plenteously, unceasingly new-born, the river
of the water of life.

The great angel could guide us no farther: those rocks we must ascend
alone!

My heart beating with hope and desire, I held faster the hand of my
Lona, and we began to climb; but soon we let each other go, to use hands
as well as feet in the toilsome ascent of the huge stones. At length
we drew near the cloud, which hung down the steps like the borders of a
garment, passed through the fringe, and entered the deep folds. A hand,
warm and strong, laid hold of mine, and drew me to a little door with a
golden lock. The door opened; the hand let mine go, and pushed me gently
through. I turned quickly, and saw the board of a large book in the act
of closing behind me. I stood alone in my library.




CHAPTER XLVII. THE “ENDLESS ENDING”

As yet I have not found Lona, but Mara is much with me. She has taught
me many things, and is teaching me more.

Can it be that that last waking also was in the dream? that I am still
in the chamber of death, asleep and dreaming, not yet ripe enough to
wake? Or can it be that I did not go to sleep outright and heartily,
and so have come awake too soon? If that waking was itself but a dream,
surely it was a dream of a better waking yet to come, and I have not
been the sport of a false vision! Such a dream must have yet lovelier
truth at the heart of its dreaming!

In moments of doubt I cry,

“Could God Himself create such lovely things as I dreamed?”

“Whence then came thy dream?” answers Hope.

“Out of my dark self, into the light of my consciousness.”

“But whence first into thy dark self?” rejoins Hope.

“My brain was its mother, and the fever in my blood its father.”

“Say rather,” suggests Hope, “thy brain was the violin whence it issued,
and the fever in thy blood the bow that drew it forth.--But who made
the violin? and who guided the bow across its strings? Say rather,
again--who set the song birds each on its bough in the tree of life, and
startled each in its order from its perch? Whence came the fantasia? and
whence the life that danced thereto? Didst THOU say, in the dark of thy
own unconscious self, ‘Let beauty be; let truth seem!’ and straightway
beauty was, and truth but seemed?”

Man dreams and desires; God broods and wills and quickens.

When a man dreams his own dream, he is the sport of his dream; when
Another gives it him, that Other is able to fulfil it.

I have never again sought the mirror. The hand sent me back: I will not
go out again by that door! “All the days of my appointed time will I
wait till my change come.”

Now and then, when I look round on my books, they seem to waver as if
a wind rippled their solid mass, and another world were about to break
through. Sometimes when I am abroad, a like thing takes place; the
heavens and the earth, the trees and the grass appear for a moment to
shake as if about to pass away; then, lo, they have settled again into
the old familiar face! At times I seem to hear whisperings around me, as
if some that loved me were talking of me; but when I would distinguish
the words, they cease, and all is very still. I know not whether these
things rise in my brain, or enter it from without. I do not seek them;
they come, and I let them go.

Strange dim memories, which will not abide identification, often,
through misty windows of the past, look out upon me in the broad
daylight, but I never dream now. It may be, notwithstanding, that, when
most awake, I am only dreaming the more! But when I wake at last into
that life which, as a mother her child, carries this life in its bosom,
I shall know that I wake, and shall doubt no more.

I wait; asleep or awake, I wait.

Novalis says, “Our life is no dream, but it should and will perhaps
become one.”





CHAPTER 1

The Mountain

Curdie was the son of Peter the miner.  He lived with his father and
mother in a cottage built on a mountain, and he worked with his father
inside the mountain.

A mountain is a strange and awful thing.  In old times, without knowing
so much of their strangeness and awfulness as we do, people were yet
more afraid of mountains.  But then somehow they had not come to see
how beautiful they are as well as awful, and they hated them--and what
people hate they must fear.  Now that we have learned to look at them
with admiration, perhaps we do not feel quite awe enough of them.  To
me they are beautiful terrors.

I will try to tell you what they are.  They are portions of the heart
of the earth that have escaped from the dungeon down below, and rushed
up and out.  For the heart of the earth is a great wallowing mass, not
of blood, as in the hearts of men and animals, but of glowing hot,
melted metals and stones.  And as our hearts keep us alive, so that
great lump of heat keeps the earth alive: it is a huge power of buried
sunlight--that is what it is.

Now think: out of that cauldron, where all the bubbles would be as big
as the Alps if it could get room for its boiling, certain bubbles have
bubbled out and escaped--up and away, and there they stand in the cool,
cold sky--mountains.  Think of the change, and you will no more wonder
that there should be something awful about the very look of a mountain:
from the darkness--for where the light has nothing to shine upon, much
the same as darkness--from the heat, from the endless tumult of boiling
unrest--up, with a sudden heavenward shoot, into the wind, and the
cold, and the starshine, and a cloak of snow that lies like ermine
above the blue-green mail of the glaciers; and the great sun, their
grandfather, up there in the sky; and their little old cold aunt, the
moon, that comes wandering about the house at night; and everlasting
stillness, except for the wind that turns the rocks and caverns into a
roaring organ for the young archangels that are studying how to let out
the pent-up praises of their hearts, and the molten music of the
streams, rushing ever from the bosoms of the glaciers fresh born.

Think, too, of the change in their own substance--no longer molten and
soft, heaving and glowing, but hard and shining and cold. Think of the
creatures scampering over and burrowing in it, and the birds building
their nests upon it, and the trees growing out of its sides, like hair
to clothe it, and the lovely grass in the valleys, and the gracious
flowers even at the very edge of its armour of ice, like the rich
embroidery of the garment below, and the rivers galloping down the
valleys in a tumult of white and green!  And along with all these,
think of the terrible precipices down which the traveller may fall and
be lost, and the frightful gulfs of blue air cracked in the glaciers,
and the dark profound lakes, covered like little arctic oceans with
floating lumps of ice.

All this outside the mountain!  But the inside, who shall tell what
lies there?  Caverns of awfullest solitude, their walls miles thick,
sparkling with ores of gold or silver, copper or iron, tin or mercury,
studded perhaps with precious stones--perhaps a brook, with eyeless
fish in it, running, running ceaselessly, cold and babbling, through
banks crusted with carbuncles and golden topazes, or over a gravel of
which some of the stones arc rubies and emeralds, perhaps diamonds and
sapphires--who can tell?--and whoever can't tell is free to think--all
waiting to flash, waiting for millions of ages--ever since the earth
flew off from the sun, a great blot of fire, and began to cool.

Then there are caverns full of water, numbingly cold, fiercely
hot--hotter than any boiling water.  From some of these the water
cannot get out, and from others it runs in channels as the blood in the
body: little veins bring it down from the ice above into the great
caverns of the mountain's heart, whence the arteries let it out again,
gushing in pipes and clefts and ducts of all shapes and kinds, through
and through its bulk, until it springs newborn to the light, and rushes
down the Mountainside in torrents, and down the valleys in
rivers--down, down, rejoicing, to the mighty lungs of the world, that
is the sea, where it is tossed in storms and cyclones, heaved up in
billows, twisted in waterspouts, dashed to mist upon rocks, beaten by
millions of tails, and breathed by millions of gills, whence at last,
melted into vapour by the sun, it is lifted up pure into the air, and
borne by the servant winds back to the mountaintops and the snow, the
solid ice, and the molten stream.

Well, when the heart of the earth has thus come rushing up among her
children, bringing with it gifts of all that she possesses, then
straightway into it rush her children to see what they can find there.
With pickaxe and spade and crowbar, with boring chisel and blasting
powder, they force their way back: is it to search for what toys they
may have left in their long-forgotten nurseries? Hence the mountains
that lift their heads into the clear air, and are dotted over with the
dwellings of men, are tunnelled and bored in the darkness of their
bosoms by the dwellers in the houses which they hold up to the sun and
air.

Curdie and his father were of these: their business was to bring to
light hidden things; they sought silver in the rock and found it, and
carried it out.  Of the many other precious things in their mountain
they knew little or nothing.  Silver ore was what they were sent to
find, and in darkness and danger they found it.  But oh, how sweet was
the air on the mountain face when they came out at sunset to go home to
wife and mother!  They did breathe deep then!

The mines belonged to the king of the country, and the miners were his
servants, working under his overseers and officers.  He was a real
king--that is, one who ruled for the good of his people and not to
please himself, and he wanted the silver not to buy rich things for
himself, but to help him to govern the country, and pay the ones that
defended it from certain troublesome neighbours, and the judges whom he
set to portion out righteousness among the people, that so they might
learn it themselves, and come to do without judges at all.  Nothing
that could be got from the heart of the earth could have been put to
better purposes than the silver the king's miners got for him.  There
were people in the country who, when it came into their hands, degraded
it by locking it up in a chest, and then it grew diseased and was
called mammon, and bred all sorts of quarrels; but when first it left
the king's hands it never made any but friends, and the air of the
world kept it clean.

About a year before this story began, a series of very remarkable
events had just ended.  I will narrate as much of them as will serve to
show the tops of the roots of my tree.

Upon the mountain, on one of its many claws, stood a grand old house,
half farmhouse, half castle, belonging to the king; and there his only
child, the Princess Irene, had been brought up till she was nearly nine
years old, and would doubtless have continued much longer, but for the
strange events to which I have referred.

At that time the hollow places of the mountain were inhabited by
creatures called goblins, who for various reasons and in various ways
made themselves troublesome to all, but to the little princess
dangerous.  Mainly by the watchful devotion and energy of Curdie,
however, their designs had been utterly defeated, and made to recoil
upon themselves to their own destruction, so that now there were very
few of them left alive, and the miners did not believe there was a
single goblin remaining in the whole inside of the mountain.

The king had been so pleased with the boy--then approaching thirteen
years of age--that when he carried away his daughter he asked him to
accompany them; but he was still better pleased with him when he found
that he preferred staying with his father and mother.  He was a right
good king and knew that the love of a boy who would not leave his
father and mother to be made a great man was worth ten thousand offers
to die for his sake, and would prove so when the right time came.  As
for his father and mother, they would have given him up without a
grumble, for they were just as good as the king, and he and they
understood each other perfectly; but in this matter, not seeing that he
could do anything for the king which one of his numerous attendants
could not do as well, Curdie felt that it was for him to decide.  So
the king took a kind farewell of them all and rode away, with his
daughter on his horse before him.

A gloom fell upon the mountain and the miners when she was gone, and
Curdie did not whistle for a whole week.  As for his verses, there was
no occasion to make any now.  He had made them only to drive away the
goblins, and they were all gone--a good riddance--only the princess was
gone too!  He would rather have had things as they were, except for the
princess's sake.  But whoever is diligent will soon be cheerful, and
though the miners missed the household of the castle, they yet managed
to get on without them. Peter and his wife, however, were troubled with
the fancy that they had stood in the way of their boy's good fortune.
It would have been such a fine thing for him and them, too, they
thought, if he had ridden with the good king's train.  How beautiful he
looked, they said, when he rode the king's own horse through the river
that the goblins had sent out of the hill!  He might soon have been a
captain, they did believe!  The good, kind people did not reflect that
the road to the next duty is the only straight one, or that, for their
fancied good, we should never wish our children or friends to do what
we would not do ourselves if we were in their position.  We must accept
righteous sacrifices as well as make them.



CHAPTER 2

The White Pigeon

When in the winter they had had their supper and sat about the fire, or
when in the summer they lay on the border of the rock-margined stream
that ran through their little meadow close by the door of their
cottage, issuing from the far-up whiteness often folded in clouds,
Curdie's mother would not seldom lead the conversation to one peculiar
personage said and believed to have been much concerned in the late
issue of events.

That personage was the great-great-grandmother of the princess, of whom
the princess had often talked, but whom neither Curdie nor his mother
had ever seen.  Curdie could indeed remember, although already it
looked more like a dream than he could account for if it had really
taken place, how the princess had once led him up many stairs to what
she called a beautiful room in the top of the tower, where she went
through all the--what should he call it?--the behaviour of presenting
him to her grandmother, talking now to her and now to him, while all
the time he saw nothing but a bare garret, a heap of musty straw, a
sunbeam, and a withered apple. Lady, he would have declared before the
king himself, young or old, there was none, except the princess
herself, who was certainly vexed that he could not see what she at
least believed she saw.

As for his mother, she had once seen, long before Curdie was born, a
certain mysterious light of the same description as one Irene spoke of,
calling it her grandmother's moon; and Curdie himself had seen this
same light, shining from above the castle, just as the king and
princess were taking their leave.  Since that time neither had seen or
heard anything that could be supposed connected with her.  Strangely
enough, however, nobody had seen her go away.  If she was such an old
lady, she could hardly be supposed to have set out alone and on foot
when all the house was asleep.  Still, away she must have gone, for, of
course, if she was so powerful, she would always be about the princess
to take care of her.

But as Curdie grew older, he doubted more and more whether Irene had
not been talking of some dream she had taken for reality: he had heard
it said that children could not always distinguish betwixt dreams and
actual events.  At the same time there was his mother's testimony: what
was he to do with that?  His mother, through whom he had learned
everything, could hardly be imagined by her own dutiful son to have
mistaken a dream for a fact of the waking world.

So he rather shrank from thinking about it, and the less he thought
about it, the less he was inclined to believe it when he did think
about it, and therefore, of course, the less inclined to talk about it
to his father and mother; for although his father was one of those men
who for one word they say think twenty thoughts, Curdie was well
assured that he would rather doubt his own eyes than his wife's
testimony.

There were no others to whom he could have talked about it.  The miners
were a mingled company--some good, some not so good, some rather
bad--none of them so bad or so good as they might have been; Curdie
liked most of them, and was a favourite with all; but they knew very
little about the upper world, and what might or might not take place
there.  They knew silver from copper ore; they understood the
underground ways of things, and they could look very wise with their
lanterns in their hands searching after this or that sign of ore, or
for some mark to guide their way in the hollows of the earth; but as to
great-great-grandmothers, they would have mocked Curdie all the rest of
his life for the absurdity of not being absolutely certain that the
solemn belief of his father and mother was nothing but ridiculous
nonsense.  Why, to them the very word 'great-great-grandmother' would
have been a week's laughter!  I am not sure that they were able quite
to believe there were such persons as great-great-grandmothers; they
had never seen one.  They were not companions to give the best of help
toward progress, and as Curdie grew, he grew at this time faster in
body than in mind--with the usual consequence, that he was getting
rather stupid--one of the chief signs of which was that he believed
less and less in things he had never seen.  At the same time I do not
think he was ever so stupid as to imagine that this was a sign of
superior faculty and strength of mind.  Still, he was becoming more and
more a miner, and less and less a man of the upper world where the wind
blew.  On his way to and from the mine he took less and less notice of
bees and butterflies, moths and dragonflies, the flowers and the brooks
and the clouds.  He was gradually changing into a commonplace man.

There is this difference between the growth of some human beings and
that of others: in the one case it is a continuous dying, in the other
a continuous resurrection.  One of the latter sort comes at length to
know at once whether a thing is true the moment it comes before him;
one of the former class grows more and more afraid of being taken in,
so afraid of it that he takes himself in altogether, and comes at
length to believe in nothing but his dinner: to be sure of a thing with
him is to have it between his teeth.

Curdie was not in a very good way, then, at that time.  His father and
mother had, it is true, no fault to find with him and yet--and
yet--neither of them was ready to sing when the thought of him came up.
There must be something wrong when a mother catches herself sighing
over the time when her boy was in petticoats, or a father looks sad
when he thinks how he used to carry him on his shoulder.  The boy
should enclose and keep, as his life, the old child at the heart of
him, and never let it go.  He must still, to be a right man, be his
mother's darling, and more, his father's pride, and more.  The child is
not meant to die, but to be forever fresh born.

Curdie had made himself a bow and some arrows, and was teaching himself
to shoot with them.  One evening in the early summer, as he was walking
home from the mine with them in his hand, a light flashed across his
eyes.  He looked, and there was a snow-white pigeon settling on a rock
in front of him, in the red light of the level sun.  There it fell at
once to work with one of its wings, in which a feather or two had got
some sprays twisted, causing a certain roughness unpleasant to the
fastidious creature of the air.

It was indeed a lovely being, and Curdie thought how happy it must be
flitting through the air with a flash--a live bolt of light. For a
moment he became so one with the bird that he seemed to feel both its
bill and its feathers, as the one adjusted the other to fly again, and
his heart swelled with the pleasure of its involuntary sympathy.
Another moment and it would have been aloft in the waves of rosy
light--it was just bending its little legs to spring: that moment it
fell on the path broken-winged and bleeding from Curdie's cruel arrow.

With a gush of pride at his skill, and pleasure at his success, he ran
to pick up his prey.  I must say for him he picked it up
gently--perhaps it was the beginning of his repentance.  But when he
had the white thing in his hands its whiteness stained with another red
than that of the sunset flood in which it had been revelling--ah God!
who knows the joy of a bird, the ecstasy of a creature that has neither
storehouse nor barn!--when he held it, I say, in his victorious hands,
the winged thing looked up in his face--and with such eyes!--asking
what was the matter, and where the red sun had gone, and the clouds,
and the wind of its flight.  Then they closed, but to open again
presently, with the same questions in them.

And as they closed and opened, their look was fixed on his.  It did not
once flutter or try to get away; it only throbbed and bled and looked
at him.  Curdie's heart began to grow very large in his bosom.  What
could it mean?  It was nothing but a pigeon, and why should he not kill
a pigeon?  But the fact was that not till this very moment had he ever
known what a pigeon was.  A good many discoveries of a similar kind
have to be made by most of us.  Once more it opened its eyes--then
closed them again, and its throbbing ceased.  Curdie gave a sob: its
last look reminded him of the princess--he did not know why.  He
remembered how hard he had laboured to set her beyond danger, and yet
what dangers she had had to encounter for his sake: they had been
saviours to each other--and what had he done now?  He had stopped
saving, and had begun killing!  What had he been sent into the world
for?  Surely not to be a death to its joy and loveliness.  He had done
the thing that was contrary to gladness; he was a destroyer!  He was
not the Curdie he had been meant to be!

Then the underground waters gushed from the boy's heart.  And with the
tears came the remembrance that a white pigeon, just before the
princess went away with her father, came from somewhere--yes, from the
grandmother's lamp, and flew round the king and Irene and himself, and
then flew away: this might be that very pigeon! Horrible to think!  And
if it wasn't, yet it was a white pigeon, the same as this.  And if she
kept a great Many pigeons--and white ones, as Irene had told him, then
whose pigeon could he have killed but the grand old princess's?

Suddenly everything round about him seemed against him.  The red sunset
stung him; the rocks frowned at him; the sweet wind that had been
laving his face as he walked up the hill dropped--as if he wasn't fit
to be kissed any more.  Was the whole world going to cast him out?
Would he have to stand there forever, not knowing what to do, with the
dead pigeon in his hand?  Things looked bad indeed.  Was the whole
world going to make a work about a pigeon--a white pigeon?  The sun
went down.  Great clouds gathered over the west, and shortened the
twilight.  The wind gave a howl, and then lay down again.  The clouds
gathered thicker.  Then came a rumbling.  He thought it was thunder.
It was a rock that fell inside the mountain.  A goat ran past him down
the hill, followed by a dog sent to fetch him home.  He thought they
were goblin creatures, and trembled.  He used to despise them.  And
still he held the dead pigeon tenderly in his hand.

It grew darker and darker.  An evil something began to move in his
heart.  'What a fool I am!' he said to himself.  Then he grew angry,
and was just going to throw the bird from him and whistle, when a
brightness shone all round him.  He lifted his eyes, and saw a great
globe of light--like silver at the hottest heat: he had once seen
silver run from the furnace.  It shone from somewhere above the roofs
of the castle: it must be the great old princess's moon!  How could she
be there?  Of course she was not there!  He had asked the whole
household, and nobody knew anything about her or her globe either.  It
couldn't be!  And yet what did that signify, when there was the white
globe shining, and here was the dead white bird in his hand?  That
moment the pigeon gave a little flutter.  'It's not dead!' cried
Curdie, almost with a shriek.  The same instant he was running full
speed toward the castle, never letting his heels down, lest he should
shake the poor, wounded bird.



CHAPTER 3

The Mistress of the Silver Moon

When Curdie reached the castle, and ran into the little garden in front
of it, there stood the door wide open.  This was as he had hoped, for
what could he have said if he had had to knock at it? Those whose
business it is to open doors, so often mistake and shut them!  But the
woman now in charge often puzzled herself greatly to account for the
strange fact that however often she shut the door, which, like the
rest, she took a great deal of unnecessary trouble to do, she was
certain, the next time she went to it, to find it open.  I speak now of
the great front door, of course: the back door she as persistently kept
wide: if people could only go in by that, she said, she would then know
what sort they were, and what they wanted.  But she would neither have
known what sort Curdie was, nor what he wanted, and would assuredly
have denied him admittance, for she knew nothing of who was in the
tower.  So the front door was left open for him, and in he walked.

But where to go next he could not tell.  It was not quite dark: a dull,
shineless twilight filled the place.  All he knew was that he must go
up, and that proved enough for the present, for there he saw the great
staircase rising before him.  When he reached the top of it, he knew
there must be more stairs yet, for he could not be near the top of the
tower.  Indeed by the situation of the stairs, he must be a good way
from the tower itself.  But those who work well in the depths more
easily understand the heights, for indeed in their true nature they are
one and the same; miners are in mountains; and Curdie, from knowing the
ways of the king's mines, and being able to calculate his whereabouts
in them, was now able to find his way about the king's house.  He knew
its outside perfectly, and now his business was to get his notion of
the inside right with the outside.

So he shut his eyes and made a picture of the outside of it in his
mind.  Then he came in at the door of the picture, and yet kept the
picture before him all the time--for you can do that kind of thing in
your mind--and took every turn of the stair over again, always watching
to remember, every time he turned his face, how the tower lay, and then
when he came to himself at the top where he stood, he knew exactly
where it was, and walked at once in the right direction.

On his way, however, he came to another stair, and up that he went, of
course, watching still at every turn how the tower must lie.  At the
top of this stair was yet another--they were the stairs up which the
princess ran when first, without knowing it, she was on her way to find
her great-great-grandmother.  At the top of the second stair he could
go no farther, and must therefore set out again to find the tower,
which, as it rose far above the rest of the house, must have the last
of its stairs inside itself.

Having watched every turn to the very last, he still knew quite well in
what direction he must go to find it, so he left the stair and went
down a passage that led, if not exactly toward it, yet nearer it.  This
passage was rather dark, for it was very long, with only one window at
the end, and although there were doors on both sides of it, they were
all shut.  At the distant window glimmered the chill east, with a few
feeble stars in it, and its like was dreary and old, growing brown, and
looking as if it were thinking about the day that was just gone.
Presently he turned into another passage, which also had a window at
the end of it; and in at that window shone all that was left of the
sunset, just a few ashes, with here and there a little touch of warmth:
it was nearly as sad as the east, only there was one difference--it was
very plainly thinking of tomorrow.

But at present Curdie had nothing to do with today or tomorrow; his
business was with the bird, and the tower where dwelt the grand old
princess to whom it belonged.  So he kept on his way, still eastward,
and came to yet another passage, which brought him to a door.  He was
afraid to open it without first knocking.  He knocked, but heard no
answer.  He was answered nevertheless; for the door gently opened, and
there was a narrow stair--and so steep that, big lad as he was, he,
too, like the Princess Irene before him, found his hands needful for
the climbing.  And it was a long climb, but he reached the top at
last--a little landing, with a door in front and one on each side.
Which should he knock at?

As he hesitated, he heard the noise of a spinning wheel.  He knew it at
once, because his mother's spinning wheel had been his governess long
ago, and still taught him things.  It was the spinning wheel that first
taught him to make verses, and to sing, and to think whether all was
right inside him; or at least it had helped him in all these things.
Hence it was no wonder he should know a spinning wheel when he heard it
sing--even although as the bird of paradise to other birds was the song
of that wheel to the song of his mother's.

He stood listening, so entranced that he forgot to knock, and the wheel
went on and on, spinning in his brain songs and tales and rhymes, till
he was almost asleep as well as dreaming, for sleep does not always
come first.  But suddenly came the thought of the poor bird, which had
been lying motionless in his hand all the time, and that woke him up,
and at once he knocked.

'Come in, Curdie,' said a voice.

Curdie shook.  It was getting rather awful.  The heart that had never
much heeded an army of goblins trembled at the soft word of invitation.
But then there was the red-spotted white thing in his hand!  He dared
not hesitate, though.  Gently he opened the door through which the
sound came, and what did he see?  Nothing at first--except indeed a
great sloping shaft of moonlight that came in at a high window, and
rested on the floor.  He stood and stared at it, forgetting to shut the
door.

'Why don't you come in, Curdie?' said the voice.  'Did you never see
moonlight before?'

'Never without a moon,' answered Curdie, in a trembling tone, but
gathering courage.

'Certainly not,' returned the voice, which was thin and quavering: 'I
never saw moonlight without a moon.'

'But there's no moon outside,' said Curdie.

'Ah! but you're inside now,' said the voice.

The answer did not satisfy Curdie; but the voice went on.

'There are more moons than you know of, Curdie.  Where there is one sun
there are many moons--and of many sorts.  Come in and look out of my
window, and you will soon satisfy yourself that there is a moon looking
in at it.'

The gentleness of the voice made Curdie remember his manners.  He shut
the door, and drew a step or two nearer to the moonlight.

All the time the sound of the spinning had been going on and on, and
Curdie now caught sight of the wheel.  Oh, it was such a thin, delicate
thing--reminding him of a spider's web in a hedge.  It stood in the
middle of the moonlight, and it seemed as if the moonlight had nearly
melted it away.  A step nearer, he saw, with a start, two little hands
at work with it.  And then at last, in the shadow on the other side of
the moonlight which came like silver between, he saw the form to which
the hands belonged: a small withered creature, so old that no age would
have seemed too great to write under her picture, seated on a stool
beyond the spinning wheel, which looked very large beside her, but, as
I said, very thin, like a long-legged spider holding up its own web,
which was the round wheel itself She sat crumpled together, a filmy
thing that it seemed a puff would blow away, more like the body of a
fly the big spider had sucked empty and left hanging in his web, than
anything else I can think of.

When Curdie saw her, he stood still again, a good deal in wonder, a
very little in reverence, a little in doubt, and, I must add, a little
in amusement at the odd look of the old marvel.  Her grey hair mixed
with the moonlight so that he could not tell where the one began and
the other ended.  Her crooked back bent forward over her chest, her
shoulders nearly swallowed up her head between them, and her two little
hands were just like the grey claws of a hen, scratching at the thread,
which to Curdie was of course invisible across the moonlight.  Indeed
Curdie laughed within himself, just a little, at the sight; and when he
thought of how the princess used to talk about her huge, great, old
grandmother, he laughed more.  But that moment the little lady leaned
forward into the moonlight, and Curdie caught a glimpse of her eyes,
and all the laugh went out of him.

'What do you come here for, Curdie?' she said, as gently as before.

Then Curdie remembered that he stood there as a culprit, and worst of
all, as one who had his confession yet to make.  There was no time to
hesitate over it.

'Oh, ma'am!  See here,' he said, and advanced a step or two, holding
out the pigeon.

'What have you got there?' she asked.

Again Curdie advanced a few steps, and held out his hand with the
pigeon, that she might see what it was, into the moonlight.  The moment
the rays fell upon it the pigeon gave a faint flutter.  The old lady
put out her old hands and took it, and held it to her bosom, and rocked
it, murmuring over it as if it were a sick baby.

When Curdie saw how distressed she was he grew sorrier still, and said:

'I didn't mean to do any harm, ma'am.  I didn't think of its being
yours.'

'Ah, Curdie!  If it weren't mine, what would become of it now?' she
returned.  'You say you didn't mean any harm: did you mean any good,
Curdie?'

'No,' answered Curdie.

'Remember, then, that whoever does not mean good is always in danger of
harm.  But I try to give everybody fair play; and those that are in the
wrong are in far more need of it always than those who are in the
right: they can afford to do without it.  Therefore I say for you that
when you shot that arrow you did not know what a pigeon is.  Now that
you do know, you are sorry.  It is very dangerous to do things you
don't know about.'

'But, please, ma'am--I don't mean to be rude or to contradict you,'
said Curdie, 'but if a body was never to do anything but what he knew
to be good, he would have to live half his time doing nothing.'

'There you are much mistaken,' said the old quavering voice.  'How
little you must have thought!  Why, you don't seem even to know the
good of the things you are constantly doing.  Now don't mistake me. I
don't mean you are good for doing them.  It is a good thing to eat your
breakfast, but you don't fancy it's very good of you to do it.  The
thing is good, not you.'

Curdie laughed.

'There are a great many more good things than bad things to do. Now
tell me what bad thing you have done today besides this sore hurt to my
little white friend.'

While she talked Curdie had sunk into a sort of reverie, in which he
hardly knew whether it was the old lady or his own heart that spoke.
And when she asked him that question, he was at first much inclined to
consider himself a very good fellow on the whole.  'I really don't
think I did anything else that was very bad all day,' he said to
himself.  But at the same time he could not honestly feel that he was
worth standing up for.  All at once a light seemed to break in upon his
mind, and he woke up and there was the withered little atomy of the old
lady on the other side of the moonlight, and there was the spinning
wheel singing on and on in the middle of it!

'I know now, ma'am; I understand now,' he said.  'Thank you, ma'am, for
spinning it into me with your wheel.  I see now that I have been doing
wrong the whole day, and such a many days besides! Indeed, I don't know
when I ever did right, and yet it seems as if I had done right some
time and had forgotten how.  When I killed your bird I did not know I
was doing wrong, just because I was always doing wrong, and the wrong
had soaked all through me.'

'What wrong were you doing all day, Curdie?  It is better to come to
the point, you know,' said the old lady, and her voice was gentler even
than before.

'I was doing the wrong of never wanting or trying to be better. And now
I see that I have been letting things go as they would for a long time.
Whatever came into my head I did, and whatever didn't come into my head
I didn't do.  I never sent anything away, and never looked out for
anything to come.  I haven't been attending to my mother--or my father
either.  And now I think of it, I know I have often seen them looking
troubled, and I have never asked them what was the matter.  And now I
see, too, that I did not ask because I suspected it had something to do
with me and my behaviour, and didn't want to hear the truth.  And I
know I have been grumbling at my work, and doing a hundred other things
that are wrong.'

'You have got it, Curdie,' said the old lady, in a voice that sounded
almost as if she had been crying.  'When people don't care to be better
they must be doing everything wrong.  I am so glad you shot my bird!'

'Ma'am!' exclaimed Curdie.  'How can you be?'

'Because it has brought you to see what sort you were when you did it,
and what sort you will grow to be again, only worse, if you don't mind.
Now that you are sorry, my poor bird will be better. Look up, my dovey.'

The pigeon gave a flutter, and spread out one of its red-spotted wings
across the old woman's bosom.

'I will mend the little angel,' she said, 'and in a week or two it will
be flying again.  So you may ease your heart about the pigeon.'

'Oh, thank you!  Thank you!' cried Curdie.  'I don't know how to thank
you.'

'Then I will tell you.  There is only one way I care for.  Do better,
and grow better, and be better.  And never kill anything without a good
reason for it.'

'Ma'am, I will go and fetch my bow and arrows, and you shall burn them
yourself.'

'I have no fire that would burn your bow and arrows, Curdie.'

'Then I promise you to burn them all under my mother's porridge pot
tomorrow morning.'

'No, no, Curdie.  Keep them, and practice with them every day, and grow
a good shot.  There are plenty of bad things that want killing, and a
day will come when they will prove useful.  But I must see first
whether you will do as I tell you.'

'That I will!' said Curdie.  'What is it, ma'am?'

'Only something not to do,' answered the old lady; 'if you should hear
anyone speak about me, never to laugh or make fun of me.'

'Oh, ma'am!' exclaimed Curdie, shocked that she should think such a
request needful.

'Stop, stop,' she went on.  'People hereabout sometimes tell very odd
and in fact ridiculous stories of an old woman who watches what is
going on, and occasionally interferes.  They mean me, though what they
say is often great nonsense.  Now what I want of you is not to laugh,
or side with them in any way; because they will take that to mean that
you don't believe there is any such person a bit more than they do.
Now that would not be the case--would it, Curdie?'

'No, indeed, ma'am.  I've seen you.'

The old woman smiled very oddly.

'Yes, you've seen me,' she said.  'But mind,' she continued, 'I don't
want you to say anything--only to hold your tongue, and not seem to
side with them.'

'That will be easy,'said Curdie,'now that I've seen you with my very
own eyes, ma'am.'

'Not so easy as you think, perhaps,' said the old lady, with another
curious smile.  'I want to be your friend,' she added after a little
pause, 'but I don't quite know yet whether you will let me.'

'Indeed I will, ma'am,' said Curdie.

'That is for me to find out,' she rejoined, with yet another strange
smile.  'In the meantime all I can say is, come to me again when you
find yourself in any trouble, and I will see what I can do for
you--only the canning depends on yourself.  I am greatly pleased with
you for bringing me my pigeon, doing your best to set right what you
had set wrong.'

As she spoke she held out her hand to him, and when he took it she made
use of his to help herself up from her stool, and--when or how it came
about, Curdie could not tell--the same instant she stood before him a
tall, strong woman--plainly very old, but as grand as she was old, and
only rather severe-looking.  Every trace of the decrepitude and
witheredness she showed as she hovered like a film about her wheel, had
vanished.  Her hair was very white, but it hung about her head in great
plenty, and shone like silver in the moonlight.  Straight as a pillar
she stood before the astonished boy, and the wounded bird had now
spread out both its wings across her bosom, like some great mystical
ornament of frosted silver.

'Oh, now I can never forget you!' cried Curdie.  'I see now what you
really are!'

'Did I not tell you the truth when I sat at my wheel?' said the old
lady.

'Yes, ma'am,' answered Curdie.

'I can do no more than tell you the truth now,' she rejoined.  'It is a
bad thing indeed to forget one who has told us the truth.  Now go.'

Curdie obeyed, and took a few steps toward the door.  'Please,
ma'am--what am I to call you?' he was going to say; but when he turned
to speak, he saw nobody.  Whether she was there or not he could not
tell, however, for the moonlight had vanished, and the room was utterly
dark.  A great fear, such as he had never before known, came upon him,
and almost overwhelmed him.  He groped his way to the door, and crawled
down the stair--in doubt and anxiety as to how he should find his way
out of the house in the dark.  And the stair seemed ever so much longer
than when he came up.  Nor was that any wonder, for down and down he
went, until at length his foot struck a door, and when he rose and
opened it, he found himself under the starry, moonless sky at the foot
of the tower.

He soon discovered the way out of the garden, with which he had some
acquaintance already, and in a few minutes was climbing the mountain
with a solemn and cheerful heart.  It was rather dark, but he knew the
way well.  As he passed the rock from which the poor pigeon fell
wounded with his arrow, a great joy filled his heart at the thought
that he was delivered from the blood of the little bird, and he ran the
next hundred yards at full speed up the hill. Some dark shadows passed
him: he did not even care to think what they were, but let them run.
When he reached home, he found his father and mother waiting supper for
him.



CHAPTER 4

Curdie's Father and Mother

The eyes of the fathers and mothers are quick to read their children's
looks, and when Curdie entered the cottage, his parents saw at once
that something unusual had taken place.  When he said to his mother, 'I
beg your pardon for being so late,' there was something in the tone
beyond the politeness that went to her heart, for it seemed to come
from the place where all lovely things were born before they began to
grow in this world.  When he set his father's chair to the table, an
attention he had not shown him for a long time, Peter thanked him with
more gratitude than the boy had ever yet felt in all his life.  It was
a small thing to do for the man who had been serving him since ever he
was born, but I suspect there is nothing a man can be so grateful for
as that to which he has the most right.

There was a change upon Curdie, and father and mother felt there must
be something to account for it, and therefore were pretty sure he had
something to tell them.  For when a child's heart is all right, it is
not likely he will want to keep anything from his parents.  But the
story of the evening was too solemn for Curdie to come out with all at
once.  He must wait until they had had their porridge, and the affairs
of this world were over for the day.

But when they were seated on the grassy bank of the brook that went so
sweetly blundering over the great stones of its rocky channel, for the
whole meadow lay on the top of a huge rock, then he felt that the right
hour had come for sharing with them the wonderful things that had come
to him.  It was perhaps the loveliest of all hours in the year.  The
summer was young and soft, and this was the warmest evening they had
yet had--dusky, dark even below, while above, the stars were bright and
large and sharp in the blackest blue sky.  The night came close around
them, clasping them in one universal arm of love, and although it
neither spoke nor smiled, seemed all eye and ear, seemed to see and
hear and know everything they said and did.  It is a way the night has
sometimes, and there is a reason for it.  The only sound was that of
the brook, for there was no wind, and no trees for it to make its music
upon if there had been, for the cottage was high up on the mountain, on
a great shoulder of stone where trees would not grow.

There, to the accompaniment of the water, as it hurried down to the
valley and the sea, talking busily of a thousand true things which it
could not understand, Curdie told his tale, outside and in, to his
father and mother.  What a world had slipped in between the mouth of
the mine and his mother's cottage!  Neither of them said a word until
he had ended.

'Now what am I to make of it, Mother? it's so strange!' he said, and
stopped.

'It's easy enough to see what Curdie has got to make of it, isn't it,
Peter?' said the good woman, turning her face toward all she could see
of her husband's.

'It seems so to me,' answered Peter, with a smile which only the night
saw, but his wife felt in the tone of his words.  They were the
happiest couple in that country, because they always understood each
other, and that was because they always meant the same thing, and that
was because they always loved what was fair and true and right better,
not than anything else, but than everything else put together.

'Then will you tell Curdie?' said she.

'You can talk best, Joan,' said he.  'You tell him, and I will
listen--and learn how to say what I think,' he added.

'I,' said Curdie, 'don't know what to think.'

'It does not matter so much,' said his mother.  'If only you know what
to make of a thing, you'll know soon enough what to think of it.  Now I
needn't tell you, surely, Curdie, what you've got to do with this?'

'I suppose you mean, Mother,' answered Curdie, 'that I must do as the
old lady told me?'

'That is what I mean: what else could it be?  Am I not right, Peter?'

'Quite right, Joan,' answered Peter, 'so far as my judgement goes. It
is a very strange story, but you see the question is not about
believing it, for Curdie knows what came to him.'

'And you remember, Curdie,' said his mother, 'that when the princess
took you up that tower once before, and there talked to her
great-great-grandmother, you came home quite angry with her, and said
there was nothing in the place but an old tub, a heap of straw--oh, I
remember your inventory quite well!--an old tub, a heap of straw, a
withered apple, and a sunbeam.  According to your eyes, that was all
there was in the great, old, musty garret.  But now you have had a
glimpse of the old princess herself!'

'Yes, Mother, I did see her--or if I didn't--' said Curdie very
thoughtfully--then began again.  'The hardest thing to believe, though
I saw it with my own eyes, was when the thin, filmy creature that
seemed almost to float about in the moonlight like a bit of the silver
paper they put over pictures, or like a handkerchief made of spider
threads, took my hand, and rose up.  She was taller and stronger than
you, Mother, ever so much!--at least, she looked so.'

'And most certainly was so, Curdie, if she looked so,' said Mrs
Peterson.

'Well, I confess,' returned her son, 'that one thing, if there were no
other, would make me doubt whether I was not dreaming, after all, wide
awake though I fancied myself to be.'

'Of course,' answered his mother, 'it is not for me to say whether you
were dreaming or not if you are doubtful of it yourself; but it doesn't
make me think I am dreaming when in the summer I hold in my hand the
bunch of sweet peas that make my heart glad with their colour and
scent, and remember the dry, withered-looking little thing I dibbled
into the hole in the same spot in the spring.  I only think how
wonderful and lovely it all is.  It seems just as full of reason as it
is of wonder.  How it is done I can't tell, only there it is!  And
there is this in it, too, Curdie--of which you would not be so ready to
think--that when you come home to your father and mother, and they find
you behaving more like a dear, good son than you have behaved for a
long time, they at least are not likely to think you were only
dreaming.'

'Still,' said Curdie, looking a little ashamed, 'I might have dreamed
my duty.'

'Then dream often, my son; for there must then be more truth in your
dreams than in your waking thoughts.  But however any of these things
may be, this one point remains certain: there can be no harm in doing
as she told you.  And, indeed, until you are sure there is no such
person, you are bound to do it, for you promised.'

'It seems to me,' said his father, 'that if a lady comes to you in a
dream, Curdie, and tells you not to talk about her when you wake, the
least you can do is to hold your tongue.'

'True, Father!  Yes, Mother, I'll do it,' said Curdie.

Then they went to bed, and sleep, which is the night of the soul, next
took them in its arms and made them well.



CHAPTER 5

The Miners

It much increased Curdie's feeling of the strangeness of the whole
affair, that, the next morning, when they were at work in the mine, the
party of which he and his father were two, just as if they had known
what had happened to him the night before, began talking about all
manner of wonderful tales that were abroad in the country, chiefly, of
course, those connected with the mines, and the mountains in which they
lay.  Their wives and mothers and grandmothers were their chief
authorities.  For when they sat by their firesides they heard their
wives telling their children the selfsame tales, with little
differences, and here and there one they had not heard before, which
they had heard their mothers and grandmothers tell in one or other of
the same cottages.

At length they came to speak of a certain strange being they called Old
Mother Wotherwop.  Some said their wives had seen her.  It appeared as
they talked that not one had seen her more than once. Some of their
mothers and grandmothers, however, had seen her also, and they all had
told them tales about her when they were children. They said she could
take any shape she liked, but that in reality she was a withered old
woman, so old and so withered that she was as thin as a sieve with a
lamp behind it; that she was never seen except at night, and when
something terrible had taken place, or was going to take place--such as
the falling in of the roof of a mine, or the breaking out of water in
it.

She had more than once been seen--it was always at night--beside some
well, sitting on the brink of it, and leaning over and stirring it with
her forefinger, which was six times as long as any of the rest.  And
whoever for months after drank of that well was sure to be ill.  To
this, one of them, however, added that he remembered his mother saying
that whoever in bad health drank of the well was sure to get better.
But the majority agreed that the former was the right version of the
story--for was she not a witch, an old hating witch, whose delight was
to do mischief?  One said he had heard that she took the shape of a
young woman sometimes, as beautiful as an angel, and then was most
dangerous of all, for she struck every man who looked upon her
stone-blind.

Peter ventured the question whether she might not as likely be an angel
that took the form of an old woman, as an old woman that took the form
of an angel.  But nobody except Curdie, who was holding his peace with
all his might, saw any sense in the question.  They said an old woman
might be very glad to make herself look like a young one, but who ever
heard of a young and beautiful one making herself look old and ugly?

Peter asked why they were so much more ready to believe the bad that
was said of her than the good.  They answered, because she was bad.  He
asked why they believed her to be bad, and they answered, because she
did bad things.  When he asked how they knew that, they said, because
she was a bad creature.  Even if they didn't know it, they said, a
woman like that was so much more likely to be bad than good.  Why did
she go about at night?  Why did she appear only now and then, and on
such occasions?  One went on to tell how one night when his grandfather
had been having a jolly time of it with his friends in the market town,
she had served him so upon his way home that the poor man never drank a
drop of anything stronger than water after it to the day of his death.
She dragged him into a bog, and tumbled him up and down in it till he
was nearly dead.

'I suppose that was her way of teaching him what a good thing water
was,' said Peter; but the man, who liked strong drink, did not see the
joke.

'They do say,' said another, 'that she has lived in the old house over
there ever since the little princess left it.  They say too that the
housekeeper knows all about it, and is hand and glove with the old
witch.  I don't doubt they have many a nice airing together on
broomsticks.  But I don't doubt either it's all nonsense, and there's
no such person at all.'

'When our cow died,' said another, 'she was seen going round and round
the cowhouse the same night.  To be sure she left a fine calf behind
her--I mean the cow did, not the witch.  I wonder she didn't kill that,
too, for she'll be a far finer cow than ever her mother was.'

'My old woman came upon her one night, not long before the water broke
out in the mine, sitting on a stone on the hillside with a whole
congregation of cobs about her.  When they saw my wife they all
scampered off as fast as they could run, and where the witch was
sitting there was nothing to be seen but a withered bracken bush.  I
made no doubt myself she was putting them up to it.'

And so they went on with one foolish tale after another, while Peter
put in a word now and then, and Curdie diligently held his peace.  But
his silence at last drew attention upon it, and one of them said:

'Come, young Curdie, what are you thinking of?'

'How do you know I'm thinking of anything?' asked Curdie.

'Because you're not saying anything.'

'Does it follow then that, as you are saying so much, you're not
thinking at all?' said Curdie.

'I know what he's thinking,' said one who had not yet spoken; 'he's
thinking what a set of fools you are to talk such rubbish; as if ever
there was or could be such an old woman as you say!  I'm sure Curdie
knows better than all that comes to.'

'I think,' said Curdie, 'it would be better that he who says anything
about her should be quite sure it is true, lest she should hear him,
and not like to be slandered.'

'But would she like it any better if it were true?' said the same man.
'If she is What they say--I don't know--but I never knew a man that
wouldn't go in a rage to be called the very thing he was.'

'If bad things were true of her, and I knew it,' said Curdie, 'I would
not hesitate to say them, for I will never give in to being afraid of
anything that's bad.  I suspect that the things they tell, however, if
we knew all about them, would turn out to have nothing but good in
them; and I won't say a word more for fear I should say something that
mightn't be to her mind.'

They all burst into a loud laugh.

'Hear the parson!' they cried.  'He believes in the witch!  Ha! ha!'

'He's afraid of her!'

'And says all she does is good!'

'He wants to make friends with her, that she may help him to find the
silver ore.'

'Give me my own eyes and a good divining rod before all the witches in
the world!  And so I'd advise you too, Master Curdie; that is, when
your eyes have grown to be worth anything, and you have learned to cut
the hazel fork.'

Thus they all mocked and jeered at him, but he did his best to keep his
temper and go quietly on with his work.  He got as close to his father
as he could, however, for that helped him to bear it.  As soon as they
were tired of laughing and mocking, Curdie was friendly with them, and
long before their midday meal all between them was as it had been.

But when the evening came, Peter and Curdie felt that they would rather
walk home together without other company, and therefore lingered behind
when the rest of the men left the mine.



CHAPTER 6

The Emerald

Father and son had seated themselves on a projecting piece of rock at a
corner where three galleries met--the one they had come along from
their work, one to the right leading out of the mountain, and the other
to the left leading far into a portion of it which had been long
disused.  Since the inundation caused by the goblins, it had indeed
been rendered impassable by the settlement of a quantity of the water,
forming a small but very deep lake, in a part where there was a
considerable descent.

They had just risen and were turning to the right, when a gleam caught
their eyes, and made them look along the whole gallery.  Far up they
saw a pale green light, whence issuing they could not tell, about
halfway between floor and roof of the passage.  They saw nothing but
the light, which was like a large star, with a point of darker colour
yet brighter radiance in the heart of it, whence the rest of the light
shot out in rays that faded toward the ends until they vanished.  It
shed hardly any light around it, although in itself it was so bright as
to sting the eyes that beheld it. Wonderful stories had from ages gone
been current in the mines about certain magic gems which gave out light
of themselves, and this light looked just like what might be supposed
to shoot from the heart of such a gem.

They went up the old gallery to find out what it could be.  To their
surprise they found, however, that, after going some distance, they
were no nearer to it, so far as they could judge, than when they
started.  It did not seem to move, and yet they moving did not approach
it.  Still they persevered, for it was far too wonderful a thing to
lose sight of, so long as they could keep it.  At length they drew near
the hollow where the water lay, and still were no nearer the light.
Where they expected to be stopped by the water, however, water was
none: something had taken place in some part of the mine that had
drained it off, and the gallery lay open as in former times.

And now, to their surprise, the light, instead of being in front of
them, was shining at the same distance to the right, where they did not
know there was any passage at all.  Then they discovered, by the light
of the lanterns they carried, that there the water had broken through,
and made an entrance to a part of the mountain of which Peter knew
nothing.  But they were hardly well into it, still following the light,
before Curdie thought he recognized some of the passages he had so
often gone through when he was watching the goblins.

After they had advanced a long way, with many turnings, now to the
right, now to the left, all at once their eyes seemed to come suddenly
to themselves, and they became aware that the light which they had
taken to be a great way from them was in reality almost within reach of
their hands.

The same instant it began to grow larger and thinner, the point of
light grew dim as it spread, the greenness melted away, and in a moment
or two, instead of the star, a dark, dark and yet luminous face was
looking at them with living eyes.  And Curdie felt a great awe swell up
in his heart, for he thought he had seen those eyes before.

'I see you know me, Curdie,' said a voice.

'If your eyes are you, ma'am, then I know you,' said Curdie.  'But I
never saw your face before.'

'Yes, you have seen it, Curdie,' said the voice.  And with that the
darkness of its complexion melted away, and down from the face dawned
out the form that belonged to it, until at last Curdie and his father
beheld a lady, beautiful exceedingly, dressed in something pale green,
like velvet, over which her hair fell in cataracts of a rich golden
colour.  It looked as if it were pouring down from her head, and, like
the water of the Dustbrook, vanishing in a golden vapour ere it reached
the floor.  It came flowing from under the edge of a coronet of gold,
set with alternated pearls and emeralds.  In front of the crown was a
great emerald, which looked somehow as if out of it had come the light
they had followed. There was no ornament else about her, except on her
slippers, which were one mass of gleaming emeralds, of various shades
of green, all mingling lovelily like the waving of grass in the wind
and sun. She looked about five-and-twenty years old.  And for all the
difference, Curdie knew somehow or other, he could not have told how,
that the face before him was that of the old princess, Irene's
great-great-grandmother.

By this time all around them had grown light, and now first they could
see where they were.  They stood in a great splendid cavern, which
Curdie recognized as that in which the goblins held their state
assemblies.  But, strange to tell, the light by which they saw came
streaming, sparkling, and shooting from stones of many colours in the
sides and roof and floor of the cavern--stones of all the colours of
the rainbow, and many more.  It was a glorious sight--the whole rugged
place flashing with colours--in one spot a great light of deep
carbuncular red, in another of sapphirine blue, in another of topaz
yellow; while here and there were groups of stones of all hues and
sizes, and again nebulous spaces of thousands of tiniest spots of
brilliancy of every conceivable shade.  Sometimes the colours ran
together, and made a little river or lake of lambent, interfusing, and
changing tints, which, by their variegation, seemed to imitate the
flowing of water, or waves made by the wind.

Curdie would have gazed entranced, but that all the beauty of the
cavern, yes, of all he knew of the whole creation, seemed gathered in
one centre of harmony and loveliness in the person of the ancient lady
who stood before him in the very summer of beauty and strength.
Turning from the first glance at the circuadjacent splendour, it
dwindled into nothing as he looked again at the lady. Nothing flashed
or glowed or shone about her, and yet it was with a prevision of the
truth that he said,

'I was here once before, ma'am.'

'I know that, Curdie,' she replied.

'The place was full of torches, and the walls gleamed, but nothing as
they do now, and there is no light in the place.'

'You want to know where the light comes from?' she said, smiling.

'Yes, ma'am.'

'Then see: I will go out of the cavern.  Do not be afraid, but watch.'

She went slowly out.  The moment she turned her back to go, the light
began to pale and fade; the moment she was out of their sight the place
was black as night, save that now the smoky yellow-red of their lamps,
which they thought had gone out long ago, cast a dusky glimmer around
them.



CHAPTER 7

What Is in a Name?

For a time that seemed to them long, the two men stood waiting, while
still the Mother of Light did not return.  So long was she absent that
they began to grow anxious: how were they to find their way from the
natural hollows of the mountain crossed by goblin paths, if their lamps
should go out?  To spend the night there would mean to sit and wait
until an earthquake rent the mountain, or the earth herself fell back
into the smelting furnace of the sun whence she had issued--for it was
all night and no faintest dawn in the bosom of the world.

So long did they wait unrevisited, that, had there not been two of
them, either would at length have concluded the vision a home-born
product of his own seething brain.  And their lamps were going out, for
they grew redder and smokier!  But they did not lose courage, for there
is a kind of capillary attraction in the facing of two souls, that
lifts faith quite beyond the level to which either could raise it
alone: they knew that they had seen the lady of emeralds, and it was to
give them their own desire that she had gone from them, and neither
would yield for a moment to the half doubts and half dreads that awoke
in his heart.

And still she who with her absence darkened their air did not return.
They grew weary, and sat down on the rocky floor, for wait they
would--indeed, wait they must.  Each set his lamp by his knee, and
watched it die.  Slowly it sank, dulled, looked lazy and stupid.  But
ever as it sank and dulled, the image in his mind of the Lady of Light
grew stronger and clearer.  Together the two lamps panted and
shuddered.  First one, then the other went out, leaving for a moment a
great, red, evil-smelling snuff.  Then all was the blackness of
darkness up to their very hearts and everywhere around them.  Was it?
No.  Far away--it looked miles away--shone one minute faint point of
green light--where, who could tell?  They only knew that it shone.  It
grew larger, and seemed to draw nearer, until at last, as they watched
with speechless delight and expectation, it seemed once more within
reach of an outstretched hand.  Then it spread and melted away as
before, and there were eyes--and a face--and a lovely form--and lo! the
whole cavern blazing with lights innumerable, and gorgeous, yet soft
and interfused--so blended, indeed, that the eye had to search and see
in order to separate distinct spots of special colour.

The moment they saw the speck in the vast distance they had risen and
stood on their feet.  When it came nearer they bowed their heads.  Yet
now they looked with fearless eyes, for the woman that was old yet
young was a joy to see, and filled their hearts with reverent delight.
She turned first to Peter.

'I have known you long,' she said.  'I have met you going to and from
the mine, and seen you working in it for the last forty years.'

'How should it be, madam, that a grand lady like you should take notice
of a poor man like me?' said Peter, humbly, but more foolishly than he
could then have understood.

'I am poor as well as rich,' said she.  'I, too, work for my bread, and
I show myself no favour when I pay myself my own wages.  Last night
when you sat by the brook, and Curdie told you about my pigeon, and my
spinning, and wondered whether he could believe that he had actually
seen me, I heard what you said to each other.  I am always about, as
the miners said the other night when they talked of me as Old Mother
Wotherwop.'

The lovely lady laughed, and her laugh was a lightning of delight in
their souls.

'Yes,' she went on, 'you have got to thank me that you are so poor,
Peter.  I have seen to that, and it has done well for both you and me,
my friend.  Things come to the poor that can't get in at the door of
the rich.  Their money somehow blocks it up.  It is a great privilege
to be poor, Peter--one that no man ever coveted, and but a very few
have sought to retain, but one that yet many have learned to prize.
You must not mistake, however, and imagine it a virtue; it is but a
privilege, and one also that, like other privileges, may be terribly
misused.  Had you been rich, my Peter, you would not have been so good
as some rich men I know.  And now I am going to tell you what no one
knows but myself: you, Peter, and your wife both have the blood of the
royal family in your veins.  I have been trying to cultivate your
family tree, every branch of which is known to me, and I expect Curdie
to turn out a blossom on it.  Therefore I have been training him for a
work that must soon be done.  I was near losing him, and had to send my
pigeon.  Had he not shot it, that would have been better; but he
repented, and that shall be as good in the end.'

She turned to Curdie and smiled.

'Ma'am,' said Curdie, 'may I ask questions?'

'Why not, Curdie?'

'Because I have been told, ma'am, that nobody must ask the king
questions.'

'The king never made that law,' she answered, with some displeasure.
'You may ask me as many as you please--that is, so long as they are
sensible.  Only I may take a few thousand years to answer some of them.
But that's nothing.  Of all things time is the cheapest.'

'Then would you mind telling me now, ma'am, for I feel very confused
about it--are you the Lady of the Silver Moon?'

'Yes, Curdie; you may call me that if you like.  What it means is true.'

'And now I see you dark, and clothed in green, and the mother of all
the light that dwells in the stones of the earth!  And up there they
call you Old Mother Wotherwop!  And the Princess Irene told me you were
her great-great-grandmother!  And you spin the spider threads, and take
care of a whole people of pigeons; and you are worn to a pale shadow
with old age; and are as young as anybody can be, not to be too young;
and as strong, I do believe, as I am.'

The lady stooped toward a large green stone bedded in the rock of the
floor, and looking like a well of grassy light in it.  She laid hold of
it with her fingers, broke it out, and gave it to Peter. 'There!' cried
Curdie.  'I told you so.  Twenty men could not have done that.  And
your fingers are white and smooth as any lady's in the land.  I don't
know what to make of it.'

'I could give you twenty names more to call me, Curdie, and not one of
them would be a false one.  What does it matter how many names if the
person is one?'

'Ah!  But it is not names only, ma'am.  Look at what you were like last
night, and what I see you now!'

'Shapes are only dresses, Curdie, and dresses are only names.  That
which is inside is the same all the time.'

'But then how can all the shapes speak the truth?'

'It would want thousands more to speak the truth, Curdie; and then they
could not.  But there is a point I must not let you mistake about.  It
is one thing the shape I choose to put on, and quite another the shape
that foolish talk and nursery tale may please to put upon me.  Also, it
is one thing what you or your father may think about me, and quite
another what a foolish or bad man may see in me.  For instance, if a
thief were to come in here just now, he would think he saw the demon of
the mine, all in green flames, come to protect her treasure, and would
run like a hunted wild goat.  I should be all the same, but his evil
eyes would see me as I was not.'

'I think I understand,' said Curdie.

'Peter,' said the lady, turning then to him, 'you will have to give up
Curdie for a little while.'

'So long as he loves us, ma'am, that will not matter--much.'

'Ah! you are right there, my friend,' said the beautiful princess. And
as she said it she put out her hand, and took the hard, horny hand of
the miner in it, and held it for a moment lovingly.

'I need say no more,' she added, 'for we understand each other--you and
I, Peter.'

The tears came into Peter's eyes.  He bowed his head in thankfulness,
and his heart was much too full to speak.

Then the great old, young, beautiful princess turned to Curdie.

'Now, Curdie, are you ready?' she said.

'Yes, ma'am,' answered Curdie.

'You do not know what for.'

'You do, ma'am.  That is enough.'

'You could not have given me a better answer, or done more to prepare
yourself, Curdie,' she returned, with one of her radiant smiles.  'Do
you think you will know me again?'

'I think so.  But how can I tell what you may look like next?'

'Ah, that indeed!  How can you tell?  Or how could I expect you should?
But those who know me well, know me whatever new dress or shape or name
I may be in; and by and by you will have learned to do so too.'

'But if you want me to know you again, ma'am, for certain sure,' said
Curdie, 'could you not give me some sign, or tell me something about
you that never changes--or some other way to know you, or thing to know
you by?'

'No, Curdie; that would be to keep you from knowing me.  You must know
me in quite another way from that.  It would not be the least use to
you or me either if I were to make you know me in that way. It would be
but to know the sign of Me--not to know me myself.  It would be no
better than if I were to take this emerald out of my crown and give it
to you to take home with you, and you were to call it me, and talk to
it as if it heard and saw and loved you. Much good that would do you,
Curdie!  No; you must do what you can to know me, and if you do, you
will.  You shall see me again in very different circumstances from
these, and, I will tell you so much, it may be in a very different
shape.  But come now, I will lead you out of this cavern; my good Joan
will be getting too anxious about you.  One word more: you will allow
that the men knew little what they were talking about this morning,
when they told all those tales of Old Mother Wotherwop; but did it
occur to you to think how it was they fell to talking about me at all?
It was because I came to them; I was beside them all the time they were
talking about me, though they were far enough from knowing it, and had
very little besides foolishness to say.'

As she spoke she turned and led the way from the cavern, which, as if a
door had been closed, sank into absolute blackness behind them.  And
now they saw nothing more of the lady except the green star, which
again seemed a good distance in front of them, and to which they came
no nearer, although following it at a quick pace through the mountain.
Such was their confidence in her guidance, however, and so fearless
were they in consequence, that they felt their way neither with hand
nor foot, but walked straight on through the pitch-dark galleries.
When at length the night of the upper world looked in at the mouth of
the mine, the green light seemed to lose its way among the stars, and
they saw it no more.

Out they came into the cool, blessed night.  It was very late, and only
starlight.  To their surprise, three paces away they saw, seated upon a
stone, an old country-woman, in a cloak which they took for black.
When they came close up to it, they saw it was red.

'Good evening!' said Peter.

'Good evening!' returned the old woman, in a voice as old as herself.

But Curdie took off his cap and said:

'I am your servant, Princess.'

The old woman replied:

'Come to me in the dove tower tomorrow night, Curdie--alone.'

'I will, ma'am,' said Curdie.

So they parted, and father and son went home to wife and mother--two
persons in one rich, happy woman.



CHAPTER 8

Curdie's Mission

The next night Curdie went home from the mine a little earlier than
usual, to make himself tidy before going to the dove tower.  The
princess had not appointed an exact time for him to be there; he would
go as near the time he had gone first as he could.  On his way to the
bottom of the hill, he met his father coming up.  The sun was then
down, and the warm first of the twilight filled the evening.  He came
rather wearily up the hill: the road, he thought, must have grown
steeper in parts since he was Curdie's age.  His back was to the light
of the sunset, which closed him all round in a beautiful setting, and
Curdie thought what a grand-looking man his father was, even when he
was tired.  It is greed and laziness and selfishness, not hunger or
weariness or cold, that take the dignity out of a man, and make him
look mean.

'Ah, Curdie!  There you are!' he said, seeing his son come bounding
along as if it were morning with him and not evening.

'You look tired, Father,' said Curdie.

'Yes, my boy.  I'm not so young as you.'

'Nor so old as the princess,' said Curdie.

'Tell me this,' said Peter, 'why do people talk about going downhill
when they begin to get old?  It seems to me that then first they begin
to go uphill.'

'You looked to me, Father, when I caught sight of you, as if you had
been climbing the hill all your life, and were soon to get to the top.'

'Nobody can tell when that will be,' returned Peter.  'We're so ready
to think we're just at the top when it lies miles away.  But I must not
keep you, my boy, for you are wanted; and we shall be anxious to know
what the princess says to you--that is, if she will allow you to tell
us.'

'I think she will, for she knows there is nobody more to be trusted
than my father and mother,' said Curdie, with pride.

And away he shot, and ran, and jumped, and seemed almost to fly down
the long, winding, steep path, until he came to the gate of the king's
house.

There he met an unexpected obstruction: in the open door stood the
housekeeper, and she seemed to broaden herself out until she almost
filled the doorway.

'So!' she said, 'it's you, is it, young man?  You are the person that
comes in and goes out when he pleases, and keeps running up and down my
stairs without ever saying by your leave, or even wiping his shoes, and
always leaves the door open!  Don't you know this is my house?'

'No, I do not,' returned Curdie respectfully.  'You forget, ma'am, that
it is the king's house.'

'That is all the same.  The king left it to me to take care of--and
that you shall know!'

'Is the king dead, ma'am, that he has left it to you?' asked Curdie,
half in doubt from the self-assertion of the woman.

'Insolent fellow!' exclaimed the housekeeper.  'Don't you see by my
dress that I am in the king's service?'

'And am I not one of his miners?'

'Ah! that goes for nothing.  I am one of his household.  You are an
out-of-doors labourer.  You are a nobody.  You carry a pickaxe.  I
carry the keys at my girdle.  See!'

'But you must not call one a nobody to whom the king has spoken,' said
Curdie.

'Go along with you!' cried the housekeeper, and would have shut the
door in his face, had she not been afraid that when she stepped back he
would step in ere she could get it in motion, for it was very heavy and
always seemed unwilling to shut.  Curdie came a pace nearer.  She
lifted the great house key from her side, and threatened to strike him
down with it, calling aloud on Mar and Whelk and Plout, the menservants
under her, to come and help her. Ere one of them could answer, however,
she gave a great shriek and turned and fled, leaving the door wide open.

Curdie looked behind him, and saw an animal whose gruesome oddity even
he, who knew so many of the strange creatures, two of which were never
the same, that used to live inside the mountain with their masters the
goblins, had never seen equalled.  Its eyes were flaming with anger,
but it seemed to be at the housekeeper, for it came cowering and
creeping up and laid its head on the ground at Curdie's feet.  Curdie
hardly waited to look at it, however, but ran into the house, eager to
get up the stairs before any of the men should come to annoy--he had no
fear of their preventing him. Without halt or hindrance, though the
passages were nearly dark, he reached the door of the princess's
workroom, and knocked.

'Come in,' said the voice of the princess.

Curdie opened the door--but, to his astonishment, saw no room there.
Could he have opened a wrong door?  There was the great sky, and the
stars, and beneath he could see nothing only darkness! But what was
that in the sky, straight in front of him?  A great wheel of fire,
turning and turning, and flashing out blue lights!

'Come in, Curdie,' said the voice again.

'I would at once, ma'am,' said Curdie, 'if I were sure I was standing
at your door.'

'Why should you doubt it, Curdie?'

'Because I see neither walls nor floor, only darkness and the great
sky.'

'That is all right, Curdie.  Come in.'

Curdie stepped forward at once.  He was indeed, for the very crumb of a
moment, tempted to feel before him with his foot; but he saw that would
be to distrust the princess, and a greater rudeness he could not offer
her.  So he stepped straight in--I will not say without a little
tremble at the thought of finding no floor beneath his foot.  But that
which had need of the floor found it, and his foot was satisfied.

No sooner was he in than he saw that the great revolving wheel in the
sky was the princess's spinning wheel, near the other end of the room,
turning very fast.  He could see no sky or stars any more, but the
wheel was flashing out blue--oh, such lovely sky-blue light!--and
behind it of course sat the princess, but whether an old woman as thin
as a skeleton leaf, or a glorious lady as young as perfection, he could
not tell for the turning and flashing of the wheel.

'Listen to the wheel,' said the voice which had already grown dear to
Curdie: its very tone was precious like a jewel, not as a jewel, for no
jewel could compare with it in preciousness.

And Curdie listened and listened.

'What is it saying?' asked the voice.

'It is singing,' answered Curdie.

'What is it singing?'

Curdie tried to make out, but thought he could not; for no sooner had
he got hold of something than it vanished again.

Yet he listened, and listened, entranced with delight.

'Thank you, Curdie, said the voice.

'Ma'am,' said Curdie, 'I did try hard for a while, but I could not make
anything of it.'

'Oh yes, you did, and you have been telling it to me!  Shall I tell you
again what I told my wheel, and my wheel told you, and you have just
told me without knowing it?'

'Please, ma'am.'

Then the lady began to sing, and her wheel spun an accompaniment to her
song, and the music of the wheel was like the music of an Aeolian harp
blown upon by the wind that bloweth where it listeth. Oh, the sweet
sounds of that spinning wheel!  Now they were gold, now silver, now
grass, now palm trees, now ancient cities, now rubies, now mountain
brooks, now peacock's feathers, now clouds, now snowdrops, and now
mid-sea islands.  But for the voice that sang through it all, about
that I have no words to tell.  It would make you weep if I were able to
tell you what that was like, it was so beautiful and true and lovely.
But this is something like the words of its song:


  The stars are spinning their threads,
  And the clouds are the dust that flies,
  And the suns are weaving them up
  For the time when the sleepers shall rise.

  The ocean in music rolls,
  And gems are turning to eyes,
  And the trees are gathering souls
  For the day when the sleepers shall rise.

  The weepers are learning to smile,
  And laughter to glean the sighs;
  Burn and bury the care and guile,
  For the day when the sleepers shall rise.

  Oh, the dews and the moths and the daisy red,
  The larks and the glimmers and flows!
  The lilies and sparrows and daily bread,
  And the something that nobody knows!


The princess stopped, her wheel stopped, and she laughed.  And her
laugh was sweeter than song and wheel; sweeter than running brook and
silver bell; sweeter than joy itself, for the heart of the laugh was
love.

'Come now, Curdie, to this side of my wheel, and you will find me,' she
said; and her laugh seemed sounding on still in the words, as if they
were made of breath that had laughed.

Curdie obeyed, and passed the wheel, and there she stood to receive
him!--fairer than when he saw her last, a little younger still, and
dressed not in green and emeralds, but in pale blue, with a coronet of
silver set with pearls, and slippers covered with opals that gleamed
every colour of the rainbow.  It was some time before Curdie could take
his eyes from the marvel of her loveliness. Fearing at last that he was
rude, he turned them away; and, behold, he was in a room that was for
beauty marvellous!  The lofty ceiling was all a golden vine, Whose
great clusters of carbuncles, rubies, and chrysoberyls hung down like
the bosses of groined arches, and in its centre hung the most glorious
lamp that human eyes ever saw--the Silver Moon itself, a globe of
silver, as it seemed, with a heart of light so wondrous potent that it
rendered the mass translucent, and altogether radiant.

The room was so large that, looking back, he could scarcely see the end
at which he entered; but the other was only a few yards from him--and
there he saw another wonder: on a huge hearth a great fire was burning,
and the fire was a huge heap of roses, and yet it was fire.  The smell
of the roses filled the air, and the heat of the flames of them glowed
upon his face.  He turned an inquiring look upon the lady, and saw that
she was now seated in an ancient chair, the legs of which were crusted
with gems, but the upper part like a nest of daisies and moss and green
grass.

'Curdie,' she said in answer to his eyes, 'you have stood more than one
trial already, and have stood them well: now I am going to put you to a
harder.  Do you think you are prepared for it?'

'How can I tell, ma'am,' he returned, 'seeing I do not know what it is,
or what preparation it needs?  Judge me yourself, ma'am.'

'It needs only trust and obedience,' answered the lady.

'I dare not say anything, ma'am.  If you think me fit, command me.'

'It will hurt you terribly, Curdie, but that will be all; no real hurt
but much good will come to you from it.'

Curdie made no answer but stood gazing with parted lips in the lady's
face.

'Go and thrust both your hands into that fire,' she said quickly,
almost hurriedly.

Curdie dared not stop to think.  It was much too terrible to think
about.  He rushed to the fire, and thrust both of his hands right into
the middle of the heap of flaming roses, and his arms halfway up to the
elbows.  And it did hurt!  But he did not draw them back. He held the
pain as if it were a thing that would kill him if he let it go--as
indeed it would have done.  He was in terrible fear lest it should
conquer him.

But when it had risen to the pitch that he thought he could bear it no
longer, it began to fall again, and went on growing less and less until
by contrast with its former severity it had become rather pleasant.  At
last it ceased altogether, and Curdie thought his hands must be burned
to cinders if not ashes, for he did not feel them at all.  The princess
told him to take them out and look at them.  He did so, and found that
all that was gone of them was the rough, hard skin; they were white and
smooth like the princess's.

'Come to me,' she said.

He obeyed and saw, to his surprise, that her face looked as if she had
been weeping.

'Oh, Princess!  What is the matter?' he cried.  'Did I make a noise and
vex you?'

'No, Curdie, she answered; 'but it was very bad.'

'Did you feel it too then?'

'Of course I did.  But now it is over, and all is well.  Would you like
to know why I made You put your hands in the fire?' Curdie looked at
them again--then said:

'To take the marks of the work off them and make them fit for the
king's court, I suppose.'

'No, Curdie,' answered the princess, shaking her head, for she was not
pleased with the answer.  'It would be a poor way of making your hands
fit for the king's court to take off them signs of his service.  There
is a far greater difference on them than that.  Do you feel none?'

'No, ma'am.'

'You will, though, by and by, when the time comes.  But perhaps even
then you might not know what had been given you, therefore I will tell
you.  Have you ever heard what some philosophers say--that men were all
animals once?'

'No, ma'am.'

'It is of no consequence.  But there is another thing that is of the
greatest consequence--this: that all men, if they do not take care, go
down the hill to the animals' country; that many men are actually, all
their lives, going to be beasts.  People knew it once, but it is long
since they forgot it.'

'I am not surprised to hear it, ma'am, when I think of some of our
miners.'

'Ah!  But you must beware, Curdie, how you say of this man or that man
that he is travelling beastward.  There are not nearly so many going
that way as at first sight you might think.  When you met your father
on the hill tonight, you stood and spoke together on the same spot; and
although one of you was going up and the other coming down, at a little
distance no one could have told which was bound in the one direction
and which in the other.  Just so two people may be at the same spot in
manners and behaviour, and yet one may be getting better and the other
worse, which is just the greatest of all differences that could
possibly exist between them.'

'But ma'am,' said Curdie, 'where is the good of knowing that there is
such a difference, if you can never know where it is?'

'Now, Curdie, you must mind exactly what words I use, because although
the right words cannot do exactly what I want them to do, the wrong
words will certainly do what I do not want them to do. I did not say
you can never know.  When there is a necessity for your knowing, when
you have to do important business with this or that man, there is
always a way of knowing enough to keep you from any great blunder.  And
as you will have important business to do by and by, and that with
people of whom you yet know nothing, it will be necessary that you
should have some better means than usual of learning the nature of them.

'Now listen.  Since it is always what they do, whether in their minds
or their bodies, that makes men go down to be less than men, that is,
beasts, the change always comes first in their hands--and first of all
in the inside hands, to which the outside ones are but as the gloves.
They do not know it of course; for a beast does not know that he is a
beast, and the nearer a man gets to being a beast the less he knows it.
Neither can their best friends, or their worst enemies indeed, see any
difference in their hands, for they see only the living gloves of them.
But there are not a few who feel a vague something repulsive in the
hand of a man who is growing a beast.

'Now here is what the rose-fire has done for you: it has made your
hands so knowing and wise, it has brought your real hands so near the
outside of your flesh gloves, that you will henceforth be able to know
at once the hand of a man who is growing into a beast; nay, more--you
will at once feel the foot of the beast he is growing, just as if there
were no glove made like a man's hand between you and it.

'Hence of course it follows that you will be able often, and with
further education in zoology, will be able always to tell, not only
when a man is growing a beast, but what beast he is growing to, for you
will know the foot--what it is and what beast's it is. According, then,
to your knowledge of that beast will be your knowledge of the man you
have to do with.  Only there is one beautiful and awful thing about it,
that if any one gifted with this perception once uses it for his own
ends, it is taken from him, and then, not knowing that it is gone, he
is in a far worse condition than before, for he trusts to what he has
not got.'

'How dreadful!' Said Curdie.  'I must mind what I am about.'

'Yes, indeed, Curdie.'

'But may not one sometimes make a mistake without being able to help
it?'

'Yes.  But so long as he is not after his own ends, he will never make
a serious mistake.'

'I suppose you want me, ma'am, to warn every one whose hand tells me
that he is growing a beast--because, as you say, he does not know it
himself.'

The princess smiled.

'Much good that would do, Curdie!  I don't say there are no cases in
which it would be of use, but they are very rare and peculiar cases,
and if such come you will know them.  To such a person there is in
general no insult like the truth.  He cannot endure it, not because he
is growing a beast, but because he is ceasing to be a man.  It is the
dying man in him that it makes uncomfortable, and he trots, or creeps,
or swims, or flutters out of its way--calls it a foolish feeling, a
whim, an old wives' fable, a bit of priests' humbug, an effete
superstition, and so on.'

'And is there no hope for him?  Can nothing be done?  It's so awful to
think of going down, down, down like that!'

'Even when it's with his own will?'

'That's what seems to me to make it worst of all,' said Curdie.

'You are right,' answered the princess, nodding her head; 'but there is
this amount of excuse to make for all such, remember--that they do not
know what or how horrid their coming fate is. Many a lady, so delicate
and nice that she can bear nothing coarser than the finest linen to
touch her body, if she had a mirror that could show her the animal she
is growing to, as it lies waiting within the fair skin and the fine
linen and the silk and the jewels, would receive a shock that might
possibly wake her up.'

'Why then, ma'am, shouldn't she have it?'

The princess held her peace.

'Come here, Lina,' she said after a long pause.

From somewhere behind Curdie, crept forward the same hideous animal
which had fawned at his feet at the door, and which, without his
knowing it, had followed him every step up the dove tower.  She ran to
the princess, and lay down flat at her feet, looking up at her with an
expression so pitiful that in Curdie's heart it overcame all the
ludicrousness of her horrible mass of incongruities.  She had a very
short body, and very long legs made like an elephant's, so that in
lying down she kneeled with both pairs.  Her tail, which dragged on the
floor behind her, was twice as long and quite as thick as her body.
Her head was something between that of a polar bear and a snake.  Her
eyes were dark green, with a yellow light in them.  Her under teeth
came up like a fringe of icicles, only very white, outside of her upper
lip.  Her throat looked as if the hair had been plucked off.  It showed
a skin white and smooth.

'Give Curdie a paw, Lina,' said the princess.

The creature rose, and, lifting a long foreleg, held up a great doglike
paw to Curdie.  He took it gently.  But what a shudder, as of terrified
delight, ran through him, when, instead of the paw of a dog, such as it
seemed to his eyes, he clasped in his great mining fist the soft, neat
little hand of a child!  He took it in both of his, and held it as if
he could not let it go.  The green eyes stared at him with their yellow
light, and the mouth was turned up toward him with its constant half
grin; but here was the child's hand!  If he could but pull the child
out of the beast! His eyes sought the princess.  She was watching him
with evident satisfaction.

'Ma'am, here is a child's hand!' said Curdie.

'Your gift does more for you than it promised.  It is yet better to
perceive a hidden good than a hidden evil.'

'But,' began Curdie.

'I am not going to answer any more questions this evening,' interrupted
the princess.  'You have not half got to the bottom of the answers I
have already given you.  That paw in your hand now might almost teach
you the whole science of natural history--the heavenly sort, I mean.'

'I will think,' said Curdie.  'But oh! please! one word more: may I
tell my father and mother all about it?'

'Certainly--though perhaps now it may be their turn to find it a little
difficult to believe that things went just as you must tell them.'

'They shall see that I believe it all this time,' said Curdie.

'Tell them that tomorrow morning you must set out for the court--not
like a great man, but just as poor as you are.  They had better not
speak about it.  Tell them also that it will be a long time before they
hear of you again, but they must not lose heart.  And tell your father
to lay that stone I gave him at night in a safe place--not because of
the greatness of its price, although it is such an emerald as no prince
has in his crown, but because it will be a news-bearer between you and
him.  As often as he gets at all anxious about you, he must take it and
lay it in the fire, and leave it there when he goes to bed.  In the
morning he must find it in the ashes, and if it be as green as ever,
then all goes well with you; if it have lost colour, things go ill with
you; but if it be very pale indeed, then you are in great danger, and
he must come to me.'

'Yes, ma'am,' said Curdie.  'Please, am I to go now?'

'Yes,' answered the princess, and held out her hand to him.

Curdie took it, trembling with joy.  It was a very beautiful hand--not
small, very smooth, but not very soft--and just the same to his
fire-taught touch that it was to his eyes.  He would have stood there
all night holding it if she had not gently withdrawn it.

'I will provide you a servant,' she said, 'for your journey and to wait
upon you afterward.'

'But where am I to go, ma'am, and what am I to do?  You have given me
no message to carry, neither have you said what I am wanted for. I go
without a notion whether I am to walk this way or that, or what I am to
do when I get I don't know where.'

'Curdie!' said the princess, and there was a tone of reminder in his
own name as she spoke it, 'did I not tell you to tell your father and
mother that you were to set out for the court?  And you know that lies
to the north.  You must learn to use far less direct directions than
that.  You must not be like a dull servant that needs to be told again
and again before he will understand.  You have orders enough to start
with, and you will find, as you go on, and as you need to know, what
you have to do.  But I warn you that perhaps it will not look the least
like what you may have been fancying I should require of you.  I have
one idea of you and your work, and you have another.  I do not blame
you for that--you cannot help it yet; but you must be ready to let my
idea, which sets you working, set your idea right.  Be true and honest
and fearless, and all shall go well with you and your work, and all
with whom your work lies, and so with your parents--and me too,
Curdie,' she added after a little pause.

The young miner bowed his head low, patted the strange head that lay at
the princess's feet, and turned away.  As soon as he passed the
spinning wheel, which looked, in the midst of the glorious room, just
like any wheel you might find in a country cottage--old and worn and
dingy and dusty--the splendour of the place vanished, and he saw but
the big bare room he seemed at first to have entered, with the
moon--the princess's moon no doubt--shining in at one of the windows
upon the spinning wheel.



CHAPTER 9

Hands

Curdie went home, pondering much, and told everything to his father and
mother.  As the old princess had said, it was now their turn to find
what they heard hard to believe.  If they had not been able to trust
Curdie himself, they would have refused to believe more than the half
of what he reported, then they would have refused that half too, and at
last would most likely for a time have disbelieved in the very
existence of the princess, what evidence their own senses had given
them notwithstanding.

For he had nothing conclusive to show in proof of what he told them.
When he held out his hands to them, his mother said they looked as if
he had been washing them with soft soap, only they did smell of
something nicer than that, and she must allow it was more like roses
than anything else she knew.  His father could not see any difference
upon his hands, but then it was night, he said, and their poor little
lamp was not enough for his old eyes.  As to the feel of them, each of
his own hands, he said, was hard and horny enough for two, and it must
be the fault of the dullness of his own thick skin that he felt no
change on Curdie's palms.

'Here, Curdie,' said his mother, 'try my hand, and see what beast's paw
lies inside it.'

'No, Mother,' answered Curdie, half beseeching, half indignant, 'I will
not insult my new gift by making pretence to try it.  That would be
mockery.  There is no hand within yours but the hand of a true woman,
my mother.'

'I should like you just to take hold of my hand though,' said his
mother.  'You are my son, and may know all the bad there is in me.'

Then at once Curdie took her hand in his.  And when he had it, he kept
it, stroking it gently with his other hand.

'Mother,' he said at length, 'your hand feels just like that of the
princess.'

'What!  My horny, cracked, rheumatic old hand, with its big joints, and
its short nails all worn down to the quick with hard work--like the
hand of the beautiful princess!  Why, my child, you will make me fancy
your fingers have grown very dull indeed, instead of sharp and
delicate, if you talk such nonsense.  Mine is such an ugly hand I
should be ashamed to show it to any but one that loved me.  But love
makes all safe--doesn't it, Curdie?'

'Well, Mother, all I can say is that I don't feel a roughness, or a
crack, or a big joint, or a short nail.  Your hand feels just and
exactly, as near as I can recollect, and it's not more than two hours
since I had it in mine--well, I will say, very like indeed to that of
the old princess.'

'Go away, you flatterer,' said his mother, with a smile that showed how
she prized the love that lay beneath what she took for its hyperbole.
The praise even which one cannot accept is sweet from a true mouth.
'If that is all your new gift can do, it won't make a warlock of you,'
she added.

'Mother, it tells me nothing but the truth,' insisted Curdie, 'however
unlike the truth it may seem.  It wants no gift to tell what anybody's
outside hands are like.  But by it I know your inside hands are like
the princess's.'

'And I am sure the boy speaks true,' said Peter.  'He only says about
your hand what I have known ever so long about yourself, Joan.  Curdie,
your mother's foot is as pretty a foot as any lady's in the land, and
where her hand is not so pretty it comes of killing its beauty for you
and me, my boy.  And I can tell you more, Curdie.  I don't know much
about ladies and gentlemen, but I am sure your inside mother must be a
lady, as her hand tells you, and I will try to say how I know it.  This
is how: when I forget myself looking at her as she goes about her
work--and that happens often as I grow older--I fancy for a moment or
two that I am a gentleman; and when I wake up from my little dream, it
is only to feel the more strongly that I must do everything as a
gentleman should.  I will try to tell you what I mean, Curdie.  If a
gentleman--I mean a real gentleman, not a pretended one, of which sort
they say there are a many above ground--if a real gentleman were to
lose all his money and come down to work in the mines to get bread for
his family--do you think, Curdie, he would work like the lazy ones?
Would he try to do as little as he could for his wages?  I know the
sort of the true gentleman pretty near as well as he does himself.  And
my wife, that's your mother, Curdie, she's a true lady, you may take my
word for it, for it's she that makes me want to be a true gentleman.
Wife, the boy is in the right about your hand.'

'Now, Father, let me feel yours,' said Curdie, daring a little more.

'No, no, my boy,' answered Peter.  'I don't want to hear anything about
my hand or my head or my heart.  I am what I am, and I hope growing
better, and that's enough.  No, you shan't feel my hand. You must go to
bed, for you must start with the sun.'

It was not as if Curdie had been leaving them to go to prison, or to
make a fortune, and although they were sorry enough to lose him, they
were not in the least heartbroken or even troubled at his going.

As the princess had said he was to go like the poor man he was, Curdie
came down in the morning from his little loft dressed in his working
clothes.  His mother, who was busy getting his breakfast for him, while
his father sat reading to her out of an old book, would have had him
put on his holiday garments, which, she said, would look poor enough
among the fine ladies and gentlemen he was going to.  But Curdie said
he did not know that he was going among ladies and gentlemen, and that
as work was better than play, his workday clothes must on the whole be
better than his playday Clothes; and as his father accepted the
argument, his mother gave in.  When he had eaten his breakfast, she
took a pouch made of goatskin, with the long hair on it, filled it with
bread and cheese, and hung it over his shoulder.  Then his father gave
him a stick he had cut for him in the wood, and he bade them good-bye
rather hurriedly, for he was afraid of breaking down.  As he went out
he caught up his mattock and took it with him.  It had on the one side
a pointed curve of strong steel for loosening the earth and the ore,
and on the other a steel hammer for breaking the stones and rocks.
Just as he crossed the threshold the sun showed the first segment of
his disc above the horizon.



CHAPTER 10

The Heath

He had to go to the bottom of the hill to get into a country he could
cross, for the mountains to the north were full of precipices, and it
would have been losing time to go that way.  Not until he had reached
the king's house was it any use to turn northwards.  Many a look did he
raise, as he passed it, to the dove tower, and as long as it was in
sight, but he saw nothing of the lady of the pigeons.

On and on he fared, and came in a few hours to a country where there
were no mountains more--only hills, with great stretches of desolate
heath.  Here and there was a village, but that brought him little
pleasure, for the people were rougher and worse mannered than those in
the mountains, and as he passed through, the children came behind and
mocked him.

'There's a monkey running away from the mines!' they cried. Sometimes
their parents came out and encouraged them.

'He doesn't want to find gold for the king any longer--the lazybones!'
they would say.  'He'll be well taxed down here though, and he won't
like that either.'

But it was little to Curdie that men who did not know what he was about
should not approve of his proceedings.  He gave them a merry answer now
and then, and held diligently on his way.  When they got so rude as
nearly to make him angry, he would treat them as he used to treat the
goblins, and sing his own songs to keep out their foolish noises.  Once
a child fell as he turned to run away after throwing a stone at him.
He picked him up, kissed him, and carried him to his mother.  The woman
had run out in terror when she saw the strange miner about, as she
thought, to take vengeance on her boy.  When he put him in her arms,
she blessed him, and Curdie went on his way rejoicing.

And so the day went on, and the evening came, and in the middle of a
great desolate heath he began to feel tired, and sat down under an
ancient hawthorn, through which every now and then a lone wind that
seemed to come from nowhere and to go nowhither sighed and hissed.  It
was very old and distorted.  There was not another tree for miles all
around.  It seemed to have lived so long, and to have been so torn and
tossed by the tempests on that moor, that it had at last gathered a
wind of its own, which got up now and then, tumbled itself about, and
lay down again.

Curdie had been so eager to get on that he had eaten nothing since his
breakfast.  But he had had plenty of water, for Many little streams had
crossed his path.  He now opened the wallet his mother had given him,
and began to eat his supper.  The sun was setting. A few clouds had
gathered about the west, but there was not a single cloud anywhere else
to be seen.

Now Curdie did not know that this was a part of the country very hard
to get through.  Nobody lived there, though many had tried to build in
it.  Some died very soon.  Some rushed out of it.  Those who stayed
longest went raving mad, and died a terrible death. Such as walked
straight on, and did not spend a night there, got through well and were
nothing the worse.  But those who slept even a single night in it were
sure to meet with something they could never forget, and which often
left a mark everybody could read. And that old hawthorn Might have been
enough for a warning--it looked so like a human being dried up and
distorted with age and suffering, with cares instead of loves, and
things instead of thoughts.  Both it and the heath around it, which
stretched on all sides as far as he could see, were so withered that it
was impossible to say whether they were alive or not.

And while Curdie ate there came a change.  Clouds had gathered over his
head, and seemed drifting about in every direction, as if not
'shepherded by the slow, unwilling wind,' but hunted in all directions
by wolfish flaws across the plains of the sky.  The sun was going down
in a storm of lurid crimson, and out of the west came a wind that felt
red and hot the one moment, and cold and pale the other.  And very
strangely it sang in the dreary old hawthorn tree, and very cheerily it
blew about Curdie, now making him creep close up to the tree for
shelter from its shivery cold, now fan himself with his cap, it was so
sultry and stifling.  It seemed to come from the deathbed of the sun,
dying in fever and ague.

And as he gazed at the sun, now on the verge of the horizon, very large
and very red and very dull--for though the clouds had broken away a
dusty fog was spread all over the disc--Curdie saw something strange
appear against it, moving about like a fly over its burning face.  This
looked as if it were coming out of the sun's furnace heart, and was a
living creature of some kind surely; but its shape was very uncertain,
because the dazzle of the light all around melted the outlines.

It was growing larger, it must be approaching!  It grew so rapidly that
by the time the sun was half down its head reached the top of the arch,
and presently nothing but its legs were to be seen, crossing and
recrossing the face of the vanishing disc.

When the sun was down he could see nothing of it more, but in a moment
he heard its feet galloping over the dry crackling heather, and seeming
to come straight for him.  He stood up, lifted his pickaxes and threw
the hammer end over his shoulder: he was going to have a fight for his
life!  And now it appeared again, vague, yet very awful, in the dim
twilight the sun had left behind.  But just before it reached him, down
from its four long legs it dropped flat on the ground, and came
crawling towards him, wagging a huge tail as it came.



CHAPTER 11

Lina

It was Lina.  All at once Curdie recognized her--the frightful creature
he had seen at the princess's.  He dropped his pickaxes and held out
his hand.  She crept nearer and nearer, and laid her chin in his palm,
and he patted her ugly head.  Then she crept away behind the tree, and
lay down, panting hard.

Curdie did not much like the idea of her being behind him. Horrible as
she was to look at, she seemed to his mind more horrible when he was
not looking at her.  But he remembered the child's hand, and never
thought of driving her away.  Now and then he gave a glance behind him,
and there she lay flat, with her eyes closed and her terrible teeth
gleaming between her two huge forepaws.

After his supper and his long day's journey it was no wonder Curdie
should now be sleepy.  Since the sun set the air had been warm and
pleasant.  He lay down under the tree, closed his eyes, and thought to
sleep.  He found himself mistaken, however.  But although he could not
sleep, he was yet aware of resting delightfully.

Presently he heard a sweet sound of singing somewhere, such as he had
never heard before--a singing as of curious birds far off, which drew
nearer and nearer.  At length he heard their wings, and, opening his
eyes, saw a number of very large birds, as it seemed, alighting around
him, still singing.  It was strange to hear song from the throats of
such big birds.

And still singing, with large and round but not the less birdlike
voices, they began to weave a strange dance about him, moving their
wings in time with their legs.  But the dance seemed somehow to be
troubled and broken, and to return upon itself in an eddy, in place of
sweeping smoothly on.

And he soon learned, in the low short growls behind him, the cause of
the imperfection: they wanted to dance all round the tree, but Lina
would not permit them to come on her side.

Now curdie liked the birds, and did not altogether like Lina.  But
neither, nor both together, made a reason for driving away the
princess's creature.  Doubtless she had been the goblins' creature, but
the last time he saw her was in the king's house and the dove tower,
and at the old princess's feet.  So he left her to do as she would, and
the dance of the birds continued only a semicircle, troubled at the
edges, and returning upon itself.

But their song and their motions, nevertheless, and the waving of their
wings, began at length to make him very sleepy.  All the time he had
kept doubting whether they could really be birds, and the sleepier he
got, the more he imagined them something else, but he suspected no harm.

Suddenly, just as he was sinking beneath the waves of slumber, he awoke
in fierce pain.  The birds were upon him--all over him--and had begun
to tear him with beaks and claws.  He had but time, however, to feel
that he could not move under their weight, when they set up a hideous
screaming, and scattered like a cloud.  Lina was among them, snapping
and striking with her paws, while her tail knocked them over and over.
But they flew up, gathered, and descended on her in a swarm, perching
upon every part of her body, so that he could see only a huge misshapen
mass, which seemed to go rolling away into the darkness.  He got up and
tried to follow, but could see nothing, and after wandering about
hither and thither for some time, found himself again beside the
hawthorn.  He feared greatly that the birds had been too much for Lina,
and had torn her to pieces.  In a little while, however, she came
limping back, and lay down in her old place.  Curdie also lay down,
but, from the pain of his wounds, there was no sleep for him.  When the
light came he found his clothes a good deal torn and his skin as well,
but gladly wondered why the wicked birds had not at once attacked his
eyes.  Then he turned, looking for Lina.  She rose and crept to him.
But she was in far worse plight than he--plucked and gashed and torn
with the beaks and claws of the birds, especially about the bare part
of her neck, so that she was pitiful to see.  And those worst wounds
she could not reach to lick.

'Poor Lina!' said Curdie, 'you got all those helping me.'

She wagged her tail, and made it clear she understood him.  Then it
flashed upon Curdie's mind that perhaps this was the companion the
princess had promised him.  For the princess did so many things
differently from what anybody looked for!  Lina was no beauty
certainly, but already, the first night, she had saved his life.

'Come along, Lina,' he said, 'we want water.'

She put her nose to the earth, and after snuffing for a moment, darted
off in a straight line.  Curdie followed.  The ground was so uneven,
that after losing sight of her many times, at last he seemed to have
lost her altogether.  In a few minutes, however, he came upon her
waiting for him.  Instantly she darted off again. After he had lost and
found her again many times, he found her the last time lying beside a
great stone.  As soon as he came up she began scratching at it with her
paws.  When he had raised it an inch or two, she shoved in first her
nose and then her teeth, and lifted with all the might of her neck.

When at length between them they got it up, there was a beautiful
little well.  He filled his cap with the clearest and sweetest water,
and drank.  Then he gave to Lina, and she drank plentifully. Next he
washed her wounds very carefully.  And as he did so, he noted how much
the bareness of her neck added to the strange repulsiveness of her
appearance.  Then he bethought him of the goatskin wallet his mother
had given him, and taking it from his shoulders, tried whether it would
do to make a collar of for the poor animal.  He found there was just
enough, and the hair so similar in colour to Lina's, that no one could
suspect it of having grown somewhere else.

He took his knife, ripped up the seams of the wallet, and began trying
the skin to her neck.  It was plain she understood perfectly what he
wished, for she endeavoured to hold her neck conveniently, turning it
this way and that while he contrived, with his rather scanty material,
to make the collar fit.  As his mother had taken care to provide him
with needles and thread, he soon had a nice gorget ready for her.  He
laced it on with one of his boot laces, which its long hair covered.
Poor Lina looked much better in it. Nor could any one have called it a
piece of finery.  If ever green eyes with a yellow light in them looked
grateful, hers did.

As they had no longer any bag to carry them in, Curdie and Lina now ate
what was left of the provisions.  Then they set out again upon their
journey.  For seven days it lasted.  They met with various adventures,
and in all of them Lina proved so helpful, and so ready to risk her
life for the sake of her companion, that Curdie grew not merely very
fond but very trustful of her; and her ugliness, which at first only
moved his pity, now actually increased his affection for her.  One day,
looking at her stretched on the grass before him, he said:

'Oh, Lina!  If the princess would but burn you in her fire of roses!'

She looked up at him, gave a mournful whine like a dog, and laid her
head on his feet.  What or how much he could not tell, but clearly she
had gathered something from his words.



CHAPTER 12

More Creatures

One day from morning till night they had been passing through a forest.
As soon as the sun was down Curdie began to be aware that there were
more in it than themselves.  First he saw only the swift rush of a
figure across the trees at some distance.  Then he saw another and then
another at shorter intervals.  Then he saw others both farther off and
nearer.  At last, missing Lina and looking about after her, he saw an
appearance as marvellous as herself steal up to her, and begin
conversing with her after some beast fashion which evidently she
understood.

Presently what seemed a quarrel arose between them, and stranger noises
followed, mingled with growling.  At length it came to a fight, which
had not lasted long, however, before the creature of the wood threw
itself upon its back, and held up its paws to Lina. She instantly
walked on, and the creature got up and followed her. They had not gone
far before another strange animal appeared, approaching Lina, when
precisely the same thing was repeated, the vanquished animal rising and
following with the former.  Again, and yet again, and again, a fresh
animal came up, seemed to be reasoned and certainly was fought with and
overcome by Lina, until at last, before they were out of the wood, she
was followed by forty-nine of the most grotesquely ugly, the most
extravagantly abnormal animals imagination can conceive.  To describe
them were a hopeless task.

I knew a boy who used to make animals out of heather roots. Wherever he
could find four legs, he was pretty sure to find a head and a tail.
His beasts were a most comic menagerie, and right fruitful of laughter.
But they were not so grotesque and extravagant as Lina and her
followers.  One of them, for instance, was like a boa constrictor
walking on four little stumpy legs near its tail.  About the same
distance from its head were two little wings, which it was forever
fluttering as if trying to fly with them.  Curdie thought it fancied it
did fly with them, when it was merely plodding on busily with its four
little stumps.  How it managed to keep up he could not think, till once
when he missed it from the group: the same moment he caught sight of
something at a distance plunging at an awful serpentine rate through
the trees, and presently, from behind a huge ash, this same creature
fell again into the group, quietly waddling along on its four stumps.

Watching it after this, he saw that, when it was not able to keep up
any longer, and they had all got a little space ahead, it shot into the
wood away from the route, and made a great round, serpentine alone in
huge billows of motion, devouring the ground, undulating awfully,
galloping as if it were all legs together, and its four stumps nowhere.
In this mad fashion it shot ahead, and, a few minutes after, toddled in
again among the rest, walking peacefully and somewhat painfully on its
few fours.

From the time it takes to describe one of them it will be readily seen
that it would hardly do to attempt a description of each of the
forty-nine.  They were not a goodly company, but well worth
contemplating, nevertheless; and Curdie had been too long used to the
goblins' creatures in the mines and on the mountain, to feel the least
uncomfortable at being followed by such a herd.  On the contrary, the
marvellous vagaries of shape they manifested amused him greatly, and
shortened the journey much.

Before they were all gathered, however, it had got so dark that he
could see some of them only a part at a time, and every now and then,
as the company wandered on, he would be startled by some extraordinary
limb or feature, undreamed of by him before, thrusting itself out of
the darkness into the range of his ken. Probably there were some of his
old acquaintances among them, although such had been the conditions of
semi-darkness, in which alone he had ever seen any of them, that it was
not like he would be able to identify any of them.

On they marched solemnly, almost in silence, for either with feet or
voice the creatures seldom made any noise.  By the time they reached
the outside of the wood it was morning twilight.  Into the open trooped
the strange torrent of deformity, each one following Lina.  Suddenly
she stopped, turned towards them, and said something which they
understood, although to Curdie's ear the sounds she made seemed to have
no articulation.  Instantly they all turned, and vanished in the
forest, and Lina alone came trotting lithely and clumsily after her
master.



CHAPTER 13

The Baker's Wife

They were now passing through a lovely country of hill and dale and
rushing stream.  The hills were abrupt, with broken chasms for
watercourses, and deep little valleys full of trees.  But now and then
they came to a larger valley, with a fine river, whose level banks and
the adjacent meadows were dotted all over with red and white kine,
while on the fields above, that sloped a little to the foot of the
hills, grew oats and barley and wheat, and on the sides of the hills
themselves vines hung and chestnuts rose.

They came at last to a broad, beautiful river, up which they must go to
arrive at the city of Gwyntystorm, where the king had his court.  As
they went the valley narrowed, and then the river, but still it was
wide enough for large boats.  After this, while the river kept its
size, the banks narrowed, until there was only room for a road between
the river and the great Cliffs that overhung it. At last river and road
took a sudden turn, and lo! a great rock in the river, which dividing
flowed around it, and on the top of the rock the city, with lofty walls
and towers and battlements, and above the city the palace of the king,
built like a strong castle. But the fortifications had long been
neglected, for the whole country was now under one king, and all men
said there was no more need for weapons or walls.  No man pretended to
love his neighbour, but every one said he knew that peace and quiet
behaviour was the best thing for himself, and that, he said, was quite
as useful, and a great deal more reasonable.  The city was prosperous
and rich, and if everybody was not comfortable, everybody else said he
ought to be.

When Curdie got up opposite the mighty rock, which sparkled all over
with crystals, he found a narrow bridge, defended by gates and
portcullis and towers with loopholes.  But the gates stood wide open,
and were dropping from their great hinges; the portcullis was eaten
away with rust, and clung to the grooves evidently immovable; while the
loopholed towers had neither floor nor roof, and their tops were fast
filling up their interiors.  Curdie thought it a pity, if only for
their old story, that they should be thus neglected.  But everybody in
the city regarded these signs of decay as the best proof of the
prosperity of the place.  Commerce and self-interest, they said, had
got the better of violence, and the troubles of the past were whelmed
in the riches that flowed in at their open gates.

Indeed, there was one sect of philosophers in it which taught that it
would be better to forget all the past history of the city, were it not
that its former imperfections taught its present inhabitants how
superior they and their times were, and enabled them to glory over
their ancestors.  There were even certain quacks in the city who
advertised pills for enabling people to think well of themselves, and
some few bought of them, but most laughed, and said, with evident
truth, that they did not require them.  Indeed, the general theme of
discourse when they met was, how much wiser they were than their
fathers.

Curdie crossed the river, and began to ascend the winding road that led
up to the city.  They met a good many idlers, and all stared at them.
It was no wonder they should stare, but there was an unfriendliness in
their looks which Curdie did not like.  No one, however, offered them
any molestation: Lina did not invite liberties.  After a long ascent,
they reached the principal gate of the city and entered.

The street was very steep, ascending toward the palace, which rose in
great strength above all the houses.  Just as they entered, a baker,
whose shop was a few doors inside the gate, came out in his white
apron, and ran to the shop of his friend, the barber, on the opposite
side of the way.  But as he ran he stumbled and fell heavily.  Curdie
hastened to help him up, and found he had bruised his forehead badly.
He swore grievously at the stone for tripping him up, declaring it was
the third time he had fallen over it within the last month; and saying
what was the king about that he allowed such a stone to stick up
forever on the main street of his royal residence of Gwyntystorm!  What
was a king for if he would not take care of his people's heads!  And he
stroked his forehead tenderly.

'Was it your head or your feet that ought to bear the blame of your
fall?' asked Curdie.

'Why, you booby of a miner!  My feet, of course,' answered the baker.

'Nay, then,' said Curdie, 'the king can't be to blame.'

'Oh, I see!' said the baker.  'You're laying a trap for me.  Of course,
if you come to that, it was my head that ought to have looked after my
feet.  But it is the king's part to look after us all, and have his
streets smooth.'

'Well, I don't see, said Curdie, 'why the king should take care of the
baker, when the baker's head won't take care of the baker's feet.'

'Who are you to make game of the king's baker?' cried the man in a rage.

But, instead of answering, Curdie went up to the bump on the street
which had repeated itself on the baker's head, and turning the hammer
end of his mattock, struck it such a blow that it flew wide in pieces.
Blow after blow he struck until he had levelled it with the street.

But out flew the barber upon him in a rage. 'What do you break my
window for, you rascal, with your pickaxe?'

'I am very sorry,' said Curdie.  'It must have been a bit of stone that
flew from my mattock.  I couldn't help it, you know.'

'Couldn't help it!  A fine story!  What do you go breaking the rock
for--the very rock upon which the city stands?'

'Look at your friend's forehead,' said Curdie.  'See what a lump he has
got on it with falling over that same stone.'

'What's that to my window?' cried the barber.  'His forehead can mend
itself; my poor window can't.'

'But he's the king's baker,' said Curdie, more and more surprised at
the man's anger.

'What's that to me?  This is a free city.  Every man here takes care of
himself, and the king takes care of us all.  I'll have the price of my
window out of you, or the exchequer shall pay for it.'

Something caught Curdie's eye.  He stooped, picked up a piece of the
stone he had just broken, and put it in his pocket.

'I suppose you are going to break another of my windows with that
stone!' said the barber.

'Oh no,' said Curdie.  'I didn't mean to break your window, and I
certainly won't break another.'

'Give me that stone,' said the barber.

Curdie gave it him, and the barber threw it over the city wall.

'I thought you wanted the stone,' said Curdie.

'No, you fool!' answered the barber.  'What should I want with a stone?'

Curdie stooped and picked up another.

'Give me that stone,' said the barber.

'No,' answered Curdie.  'You have just told me YOU don't want a stone,
and I do.'

The barber took Curdie by the collar.

'Come, now!  You pay me for that window.'

'How much?' asked Curdie.

The barber said, 'A crown.'  But the baker, annoyed at the
heartlessness of the barber, in thinking more of his broken window than
the bump on his friend's forehead, interfered.

'No, no,' he said to Curdie; 'don't you pay any such sum.  A little
pane like that cost only a quarter.'

'Well, to be certain,' said Curdie, 'I'll give a half.'  For he doubted
the baker as well as the barber.  'Perhaps one day, if he finds he has
asked too much, he will bring me the difference.'

'Ha! ha!' laughed the barber.  'A fool and his money are soon parted.'

But as he took the coin from Curdie's hand he grasped it in affected
reconciliation and real satisfaction.  In Curdie's, his was the cold
smooth leathery palm of a monkey.  He looked up, almost expecting to
see him pop the money in his cheek; but he had not yet got so far as
that, though he was well on the road to it: then he would have no other
pocket.

'I'm glad that stone is gone, anyhow,' said the baker.  'It was the
bane of my life.  I had no idea how easy it was to remove it.  Give me
your pickaxes young miner, and I will show you how a baker can make the
stones fly.'

He caught the tool out of Curdie's hand, and flew at one of the
foundation stones of the gateway.  But he jarred his arm terribly,
scarcely chipped the stone, dropped the mattock with a cry of pain, and
ran into his own shop.  Curdie picked up his implement, and, looking
after the baker, saw bread in the window, and followed him in.  But the
baker, ashamed of himself, and thinking he was coming to laugh at him,
popped out of the back door, and when Curdie entered, the baker's wife
came from the bakehouse to serve him. Curdie requested to know the
price of a certain good-sized loaf.

Now the baker's wife had been watching what had passed since first her
husband ran out of the shop, and she liked the look of Curdie. Also she
was more honest than her husband.  Casting a glance to the back door,
she replied:

'That is not the best bread.  I will sell you a loaf of what we bake
for ourselves.'  And when she had spoken she laid a finger on her lips.
'Take care of yourself in this place, MY son,' she added.  'They do not
love strangers.  I was once a stranger here, and I know what I say.'
Then fancying she heard her husband, 'That is a strange animal you
have,' she said, in a louder voice.

'Yes,' answered Curdie.  'She is no beauty, but she is very good, and
we love each other.  Don't we, Lina?'

Lina looked up and whined.  Curdie threw her the half of his loaf,
which she ate, while her master and the baker's wife talked a little.
Then the baker's wife gave them some water, and Curdie having paid for
his loaf, he and Lina went up the street together.



CHAPTER 14

The Dogs of Gwyntystorm

The steep street led them straight up to a large market place with
butchers' shops, about which were many dogs.  The moment they caught
sight of Lina, one and all they came rushing down upon her, giving her
no chance of explaining herself.  When Curdie saw the dogs coming he
heaved up his mattock over his shoulder, and was ready, if they would
have it so.  Seeing him thus prepared to defend his follower, a great
ugly bulldog flew at him.  With the first blow Curdie struck him
through the brain and the brute fell dead at his feet.  But he could
not at once recover his weapon, which stuck in the skull of his foe,
and a huge mastiff, seeing him thus hampered, flew at him next.

Now Lina, who had shown herself so brave upon the road thither, had
grown shy upon entering the city, and kept always at Curdie's heel. But
it was her turn now.  The moment she saw her master in danger she
seemed to go mad with rage.  As the mastiff jumped at Curdie's throat,
Lina flew at him, seized him with her tremendous jaws, gave one roaring
grind, and he lay beside the bulldog with his neck broken.  They were
the best dogs in the market, after the judgement of the butchers of
Gwyntystorm.  Down came their masters, knives in hand.

Curdie drew himself up fearlessly, mattock on shoulder, and awaited
their coming, while at his heel his awful attendant showed not only her
outside fringe of icicle teeth, but a double row of right serviceable
fangs she wore inside her mouth, and her green eyes flashed yellow as
gold.  The butchers, not liking the look of either of them or of the
dogs at their feet, drew back, and began to remonstrate in the manner
of outraged men.

'Stranger,' said the first, 'that bulldog is mine.'

'Take him, then,' said Curdie, indignant.

'You've killed him!'

'Yes--else he would have killed me.'

'That's no business of mine.'

'No?'

'No.'

'That makes it the more mine, then.'

'This sort of thing won't do, you know,' said the other butcher.

'That's true,' said Curdie. 'That's my mastiff,' said the butcher.

'And as he ought to be,' said Curdie.

'Your brute shall be burned alive for it,' said the butcher.

'Not yet,' answered Curdie.  'We have done no wrong.  We were walking
quietly up your street when your dogs flew at us.  If you don't teach
your dogs how to treat strangers, you must take the consequences.'

'They treat them quite properly,' said the butcher.  'What right has
any one to bring an abomination like that into our city?  The horror is
enough to make an idiot of every child in the place.'

'We are both subjects of the king, and my poor animal can't help her
looks.  How would you like to be served like that because you were
ugly?  She's not a bit fonder of her looks than you are--only what can
she do to change them?'

'I'll do to change them,' said the fellow.

Thereupon the butchers brandished their long knives and advanced,
keeping their eyes upon Lina.

'Don't be afraid, Lina,' cried Curdie.  'I'll kill one--you kill the
other.'

Lina gave a howl that might have terrified an army, and crouched ready
to spring.  The butchers turned and ran.

By this time a great crowd had gathered behind the butchers, and in it
a number of boys returning from school who began to stone the
strangers.  It was a way they had with man or beast they did not expect
to make anything by.  One of the stones struck Lina; she caught it in
her teeth and crunched it so that it fell in gravel from her mouth.
Some of the foremost of the crowd saw this, and it terrified them.
They drew back; the rest took fright from their retreat; the panic
spread; and at last the crowd scattered in all directions.  They ran,
and cried out, and said the devil and his dam were come to Gwyntystorm.
So Curdie and Lina were left standing unmolested in the market place.
But the terror of them spread throughout the city, and everybody began
to shut and lock his door so that by the time the setting sun shone
down the street, there was not a shop left open, for fear of the devil
and his horrible dam.  But all the upper windows within sight of them
were crowded with heads watching them where they stood lonely in the
deserted market place.

Curdie looked carefully all round, but could not see one open door. He
caught sight of the sign of an inn, however, and laying down his
mattock, and telling Lina to take care of it, walked up to the door of
it and knocked.  But the people in the house, instead of opening the
door, threw things at him from the windows.  They would not listen to a
word he said, but sent him back to Lina with the blood running down his
face.  When Lina saw that she leaped up in a fury and was rushing at
the house, into which she would certainly have broken; but Curdie
called her, and made her lie down beside him while he bethought him
what next he should do.

'Lina,' he said, 'the people keep their gates open, but their houses
and their hearts shut.'

As if she knew it was her presence that had brought this trouble upon
him, she rose and went round and round him, purring like a tigress, and
rubbing herself against his legs.

Now there was one little thatched house that stood squeezed in between
two tall gables, and the sides of the two great houses shot out
projecting windows that nearly met across the roof of the little one,
so that it lay in the street like a doll's house.  In this house lived
a poor old woman, with a grandchild.  And because she never gossiped or
quarrelled, or chaffered in the market, but went without what she could
not afford, the people called her a witch, and would have done her many
an ill turn if they had not been afraid of her.

Now while Curdie was looking in another direction the door opened, and
out came a little dark-haired, black-eyed, gypsy-looking child, and
toddled across the market place toward the outcasts.  The moment they
saw her coming, Lina lay down flat on the road, and with her two huge
forepaws covered her mouth, while Curdie went to meet her, holding out
his arms.  The little one came straight to him, and held up her mouth
to be kissed.  Then she took him by the hand, and drew him toward the
house, and Curdie yielded to the silent invitation.

But when Lina rose to follow, the child shrank from her, frightened a
little.  Curdie took her up, and holding her on one arm, patted Lina
with the other hand.  Then the child wanted also to pat doggy, as she
called her by a right bountiful stretch of courtesy, and having once
patted her, nothing would serve but Curdie must let her have a ride on
doggy.  So he set her on Lina's back, holding her hand, and she rode
home in merry triumph, all unconscious of the hundreds of eyes staring
at her foolhardiness from the windows about the market place, or the
murmur of deep disapproval that rose from as many lips.

At the door stood the grandmother to receive them.  She caught the
child to her bosom with delight at her courage, welcomed Curdie, and
showed no dread of Lina.  Many were the significant nods exchanged, and
many a one said to another that the devil and the witch were old
friends.  But the woman was only a wise woman, who, having seen how
Curdie and Lina behaved to each other, judged from that what sort they
were, and so made them welcome to her house. She was not like her
fellow townspeople, for that they were strangers recommended them to
her.

The moment her door was shut the other doors began to open, and soon
there appeared little groups here and there about a threshold, while a
few of the more courageous ventured out upon the square--all ready to
make for their houses again, however, upon the least sign of movement
in the little thatched one.

The baker and the barber had joined one of these groups, and were
busily wagging their tongues against Curdie and his horrible beast.

'He can't be honest,' said the barber; 'for he paid me double the worth
of the pane he broke in my window.'

And then he told them how Curdie broke his window by breaking a stone
in the street with his hammer.  There the baker struck in.

'Now that was the stone,' said he, 'over which I had fallen three times
within the last month: could it be by fair means he broke that to
pieces at the first blow?  Just to make up my mind on that point I
tried his own hammer against a stone in the gate; it nearly broke both
my arms, and loosened half the teeth in my head!'



CHAPTER 15

Derba and Barbara

Meantime the wanderers were hospitably entertained by the old woman and
her grandchild and they were all very comfortable and happy together.
Little Barbara sat upon Curdie's knee, and he told her stories about
the mines and his adventures in them.  But he never mentioned the king
or the princess, for all that story was hard to believe.  And he told
her about his mother and father, and how good they were.  And Derba sat
and listened.  At last little Barbara fell asleep in Curdie's arms, and
her grandmother carried her to bed.

It was a poor little house, and Derba gave up her own room to Curdie
because he was honest and talked wisely.  Curdie saw how it was, and
begged her to allow him to lie on the floor, but she would not hear of
it.

In the night he was waked by Lina pulling at him.  As soon as he spoke
to her she ceased, and Curdie, listening, thought he heard someone
trying to get in.  He rose, took his mattock, and went about the house,
listening and watching; but although he heard noises now at one place
now at another, he could not think what they meant for no one appeared.
Certainly, considering how she had frightened them all in the day, it
was not likely any one would attack Lina at night.  By and by the
noises ceased, and Curdie went back to his bed, and slept undisturbed.

In the morning, however, Derba came to him in great agitation, and said
they had fastened up the door, so that she could not get out. Curdie
rose immediately and went with her: they found that not only the door,
but every window in the house was so secured on the outside that it was
impossible to open one of them without using great force.  Poor Derba
looked anxiously in Curdie's face.  He broke out laughing.

'They are much mistaken,' he said, 'if they fancy they could keep Lina
and a miner in any house in Gwyntystorm--even if they built up doors
and windows.'

With that he shouldered his mattock.  But Derba begged him not to make
a hole in her house just yet.  She had plenty for breakfast, she said,
and before it was time for dinner they would know what the people meant
by it.

And indeed they did.  For within an hour appeared one of the chief
magistrates of the city, accompanied by a score of soldiers with drawn
swords, and followed by a great multitude of people, requiring the
miner and his brute to yield themselves, the one that he might be tried
for the disturbance he had occasioned and the injury he had committed,
the other that she might be roasted alive for her part in killing two
valuable and harmless animals belonging to worthy citizens.  The
summons was preceded and followed by flourish of trumpet, and was read
with every formality by the city marshal himself.

The moment he ended, Lina ran into the little passage, and stood
opposite the door.

'I surrender,' cried Curdie.

'Then tie up your brute, and give her here.'

'No, no,' cried Curdie through the door.  'I surrender; but I'm not
going to do your hangman's work.  If you want MY dog, you must take
her.'

'Then we shall set the house on fire, and burn witch and all.'

'It will go hard with us but we shall kill a few dozen of you first,'
cried Curdie.  'We're not the least afraid of you.'  With that Curdie
turned to Derba, and said:

'Don't be frightened.  I have a strong feeling that all will be well.
Surely no trouble will come to you for being good to strangers.'

'But the poor dog!' said Derba.

Now Curdie and Lina understood each other more than a little by this
time, and not only had he seen that she understood the proclamation,
but when she looked up at him after it was read, it was with such a
grin, and such a yellow flash, that he saw also she was determined to
take care of herself.

'The dog will probably give you reason to think a little more of her
ere long,' he answered.  'But now,' he went on, 'I fear I must hurt
your house a little.  I have great confidence, however, that I shall be
able to make up to you for it one day.'

'Never mind the house, if only you can get safe off,' she answered. 'I
don't think they will hurt this precious lamb,' she added, clasping
little Barbara to her bosom.  'For myself, it is all one; I am ready
for anything.'

'It is but a little hole for Lina I want to make,' said Curdie. 'She
can creep through a much smaller one than you would think.'

Again he took his mattock, and went to the back wall.

'They won't burn the house,' he said to himself.  'There is too good a
one on each side of it.'

The tumult had kept increasing every moment, and the city marshal had
been shouting, but Curdie had not listened to him.  When now they heard
the blows of his mattock, there went up a great cry, and the people
taunted the soldiers that they were afraid of a dog and his miner.  The
soldiers therefore made a rush at the door, and cut its fastenings.

The moment they opened it, out leaped Lina, with a roar so unnaturally
horrible that the sword arms of the soldiers dropped by their sides,
paralysed with the terror of that cry; the crowd fled in every
direction, shrieking and yelling with mortal dismay; and without even
knocking down with her tail, not to say biting a man of them with her
pulverizing jaws, Lina vanished--no one knew whither, for not one of
the crowd had had courage to look upon her.

The moment she was gone, Curdie advanced and gave himself up.  The
soldiers were so filled with fear, shame, and chagrin, that they were
ready to kill him on the spot.  But he stood quietly facing them, with
his mattock on his shoulder; and the magistrate wishing to examine him,
and the people to see him made an example of, the soldiers had to
content themselves with taking him.  Partly for derision, partly to
hurt him, they laid his mattock against his back, and tied his arms to
it.

They led him up a very steep street, and up another still, all the
crowd following.  The king's palace-castle rose towering above them;
but they stopped before they reached it, at a low-browed door in a
great, dull, heavy-looking building.

The city marshal opened it with a key which hung at his girdle, and
ordered Curdie to enter.  The place within was dark as night, and while
he was feeling his way with his feet, the marshal gave him a rough
push.  He fell, and rolled once or twice over, unable to help himself
because his hands were tied behind him.

It was the hour of the magistrate's second and more important
breakfast, and until that was over he never found himself capable of
attending to a case with concentration sufficient to the distinguishing
of the side upon which his own advantage lay; and hence was this
respite for Curdie, with time to collect his thoughts.  But indeed he
had very few to collect, for all he had to do, so far as he could see,
was to wait for what would come next. Neither had he much power to
collect them, for he was a good deal shaken.

In a few minutes he discovered, to his great relief, that, from the
projection of the pick end of his mattock beyond his body, the fall had
loosened the ropes tied round it.  He got one hand disengaged, and then
the other; and presently stood free, with his good mattock once more in
right serviceable relation to his arms and legs.



CHAPTER 16

The Mattock

While The magistrate reinvigorated his selfishness with a greedy
breakfast, Curdie found doing nothing in the dark rather tiresome work.
It was useless attempting to think what he should do next, seeing the
circumstances in which he was presently to find himself were altogether
unknown to him.  So he began to think about his father and mother in
their little cottage home, high in the clear air of the open
Mountainside, and the thought, instead of making his dungeon gloomier
by the contrast, made a light in his soul that destroyed the power of
darkness and captivity.

But he was at length startled from his waking dream by a swell in the
noise outside.  All the time there had been a few of the more idle of
the inhabitants about the door, but they had been rather quiet.  Now,
however, the sounds of feet and voices began to grow, and grew so
rapidly that it was plain a multitude was gathering. For the people of
Gwyntystorm always gave themselves an hour of pleasure after their
second breakfast, and what greater pleasure could they have than to see
a stranger abused by the officers of justice?

The noise grew till it was like the roaring of the sea, and that
roaring went on a long time, for the magistrate, being a great man,
liked to know that he was waited for: it added to the enjoyment of his
breakfast, and, indeed, enabled him to eat a little more after he had
thought his powers exhausted.

But at length, in the waves of the human noises rose a bigger wave, and
by the running and shouting and outcry, Curdie learned that the
magistrate was approaching.

Presently came the sound of the great rusty key in the lock, which
yielded with groaning reluctance; the door was thrown back, the light
rushed in, and with it came the voice of the city marshal, calling upon
Curdie, by many legal epithets opprobrious, to come forth and be tried
for his life, inasmuch as he had raised a tumult in His Majesty's city
of Gwyntystorm, troubled the hearts of the king's baker and barber, and
slain the faithful dogs of His Majesty's well-beloved butchers.

He was still reading, and Curdie was still seated in the brown twilight
of the vault, not listening, but pondering with himself how this king
the city marshal talked of could be the same with the Majesty he had
seen ride away on his grand white horse with the Princess Irene on a
cushion before him, when a scream of agonized terror arose on the
farthest skirt of the crowd, and, swifter than flood or flame, the
horror spread shrieking.  In a moment the air was filled with hideous
howling, cries of unspeakable dismay, and the multitudinous noise of
running feet.  The next moment, in at the door of the vault bounded
Lina, her two green eyes flaming yellow as sunflowers, and seeming to
light up the dungeon.  With one spring she threw herself at Curdie's
feet, and laid her head upon them panting.  Then came a rush of two or
three soldiers darkening the doorway, but it was only to lay hold of
the key, pull the door to, and lock it; so that once more Curdie and
Lina were prisoners together.

For a few moments Lina lay panting hard: it is breathless work leaping
and roaring both at once, and that in a way to scatter thousands of
people.  Then she jumped up, and began snuffing about all over the
place; and Curdie saw what he had never seen before--two faint spots of
light cast from her eyes upon the ground, one on each side of her
snuffing nose.  He got out his tinder box--a miner is never without
one--and lighted a precious bit of candle he carried in a division of
it just for a moment, for he must not waste it.

The light revealed a vault without any window or other opening than the
door.  It was very old and much neglected.  The mortar had vanished
from between the stones, and it was half filled with a heap of all
sorts of rubbish, beaten down in the middle, but looser at the sides;
it sloped from the door to the foot of the opposite wall: evidently for
a long time the vault had been left open, and every sort of refuse
thrown into it.  A single minute served for the survey, so little was
there to note.

Meantime, down in the angle between the back wall and the base of the
heap Lina was scratching furiously with all the eighteen great strong
claws of her mighty feet.

'Ah, ha!' said Curdie to himself, catching sight of her, 'if only they
will leave us long enough to ourselves!'

With that he ran to the door, to see if there was any fastening on the
inside.  There was none: in all its long history it never had had one.
But a few blows of the right sort, now from the one, now from the other
end of his mattock, were as good as any bolt, for they so ruined the
lock that no key could ever turn in it again. Those who heard them
fancied he was trying to get out, and laughed spitefully.  As soon as
he had done, he extinguished his candle, and went down to Lina.

She had reached the hard rock which formed the floor of the dungeon,
and was now clearing away the earth a little wider. Presently she
looked up in his face and whined, as much as to say, 'My paws are not
hard enough to get any farther.'

'Then get out of my way, Lina,' said Curdie, and mind you keep your
eyes shining, for fear I should hit you.'

So saying, he heaved his mattock, and assailed with the hammer end of
it the spot she had cleared.

The rock was very hard, but when it did break it broke in good-sized
pieces.  Now with hammer, now with pick, he worked till he was weary,
then rested, and then set to again.  He could not tell how the day
went, as he had no light but the lamping of Lina's eyes.  The darkness
hampered him greatly, for he would not let Lina come close enough to
give him all the light she could, lest he should strike her.  So he
had, every now and then, to feel with his hands to know how he was
getting on, and to discover in what direction to strike: the exact spot
was a mere imagination.

He was getting very tired and hungry, and beginning to lose heart a
little, when out of the ground, as if he had struck a spring of it,
burst a dull, gleamy, lead-coloured light, and the next moment he heard
a hollow splash and echo.  A piece of rock had fallen out of the floor,
and dropped into water beneath.  Already Lina, who had been lying a few
yards off all the time he worked, was on her feet and peering through
the hole.  Curdie got down on his hands and knees, and looked.  They
were over what seemed a natural cave in the rock, to which apparently
the river had access, for, at a great distance below, a faint light was
gleaming upon water.  If they could but reach it, they might get out;
but even if it was deep enough, the height was very dangerous.  The
first thing, whatever might follow, was to make the hole larger.  It
was comparatively easy to break away the sides of it, and in the course
of another hour he had it large enough to get through.

And now he must reconnoitre.  He took the rope they had tied him
with--for Curdie's hindrances were always his furtherance--and fastened
one end of it by a slipknot round the handle of his pickaxes then
dropped the other end through, and laid the pickaxe so that, when he
was through himself, and hanging on the edge, he could place it across
the hole to support him on the rope.  This done, he took the rope in
his hands, and, beginning to descend, found himself in a narrow cleft
widening into a cave.  His rope was not very long, and would not do
much to lessen the force of his fall--he thought to himself--if he
should have to drop into the water; but he was not more than a couple
of yards below the dungeon when he spied an opening on the opposite
side of the cleft: it might be but a shadow hole, or it might lead them
out.  He dropped himself a little below its level, gave the rope a
swing by pushing his feet against the side of the cleft, and so
penduled himself into it.  Then he laid a stone on the end of the rope
that it should not forsake him, called to Lina, whose yellow eyes were
gleaming over the mattock grating above, to watch there till he
returned, and went cautiously in.  It proved a passage, level for some
distance, then sloping gently up.  He advanced carefully, feeling his
way as he went.  At length he was stopped by a door--a small door,
studded with iron.  But the wood was in places so much decayed that
some of the bolts had dropped out, and he felt sure of being able to
open it.  He returned, therefore, to fetch Lina and his mattock.
Arrived at the cleft, his strong miner arms bore him swiftly up along
the rope and through the hole into the dungeon.  There he undid the
rope from his mattock, and making Lina take the end of it in her teeth,
and get through the hole, he lowered her--it was all he could do, she
was so heavy.  When she came opposite the passage, with a slight push
of her tail she shot herself into it, and let go the rope, which Curdie
drew up.

Then he lighted his candle and searching in the rubbish found a bit of
iron to take the place of his pickaxe across the hole.  Then he
searched again in the rubbish, and found half an old shutter.  This he
propped up leaning a little over the hole, with a bit of stick, and
heaped against the back of it a quantity of the loosened earth. Next he
tied his mattock to the end of the rope, dropped it, and let it hang.
Last, he got through the hole himself, and pulled away the propping
stick, so that the shutter fell over the hole with a quantity of earth
on the top of it.  A few motions of hand over hand, and he swung
himself and his mattock into the passage beside Lina.

There he secured the end of the rope, and they went on together to the
door.



CHAPTER 17

The Wine Cellar

He lighted his candle and examined it.  Decayed and broken as it was,
it was strongly secured in its place by hinges on the one side, and
either lock or bolt, he could not tell which, on the other.  A brief
use of his pocket-knife was enough to make room for his hand and arm to
get through, and then he found a great iron bolt--but so rusty that he
could not move it.

Lina whimpered.  He took his knife again, made the hole bigger, and
stood back.  In she shot her small head and long neck, seized the bolt
with her teeth, and dragged it, grating and complaining, back. A push
then opened the door.  It was at the foot of a short flight of steps.
They ascended, and at the top Curdie found himself in a space which,
from the echo to his stamp, appeared of some size, though of what sort
he could not at first tell, for his hands, feeling about, came upon
nothing.  Presently, however, they fell on a great thing: it was a wine
cask.

He was just setting out to explore the place thoroughly, when he heard
steps coming down a stair.  He stood still, not knowing whether the
door would open an inch from his nose or twenty yards behind his back.
It did neither.  He heard the key turn in the lock, and a stream of
light shot in, ruining the darkness, about fifteen yards away on his
right.

A man carrying a candle in one hand and a large silver flagon in the
other, entered, and came toward him.  The light revealed a row of huge
wine casks, that stretched away into the darkness of the other end of
the long vault.  Curdie retreated into the recess of the stair, and
peeping round the corner of it, watched him, thinking what he could do
to prevent him from locking them in.  He came on and on, until curdie
feared he would pass the recess and see them.  He was just preparing to
rush out, and master him before he should give alarm, not in the least
knowing what he should do next, when, to his relief, the man stopped at
the third cask from where he stood.  He set down his light on the top
of it, removed what seemed a large vent-peg, and poured into the cask a
quantity of something from the flagon.  Then he turned to the next
cask, drew some wine, rinsed the flagon, threw the wine away, drew and
rinsed and threw away again, then drew and drank, draining to the
bottom.  Last of all, he filled the flagon from the cask he had first
visited, replaced then the vent-peg, took up his candle, and turned
toward the door.

'There is something wrong here!' thought Curdie.

'Speak to him, Lina,' he whispered.

The sudden howl she gave made Curdie himself start and tremble for a
moment.  As to the man, he answered Lina's with another horrible howl,
forced from him by the convulsive shudder of every muscle of his body,
then reeled gasping to and fro, and dropped his candle. But just as
Curdie expected to see him fall dead he recovered himself, and flew to
the door, through which he darted, leaving it open behind him.  The
moment he ran, Curdie stepped out, picked up the candle still alight,
sped after him to the door, drew out the key, and then returned to the
stair and waited.  In a few minutes he heard the sound of many feet and
voices.  Instantly he turned the tap of the cask from which the man had
been drinking, set the candle beside it on the floor, went down the
steps and out of the little door, followed by Lina, and closed it
behind them.

Through the hole in it he could see a little, and hear all.  He could
see how the light of many candles filled the place, and could hear how
some two dozen feet ran hither and thither through the echoing cellar;
he could hear the clash of iron, probably spits and pokers, now and
then; and at last heard how, finding nothing remarkable except the best
wine running to waste, they all turned on the butler and accused him of
having fooled them with a drunken dream.  He did his best to defend
himself, appealing to the evidence of their own senses that he was as
sober as they were. They replied that a fright was no less a fright
that the cause was imaginary, and a dream no less a dream that the
fright had waked him from it.

When he discovered, and triumphantly adduced as corroboration, that the
key was gone from the door, they said it merely showed how drunk he had
been--either that or how frightened, for he had certainly dropped it.
In vain he protested that he had never taken it out of the lock--that
he never did when he went in, and certainly had not this time stopped
to do so when he came out; they asked him why he had to go to the
cellar at such a time of the day, and said it was because he had
already drunk all the wine that was left from dinner.  He said if he
had dropped the key, the key was to be found, and they must help him to
find it.  They told him they wouldn't move a peg for him.  He declared,
with much language, he would have them all turned out of the king's
service.  They said they would swear he was drunk.

And so positive were they about it, that at last the butler himself
began to think whether it was possible they could be in the right. For
he knew that sometimes when he had been drunk he fancied things had
taken place which he found afterward could not have happened. Certain
of his fellow servants, however, had all the time a doubt whether the
cellar goblin had not appeared to him, or at least roared at him, to
protect the wine.  In any case nobody wanted to find the key for him;
nothing could please them better than that the door of the wine cellar
should never more be locked.  By degrees the hubbub died away, and they
departed, not even pulling to the door, for there was neither handle
nor latch to it.

As soon as they were gone, Curdie returned, knowing now that they were
in the wine cellar of the palace, as indeed, he had suspected. Finding
a pool of wine in a hollow of the floor, Lina lapped it up eagerly: she
had had no breakfast, and was now very thirsty as well as hungry.  Her
master was in a similar plight, for he had but just begun to eat when
the magistrate arrived with the soldiers.  If only they were all in
bed, he thought, that he might find his way to the larder!  For he said
to himself that, as he was sent there by the young princess's
great-great-grandmother to serve her or her father in some way, surely
he must have a right to his food in the Palace, without which he could
do nothing.  He would go at once and reconnoitre.

So he crept up the stair that led from the cellar.  At the top was a
door, opening on a long passage dimly lighted by a lamp.  He told Lina
to lie down upon the stair while he went on.  At the end of the passage
he found a door ajar, and, peering through, saw right into a great
stone hall, where a huge fire was blazing, and through which men in the
king's livery were constantly coming and going. Some also in the same
livery were lounging about the fire.  He noted that their colours were
the same as those he himself, as king's miner, wore; but from what he
had seen and heard of the habits of the place, he could not hope they
would treat him the better for that.

The one interesting thing at the moment, however, was the plentiful
supper with which the table was spread.  It was something at least to
stand in sight of food, and he was unwilling to turn his back on the
prospect so long as a share in it was not absolutely hopeless. Peeping
thus, he soon made UP his mind that if at any moment the hall should be
empty, he would at that moment rush in and attempt to carry off a dish.
That he might lose no time by indecision, he selected a large pie upon
which to pounce instantaneously.  But after he had watched for some
minutes, it did not seem at all likely the chance would arrive before
suppertime, and he was just about to turn away and rejoin Lina, when he
saw that there was not a person in the place.  Curdie never made up his
mind and then hesitated.  He darted in, seized the pie, and bore it
swiftly and noiselessly to the cellar stair.



CHAPTER 18

The King's Kitchen

Back to the cellar Curdie and Lina sped with their booty, where, seated
on the steps, Curdie lighted his bit of candle for a moment. A very
little bit it was now, but they did not waste much of it in examination
of the pie; that they effected by a more summary process.  Curdie
thought it the nicest food he had ever tasted, and between them they
soon ate it up.  Then Curdie would have thrown the dish along with the
bones into the water, that there might be no traces of them; but he
thought of his mother, and hid it instead; and the very next minute
they wanted it to draw some wine into.  He was careful it should be
from the cask of which he had seen the butler drink.

Then they sat down again upon the steps, and waited until the house
should be quiet.  For he was there to do something, and if it did not
come to him in the cellar, he must go to meet it in other places.
Therefore, lest he should fall asleep, he set the end of the helve of
his mattock on the ground, and seated himself on the cross part,
leaning against the wall, so that as long as he kept awake he should
rest, but the moment he began to fall asleep he must fall awake
instead.  He quite expected some of the servants would visit the cellar
again that night, but whether it was that they were afraid of each
other, or believed more of the butler's story than they had chosen to
allow, not one of them appeared.

When at length he thought he might venture, he shouldered his mattock
and crept up the stair.  The lamp was out in the passage, but he could
not miss his way to the servants' hall.  Trusting to Lina's quickness
in concealing herself, he took her with him.

When they reached the hall they found it quiet and nearly dark. The
last of the great fire was glowing red, but giving little light.
Curdie stood and warmed himself for a few moments: miner as he was, he
had found the cellar cold to sit in doing nothing; and standing thus he
thought of looking if there were any bits of candle about.  There were
many candlesticks on the supper table, but to his disappointment and
indignation their candles seemed to have been all left to burn out, and
some of them, indeed, he found still hot in the neck.

Presently, one after another, he came upon seven men fast asleep, most
of them upon tables, one in a chair, and one on the floor. They seemed,
from their shape and colour, to have eaten and drunk so much that they
might be burned alive without wakening.  He grasped the hand of each in
succession, and found two ox hoofs, three pig hoofs, one concerning
which he could not be sure whether it was the hoof of a donkey or a
pony, and one dog's paw.  'A nice set of people to be about a king!'
thought Curdie to himself, and turned again to his candle hunt.  He did
at last find two or three little pieces, and stowed them away in his
pockets.  They now left the hall by another door, and entered a short
passage, which led them to the huge kitchen, vaulted and black with
smoke.  There, too, the fire was still burning, so that he was able to
see a little of the state of things in this quarter also.

The place was dirty and disorderly.  In a recess, on a heap of
brushwood, lay a kitchen-maid, with a table cover around her, and a
skillet in her hand: evidently she too had been drinking.  In another
corner lay a page, and Curdie noted how like his dress was to his own.
In the cinders before the hearth were huddled three dogs and five cats,
all fast asleep, while the rats were running about the floor.  Curdie's
heart ached to think of the lovely child-princess living over such a
sty.  The mine was a paradise to a palace with such servants in it.

Leaving the kitchen, he got into the region of the sculleries. There
horrible smells were wandering about, like evil spirits that come forth
with the darkness.  He lighted a candle--but only to see ugly sights.
Everywhere was filth and disorder.  Mangy turnspit dogs were lying
about, and grey rats were gnawing at refuse in the sinks.  It was like
a hideous dream.  He felt as if he should never get out of it, and
longed for one glimpse of his mother's poor little kitchen, so clean
and bright and airy. Turning from it at last in miserable disgust, he
almost ran back through the kitchen, re-entered the hall, and crossed
it to another door.

It opened upon a wider passage leading to an arch in a stately
corridor, all its length lighted by lamps in niches.  At the end of it
was a large and beautiful hall, with great pillars.  There sat three
men in the royal livery, fast asleep, each in a great armchair, with
his feet on a huge footstool.  They looked like fools dreaming
themselves kings; and Lina looked as if she longed to throttle them.
At one side of the hall was the grand staircase, and they went up.

Everything that now met Curdie's eyes was rich--not glorious like the
splendours of the mountain cavern, but rich and soft--except where, now
and then, some rough old rib of the ancient fortress came through, hard
and discoloured.  Now some dark bare arch of stone, now some rugged and
blackened pillar, now some huge beam, brown with the smoke and dust of
centuries, looked like a thistle in the midst of daisies, or a rock in
a smooth lawn.

They wandered about a good while, again and again finding themselves
where they had been before.  Gradually, however, Curdie was gaining
some idea of the place.  By and by Lina began to look frightened, and
as they went on Curdie saw that she looked more and more frightened.
Now, by this time he had come to understand that what made her look
frightened was always the fear of frightening, and he therefore
concluded they must be drawing nigh to somebody.

At last, in a gorgeously painted gallery, he saw a curtain of crimson,
and on the curtain a royal crown wrought in silks and stones.  He felt
sure this must be the king's chamber, and it was here he was wanted;
or, if it was not the place he was bound for, something would meet him
and turn him aside; for he had come to think that so long as a man
wants to do right he may go where he can: when he can go no farther,
then it is not the way.  'Only,' said his father, in assenting to the
theory, 'he must really want to do right, and not merely fancy he does.
He must want it with his heart and will, and not with his rag of a
tongue.'

So he gently lifted the corner of the curtain, and there behind it was
a half-open door.  He entered, and the moment he was in, Lina stretched
herself along the threshold between the curtain and the door.



CHAPTER 19

The King's Chamber

He found himself in a large room, dimly lighted by a silver lamp that
hung from the ceiling.  Far at the other end was a great bed,
surrounded with dark heavy curtains.  He went softly toward it, his
heart beating fast.  It was a dreadful thing to be alone in the king's
chamber at the dead of night.  To gain courage he had to remind himself
of the beautiful princess who had sent him.

But when he was about halfway to the bed, a figure appeared from the
farther side of it, and came towards him, with a hand raised warningly.
He stood still.  The light was dim, and he could distinguish little
more than the outline of a young girl.  But though the form he saw was
much taller than the princess he remembered, he never doubted it was
she.  For one thing, he knew that most girls would have been frightened
to see him there in the dead of the night, but like a true princess,
and the princess he used to know, she walked straight on to meet him.
As she came she lowered the hand she had lifted, and laid the
forefinger of it upon her lips.  Nearer and nearer, quite near, close
up to him she came, then stopped, and stood a moment looking at him.

'You are Curdie,' she said.

'And you are the Princess Irene,' he returned.

'Then we know each other still,' she said, with a sad smile of
pleasure.  'You will help me.'

'That I will,' answered Curdie.  He did not say, 'If I can'; for he
knew that what he was sent to do, that he could do.  'May I kiss your
hand, little Princess?'

She was only between nine and ten, though indeed she looked several
years older, and her eyes almost those of a grown woman, for she had
had terrible trouble of late.

She held out her hand.

'I am not the little princess any more.  I have grown up since I saw
you last, Mr Miner.'

The smile which accompanied the words had in it a strange mixture of
playfulness and sadness.

'So I see, Miss Princess,' returned Curdie; 'and therefore, being more
of a princess, you are the more my princess.  Here I am, sent by your
great-great-grandmother, to be your servant.  May I ask why you are up
so late, Princess?'

'Because my father wakes so frightened, and I don't know what he would
do if he didn't find me by his bedside.  There! he's waking now.'

She darted off to the side of the bed she had come from.

Curdie stood where he was.

A voice altogether unlike what he remembered of the mighty, noble king
on his white horse came from the bed, thin, feeble, hollow, and husky,
and in tone like that of a petulant child:

'I will not, I will not.  I am a king, and I will be a king.  I hate
you and despise you, and you shall not torture me!'

'Never mind them, Father dear,' said the princess.  'I am here, and
they shan't touch you.  They dare not, you know, so long as you defy
them.'

'They want my crown, darling; and I can't give them my crown, can I?
For what is a king without his crown?'

'They shall never have your crown, my king,' said Irene.  'Here it
is--all safe.  I am watching it for you.'

Curdie drew near the bed on the other side.  There lay the grand old
king--he looked grand still, and twenty years older.  His body was
pillowed high; his beard descended long and white over the crimson
coverlid; and his crown, its diamonds and emeralds gleaming in the
twilight of the curtains, lay in front of him, his long thin old hands
folded round it, and the ends of his beard straying among the lovely
stones.  His face was like that of a man who had died fighting nobly;
but one thing made it dreadful: his eyes, while they moved about as if
searching in this direction and in that, looked more dead than his
face.  He saw neither his daughter nor his crown: it was the voice of
the one and the touch of the other that comforted him.  He kept
murmuring what seemed words, but was unintelligible to Curdie,
although, to judge from the look of Irene's face, she learned and
concluded from it.

By degrees his voice sank away and the murmuring ceased, although still
his lips moved.  Thus lay the old king on his bed, slumbering with his
crown between his hands; on one side of him stood a lovely little
maiden, with blue eyes, and brown hair going a little back from her
temples, as if blown by a wind that no one felt but herself; and on the
other a stalwart young miner, with his mattock over his shoulder.
Stranger sight still was Lina lying along the threshold--only nobody
saw her just then.

A moment more and the king's lips ceased to move.  His breathing had
grown regular and quiet.  The princess gave a sigh of relief, and came
round to Curdie.

'We can talk a little now,' she said, leading him toward the middle of
the room.  'My father will sleep now till the doctor wakes him to give
him his medicine.  It is not really medicine, though, but wine.
Nothing but that, the doctor says, could have kept him so long alive.
He always comes in the middle of the night to give it him with his own
hands.  But it makes me cry to see him wake up when so nicely asleep.'

'What sort of man is your doctor?' asked Curdie.

'Oh, such a dear, good, kind gentleman!' replied the princess.  'He
speaks so softly, and is so sorry for his dear king!  He will be here
presently, and you shall see for yourself.  You will like him very
much.'

'Has your king-father been long ill?' asked Curdie.

'A whole year now,' she replied.  'Did you not know?  That's how your
mother never got the red petticoat my father promised her. The lord
chancellor told me that not only Gwyntystorm but the whole land was
mourning over the illness of the good man.'

Now Curdie himself had not heard a word of His Majesty's illness, and
had no ground for believing that a single soul in any place he had
visited on his journey had heard of it.  Moreover, although mention had
been made of His Majesty again and again in his hearing since he came
to Gwyntystorm, never once had he heard an allusion to the state of his
health.  And now it dawned upon him also that he had never heard the
least expression of love to him.  But just for the time he thought it
better to say nothing on either point.

'Does the king wander like this every night?' he asked.

'Every night,' answered Irene, shaking her head mournfully.  'That is
why I never go to bed at night.  He is better during the day--a little,
and then I sleep--in the dressing room there, to be with him in a
moment if he should call me.  It is so sad he should have only me and
not my mamma!  A princess is nothing to a queen!'

'I wish he would like me,' said Curdie, 'for then I might watch by him
at night, and let you go to bed, Princess.'

'Don't you know then?' returned Irene, in wonder.  'How was it you
came?  Ah!  You said my grandmother sent you.  But I thought you knew
that he wanted you.'

And again she opened wide her blue stars.

'Not I,' said Curdie, also bewildered, but very glad.

'He used to be constantly saying--he was not so ill then as he is
now--that he wished he had you about him.'

'And I never to know it!' said Curdie, with displeasure.

'The master of the horse told papa's own secretary that he had written
to the miner-general to find you and send you up; but the miner-general
wrote back to the master of the horse, and he told the secretary, and
the secretary told my father, that they had searched every mine in the
kingdom and could hear nothing of you. My father gave a great sigh, and
said he feared the goblins had got you, after all, and your father and
mother were dead of grief.  And he has never mentioned you since,
except when wandering.  I cried very much.  But one of my grandmother's
pigeons with its white wing flashed a message to me through the window
one day, and then I knew that my Curdie wasn't eaten by the goblins,
for my grandmother wouldn't have taken care of him one time to let him
be eaten the next.  Where were you, Curdie, that they couldn't find
you?'

'We will talk about that another time, when we are not expecting the
doctor,' said Curdie.

As he spoke, his eyes fell upon something shining on the table under
the lamp.  His heart gave a great throb, and he went nearer. Yes, there
could be no doubt--it was the same flagon that the butler had filled in
the wine cellar.

'It looks worse and worse!'he said to himself, and went back to Irene,
where she stood half dreaming.

'When will the doctor be here?' he asked once more--this time hurriedly.

The question was answered--not by the princess, but by something which
that instant tumbled heavily into the room.  Curdie flew toward it in
vague terror about Lina.

On the floor lay a little round man, puffing and blowing, and uttering
incoherent language.  Curdie thought of his mattock, and ran and laid
it aside.

'Oh, dear Dr Kelman!' cried the princess, running up and taking hold of
his arm; 'I am so sorry!'  She pulled and pulled, but might almost as
well have tried to set up a cannon ball.  'I hope you have not hurt
yourself?'

'Not at all, not at all,' said the doctor, trying to smile and to rise
both at once, but finding it impossible to do either.

'If he slept on the floor he would be late for breakfast,' said Curdie
to himself, and held out his hand to help him.

But when he took hold of it, Curdie very nearly let him fall again, for
what he held was not even a foot: it was the belly of a creeping thing.
He managed, however, to hold both his peace and his grasp, and pulled
the doctor roughly on his legs--such as they were.

'Your Royal Highness has rather a thick mat at the door,' said the
doctor, patting his palms together.  'I hope my awkwardness may not
have startled His Majesty.'

While he talked Curdie went to the door: Lina was not there.

The doctor approached the bed.

'And how has my beloved king slept tonight?' he asked.

'No better,' answered Irene, with a mournful shake of her head.

'Ah, that is very well!' returned the doctor, his fall seeming to have
muddled either his words or his meaning.  'When we give him his wine,
he will be better still.'

Curdie darted at the flagon, and lifted it high, as if he had expected
to find it full, but had found it empty.

'That stupid butler!  I heard them say he was drunk!' he cried in a
loud whisper, and was gliding from the room.

'Come here with that flagon, you!  Page!' cried the doctor. Curdie came
a few steps toward him with the flagon dangling from his hand, heedless
of the gushes that fell noiseless on the thick carpet.

'Are you aware, young man,' said the doctor, 'that it is not every wine
can do His Majesty the benefit I intend he should derive from my
prescription?'

'Quite aware, sir, answered Curdie.  'The wine for His Majesty's use is
in the third cask from the corner.'

'Fly, then,' said the doctor, looking satisfied.

Curdie stopped outside the curtain and blew an audible breath--no more;
up came Lina noiseless as a shadow.  He showed her the flagon.

'The cellar, Lina: go,' he said.

She galloped away on her soft feet, and Curdie had indeed to fly to
keep up with her.  Not once did she make even a dubious turn.  From the
king's gorgeous chamber to the cold cellar they shot.  Curdie dashed
the wine down the back stair, rinsed the flagon out as he had seen the
butler do, filled it from the cask of which he had seen the butler
drink, and hastened with it up again to the king's room.

The little doctor took it, poured out a full glass, smelt, but did not
taste it, and set it down.  Then he leaned over the bed, shouted in the
king's ear, blew upon his eyes, and pinched his arm: Curdie thought he
saw him run something bright into it.  At last the king half woke.  The
doctor seized the glass, raised his head, poured the wine down his
throat, and let his head fall back on the pillow again.  Tenderly
wiping his beard, and bidding the princess good night in paternal
tones, he then took his leave.  Curdie would gladly have driven his
pick into his head, but that was not in his commission, and he let him
go.  The little round man looked very carefully to his feet as he
crossed the threshold.

'That attentive fellow of a page has removed the mat,' he said to
himself, as he walked along the corridor.  'I must remember him.'



CHAPTER 20

Counterplotting

Curdie was already sufficiently enlightened as to how things were
going, to see that he must have the princess of one mind with him, and
they must work together.  It was clear that among those about the king
there was a plot against him: for one thing, they had agreed in a lie
concerning himself; and it was plain also that the doctor was working
out a design against the health and reason of His Majesty, rendering
the question of his life a matter of little moment.  It was in itself
sufficient to justify the worst fears, that the people outside the
palace were ignorant of His Majesty's condition: he believed those
inside it also--the butler excepted--were ignorant of it as well.
Doubtless His Majesty's councillors desired to alienate the hearts of
his subjects from their sovereign.  Curdie's idea was that they
intended to kill the king, marry the princess to one of themselves, and
found a new dynasty; but whatever their purpose, there was treason in
the palace of the worst sort: they were making and keeping the king
incapable, in order to effect that purpose.  The first thing to be seen
to, therefore, was that His Majesty should neither eat morsel nor drink
drop of anything prepared for him in the palace.  Could this have been
managed without the princess, Curdie would have preferred leaving her
in ignorance of the horrors from which he sought to deliver her.  He
feared also the danger of her knowledge betraying itself to the evil
eyes about her; but it must be risked and she had always been a wise
child.

Another thing was clear to him--that with such traitors no terms of
honour were either binding or possible, and that, short of lying, he
might use any means to foil them.  And he could not doubt that the old
princess had sent him expressly to frustrate their plans.

While he stood thinking thus with himself, the princess was earnestly
watching the king, with looks of childish love and womanly tenderness
that went to Curdie's heart.  Now and then with a great fan of peacock
feathers she would fan him very softly; now and then, seeing a cloud
begin to gather upon the sky of his sleeping face, she would climb upon
the bed, and bending to his ear whisper into it, then draw back and
watch again--generally to see the cloud disperse.  In his deepest
slumber, the soul of the king lay open to the voice of his child, and
that voice had power either to change the aspect of his visions, or,
which was better still, to breathe hope into his heart, and courage to
endure them.

Curdie came near, and softly called her.

'I can't leave Papa just yet,' she returned, in a low voice.

'I will wait,' said Curdie; 'but I want very much to say something.'

In a few minutes she came to him where he stood under the lamp.

'Well, Curdie, what is it?' she said.

'Princess,' he replied, 'I want to tell you that I have found why your
grandmother sent me.'

'Come this way, then, she answered, 'where I can see the face of my
king.'

Curdie placed a chair for her in the spot she chose, where she would be
near enough to mark any slightest change on her father's countenance,
yet where their low-voiced talk would not disturb him. There he sat
down beside her and told her all the story--how her grandmother had
sent her good pigeon for him, and how she had instructed him, and sent
him there without telling him what he had to do.  Then he told her what
he had discovered of the state of things generally in Gwyntystorm, and
especially what he had heard and seen in the palace that night.

'Things are in a bad state enough,' he said in conclusion--'lying and
selfishness and inhospitality and dishonesty everywhere; and to crown
all, they speak with disrespect of the good king, and not a man knows
he is ill.'

'You frighten me dreadfully,' said Irene, trembling.

'You must be brave for your king's sake,' said Curdie.

'Indeed I will,' she replied, and turned a long loving look upon the
beautiful face of her father.  'But what is to be done?  And how am I
to believe such horrible things of Dr Kelman?'

'My dear Princess,' replied Curdie, 'you know nothing of him but his
face and his tongue, and they are both false.  Either you must beware
of him, or you must doubt your grandmother and me; for I tell you, by
the gift she gave me of testing hands, that this man is a snake.  That
round body he shows is but the case of a serpent. Perhaps the creature
lies there, as in its nest, coiled round and round inside.'

'Horrible!' said Irene.

'Horrible indeed; but we must not try to get rid of horrible things by
refusing to look at them, and saying they are not there.  Is not your
beautiful father sleeping better since he had the wine?'

'Yes.'

'Does he always sleep better after having it?'

She reflected an instant.

'No; always worse--till tonight,' she answered.

'Then remember that was the wine I got him--not what the butler drew.
Nothing that passes through any hand in the house except yours or mine
must henceforth, till he is well, reach His Majesty's lips.'

'But how, dear Curdie?' said the princess, almost crying.

'That we must contrive,' answered Curdie.  'I know how to take care of
the wine; but for his food--now we must think.'

'He takes hardly any,' said the princess, with a pathetic shake of her
little head which Curdie had almost learned to look for.

'The more need,' he replied, 'there should be no poison in it.' Irene
shuddered.  'As soon as he has honest food he will begin to grow
better.  And you must be just as careful with yourself, Princess,'
Curdie went on, 'for you don't know when they may begin to poison you,
too.'

'There's no fear of me; don't talk about me,' said Irene.  'The good
food!  How are we to get it, Curdie?  That is the whole question.'

'I am thinking hard,' answered Curdie.  'The good food?  Let me
see--let me see!  Such servants as I saw below are sure to have the
best of everything for themselves: I will go an see what I can find on
their table.'

'The chancellor sleeps in the house, and he and the master of the
king's horse always have their supper together in a room off the great
hall, to the right as you go down the stairs,' said Irene. 'I would go
with you, but I dare not leave my father.  Alas!  He scarcely ever
takes more than a mouthful.  I can't think how he lives!  And the very
thing he would like, and often asks for--a bit of bread--I can hardly
ever get for him: Dr Kelman has forbidden it, and says it is nothing
less than poison to him.'

'Bread at least he shall have,' said Curdie; 'and that, with the honest
wine, will do as well as anything, I do believe.  I will go at once and
look for some.  But I want you to see Lina first, and know her, lest,
coming upon her by accident at any time, you should be frightened.'

'I should like much to see her,' said the princess.

Warning her not to be startled by her ugliness, he went to the door and
called her.

She entered, creeping with downcast head, and dragging her tail over
the floor behind her.  Curdie watched the princess as the frightful
creature came nearer and nearer.  One shudder went from head to foot,
and next instant she stepped to meet her.  Lina dropped flat on the
floor, and covered her face with her two big paws.  It went to the
heart of the princess: in a moment she was on her knees beside her,
stroking her ugly head, and patting her all over.

'Good dog!  Dear ugly dog!' she said.

Lina whimpered.

'I believe,' said Curdie, 'from what your grandmother told me, that
Lina is a woman, and that she was naughty, but is now growing good.'

Lina had lifted her head while Irene was caressing her; now she dropped
it again between her paws; but the princess took it in her hands, and
kissed the forehead betwixt the gold-green eyes.

'Shall I take her with me or leave her?' asked Curdie.

'Leave her, poor dear,' said Irene, and Curdie, knowing the way now,
went without her.

He took his way first to the room the princess had spoken of, and there
also were the remains of supper; but neither there nor in the kitchen
could he find a scrap of plain wholesome-looking bread.  So he returned
and told her that as soon as it was light he would go into the city for
some, and asked her for a handkerchief to tie it in.  If he could not
bring it himself, he would send it by Lina, who could keep out of sight
better than he, and as soon as all was quiet at night he would come to
her again.  He also asked her to tell the king that he was in the
house.  His hope lay in the fact that bakers everywhere go to work
early.  But it was yet much too early.  So he persuaded the princess to
lie down, promising to call her if the king should stir.



CHAPTER 21

The Loaf

His Majesty slept very quietly.  The dawn had grown almost day, and
still Curdie lingered, unwilling to disturb the princess.

At last, however, he called her, and she was in the room in a moment.
She had slept, she said, and felt quite fresh.  Delighted to find her
father still asleep, and so peacefully, she pushed her chair close to
the bed, and sat down with her hands in her lap.

Curdie got his mattock from where he had hidden it behind a great
mirror, and went to the cellar, followed by Lina.  They took some
breakfast with them as they passed through the hall, and as soon as
they had eaten it went out the back way.

At the mouth of the passage Curdie seized the rope, drew himself up,
pushed away the shutter, and entered the dungeon.  Then he swung the
end of the rope to Lina, and she caught it in her teeth. When her
master said, 'Now, Lina!' she gave a great spring, and he ran away with
the end of the rope as fast as ever he could.  And such a spring had
she made, that by the time he had to bear her weight she was within a
few feet of the hole.  The instant she got a paw through, she was all
through.

Apparently their enemies were waiting till hunger should have cowed
them, for there was no sign of any attempt having been made to open the
door.  A blow or two of Curdie's mattock drove the shattered lock clean
from it, and telling Lina to wait there till he came back, and let no
one in, he walked out into the silent street, and drew the door to
behind them.  He could hardly believe it was not yet a whole day since
he had been thrown in there with his hands tied at his back.

Down the town he went, walking in the middle of the street, that, if
any one saw him, he might see he was not afraid, and hesitate to rouse
an attack on him.  As to the dogs, ever since the death of their two
companions, a shadow that looked like a mattock was enough to make them
scamper.  As soon as he reached the archway of the city gate he turned
to reconnoitre the baker's shop, and perceiving no sign of movement,
waited there watching for the first.

After about an hour, the door opened, and the baker's man appeared with
a pail in his hand.  He went to a pump that stood in the street, and
having filled his pail returned with it into the shop. Curdie stole
after him, found the door on the latch, opened it very gently, peeped
in, saw nobody, and entered.  Remembering perfectly from what shelf the
baker's wife had taken the loaf she said was the best, and seeing just
one upon it, he seized it, laid the price of it on the counter, and
sped softly out, and up the street.  Once more in the dungeon beside
Lina, his first thought was to fasten up the door again, which would
have been easy, so many iron fragments of all sorts and sizes lay
about; but he bethought himself that if he left it as it was, and they
came to find him, they would conclude at once that they had made their
escape by it, and would look no farther so as to discover the hole.  He
therefore merely pushed the door close and left it.  Then once more
carefully arranging the earth behind the shutter, so that it should
again fall with it, he returned to the cellar.

And now he had to convey the loaf to the princess.  If he could venture
to take it himself, well; if not, he would send Lina.  He crept to the
door of the servants' hall, and found the sleepers beginning to stir.
One said it was time to go to bed; another, that he would go to the
cellar instead, and have a mug of wine to waken him up; while a third
challenged a fourth to give him his revenge at some game or other.

'Oh, hang your losses!' answered his companion; 'you'll soon pick up
twice as much about the house, if you but keep your eyes open.'

Perceiving there would be risk in attempting to pass through, and
reflecting that the porters in the great hall would probably be awake
also, Curdie went back to the cellar, took Irene's handkerchief with
the loaf in it, tied it round Lina's neck, and told her to take it to
the princess.

Using every shadow and every shelter, Lina slid through the servants
like a shapeless terror through a guilty mind, and so, by corridor and
great hall, up the stair to the king's chamber.

Irene trembled a little when she saw her glide soundless in across the
silent dusk of the morning, that filtered through the heavy drapery of
the windows, but she recovered herself at once when she saw the bundle
about her neck, for it both assured her of Curdie's safety, and gave
her hope of her father's.  She untied it with joy, and Lina stole away,
silent as she had come.  Her joy was the greater that the king had
waked up a little before, and expressed a desire for food--not that he
felt exactly hungry, he said, and yet he wanted something.  If only he
might have a piece of nice fresh bread!  Irene had no knife, but with
eager hands she broke a great piece from the loaf, and poured out a
full glass of wine. The king ate and drank, enjoyed the bread and the
wine much, and instantly fell asleep again.

It was hours before the lazy people brought their breakfast.  When it
came, Irene crumbled a little about, threw some into the fireplace, and
managed to make the tray look just as usual.

In the meantime, down below in the cellar, Curdie was lying in the
hollow between the upper sides of two of the great casks, the warmest
place he could find.  Lina was watching.  She lay at his feet, across
the two casks, and did her best so to arrange her huge tail that it
should be a warm coverlid for her master.

By and by Dr Kelman called to see his patient; and now that Irene's
eyes were opened, she saw clearly enough that he was both annoyed and
puzzled at finding His Majesty rather better.  He pretended however to
congratulate him, saying he believed he was quite fit to see the lord
chamberlain: he wanted his signature to something important; only he
must not strain his mind to understand it, whatever it might be: if His
Majesty did, he would not be answerable for the consequences.  The king
said he would see the lord chamberlain, and the doctor went.

Then Irene gave him more bread and wine, and the king ate and drank,
and smiled a feeble smile, the first real one she had seen for many a
day.  He said he felt much better, and would soon be able to take
matters into his own hands again.  He had a strange miserable feeling,
he said, that things were going terribly wrong, although he could not
tell how.  Then the princess told him that Curdie had come, and that at
night, when all was quiet for nobody in the palace must know, he would
pay His Majesty a visit.  Her great-great-grandmother had sent him, she
said.  The king looked strangely upon her, but the strange look passed
into a smile clearer than the first, and irene's heart throbbed with
delight.



CHAPTER 22

The Lord Chamberlain

At noon the lord chamberlain appeared.  With a long, low bow, and paper
in hand, he stepped softly into the room.  Greeting His Majesty with
every appearance of the profoundest respect, and congratulating him on
the evident progress he had made, he declared himself sorry to trouble
him, but there were certain papers, he said, which required his
signature--and therewith drew nearer to the king, who lay looking at
him doubtfully.  He was a lean, long, yellow man, with a small head,
bald over the top, and tufted at the back and about the ears.  He had a
very thin, prominent, hooked nose, and a quantity of loose skin under
his chin and about the throat, which came craning up out of his
neckcloth.  His eyes were very small, sharp, and glittering, and looked
black as jet.  He had hardly enough of a mouth to make a smile with.
His left hand held the paper, and the long, skinny fingers of his right
a pen just dipped in ink.

But the king, who for weeks had scarcely known what he did, was today
so much himself as to be aware that he was not quite himself; and the
moment he saw the paper, he resolved that he would not sign without
understanding and approving of it.  He requested the lord chamberlain
therefore to read it.  His Lordship commenced at once but the
difficulties he seemed to encounter, and the fits of stammering that
seized him, roused the king's suspicion tenfold. He called the princess.

'I trouble His Lordship too much,' he said to her: 'you can read print
well, my child--let me hear how you can read writing.  Take that paper
from His Lordship's hand, and read it to me from beginning to end,
while my lord drinks a glass of my favourite wine, and watches for your
blunders.'

'Pardon me, Your Majesty,' said the lord chamberlain, with as much of a
smile as he was able to extemporize, 'but it were a thousand pities to
put the attainments of Her Royal Highness to a test altogether too
severe.  Your Majesty can scarcely with justice expect the very organs
of her speech to prove capable of compassing words so long, and to her
so unintelligible.'

'I think much of my little princess and her capabilities,' returned the
king, more and more aroused.  'Pray, my lord, permit her to try.'

'Consider, Your Majesty: the thing would be altogether without
precedent.  It would be to make sport of statecraft,' said the lord
chamberlain.

'Perhaps you are right, my lord,' answered the king, with more meaning
than he intended should be manifest, while to his growing joy he felt
new life and power throbbing in heart and brain.  'So this morning we
shall read no further.  I am indeed ill able for business of such
weight.'

'Will Your Majesty please sign your royal name here?' said the lord
chamberlain, preferring the request as a matter of course, and
approaching with the feather end of the pen pointed to a spot where
there was a great red seal.

'Not today, my lord,' replied the king.

'It is of the greatest importance, Your Majesty,' softly insisted the
other.

'I descried no such importance in it,' said the king.

'Your Majesty heard but a part.'

'And I can hear no more today.'

'I trust Your Majesty has ground enough, in a case of necessity like
the present, to sign upon the representation of his loyal subject and
chamberlain?  Or shall I call the lord chancellor?' he added, rising.

'There is no need.  I have the very highest opinion of your judgement,
my lord,' answered the king; 'that is, with respect to means: we might
differ as to ends.'

The lord chamberlain made yet further attempts at persuasion; but they
grew feebler and feebler, and he was at last compelled to retire
without having gained his object.  And well might his annoyance be
keen!  For that paper was the king's will, drawn up by the
attorney-general; nor until they had the king's signature to it was
there much use in venturing farther.  But his worst sense of
discomfiture arose from finding the king with so much capacity left,
for the doctor had pledged himself so to weaken his brain that he
should be as a child in their hands, incapable of refusing anything
requested of him: His Lordship began to doubt the doctor's fidelity to
the conspiracy.

The princess was in high delight.  She had not for weeks heard so many
words, not to say words of such strength and reason, from her father's
lips: day by day he had been growing weaker and more lethargic.  He was
so much exhausted, however, after this effort, that he asked for
another piece of bread and more wine, and fell fast asleep the moment
he had taken them.

The lord chamberlain sent in a rage for Dr Kelman.  He came, and while
professing himself unable to understand the symptoms described by His
Lordship, yet pledged himself again that on the morrow the king should
do whatever was required of him.

The day went on.  When His Majesty was awake, the princess read to
him--one storybook after another; and whatever she read, the king
listened as if he had never heard anything so good before, making out
in it the wisest meanings.  Every now and then he asked for a piece of
bread and a little wine, and every time he ate and drank he slept, and
every time he woke he seemed better than the last time.  The princess
bearing her part, the loaf was eaten up and the flagon emptied before
night.  The butler took the flagon away, and brought it back filled to
the brim, but both were thirsty and hungry when Curdie came again.

Meantime he and Lina, watching and waking alternately, had plenty of
sleep.  In the afternoon, peeping from the recess, they saw several of
the servants enter hurriedly, one after the other, draw wine, drink it,
and steal out; but their business was to take care of the king, not of
his cellar, and they let them drink.  Also, when the butler came to
fill the flagon, they restrained themselves, for the villain's fate was
not yet ready for him.  He looked terribly frightened, and had brought
with him a large candle and a small terrier--which latter indeed
threatened to be troublesome, for he went roving and sniffing about
until he came to the recess where they were.  But as soon as he showed
himself, Lina opened her jaws so wide, and glared at him so horribly,
that, without even uttering a whimper, he tucked his tail between his
legs and ran to his master.  He was drawing the wicked wine at the
moment, and did not see him, else he would doubtless have run too.

When suppertime approached, Curdie took his place at the door into the
servants' hall; but after a long hour's vain watch, he began to fear he
should get nothing: there was so much idling about, as well as coming
and going.  It was hard to bear--chiefly from the attractions of a
splendid loaf, just fresh out of the oven, which he longed to secure
for the king and princess.  At length his chance did arrive: he pounced
upon the loaf and carried it away, and soon after got hold of a pie.

This time, however, both loaf and pie were missed.  The cook was
called.  He declared he had provided both.  One of themselves, he said,
must have carried them away for some friend outside the palace.  Then a
housemaid, who had not long been one of them, said she had seen someone
like a page running in the direction of the cellar with something in
his hands.  Instantly all turned upon the pages, accusing them, one
after another.  All denied, but nobody believed one of them: Where
there is no truth there can be no faith.

To the cellar they all set out to look for the missing pie and loaf.
Lina heard them coming, as well she might, for they were talking and
quarrelling loud, and gave her master warning.  They snatched up
everything, and got all signs of their presence out at the back door
before the servants entered.  When they found nothing, they all turned
on the chambermaid, and accused her, not only of lying against the
pages, but of having taken the things herself.  Their language and
behaviour so disgusted Curdie, who could hear a great part of what
passed, and he saw the danger of discovery now so much increased, that
he began to devise how best at once to rid the palace of the whole pack
of them.  That, however, would be small gain so long as the treacherous
officers of state continued in it.  They must be first dealt with.  A
thought came to him, and the longer he looked at it the better he liked
it.

As soon as the servants were gone, quarrelling and accusing all the
way, they returned and finished their supper.  Then Curdie, who had
long been satisfied that Lina understood almost every word he said,
communicated his plan to her, and knew by the wagging of her tail and
the flashing of her eyes that she comprehended it.  Until they had the
king safe through the worst part of the night, however, nothing could
be done.

They had now merely to go on waiting where they were till the household
should be asleep.  This waiting and waiting was much the hardest thing
Curdie had to do in the whole affair.  He took his mattock and, going
again into the long passage, lighted a candle end and proceeded to
examine the rock on all sides.  But this was not merely to pass the
time: he had a reason for it.  When he broke the stone in the street,
over which the baker fell, its appearance led him to pocket a fragment
for further examination; and since then he had satisfied himself that
it was the kind of stone in which gold is found, and that the yellow
particles in it were pure metal.  If such stone existed here in any
plenty, he could soon make the king rich and independent of his
ill-conditioned subjects. He was therefore now bent on an examination
of the rock; nor had he been at it long before he was persuaded that
there were large quantities of gold in the half-crystalline white
stone, with its veins of opaque white and of green, of which the rock,
so far as he had been able to inspect it, seemed almost entirely to
consist. Every piece he broke was spotted with particles and little
lumps of a lovely greenish yellow--and that was gold.  Hitherto he had
worked only in silver, but he had read, and heard talk, and knew,
therefore, about gold.  As soon as he had got the king free of rogues
and villains, he would have all the best and most honest miners, with
his father at the head of them, to work this rock for the king.

It was a great delight to him to use his mattock once more.  The time
went quickly, and when he left the passage to go to the king's chamber,
he had already a good heap of fragments behind the broken door.



CHAPTER 23

Dr Kelman

As soon as he had reason to hope the way was clear, Curdie ventured
softly into the hall, with Lina behind him.  There was no one asleep on
the bench or floor, but by the fading fire sat a girl weeping.  It was
the same who had seen him carrying off the food, and had been so hardly
used for saying so.  She opened her eyes when he appeared, but did not
seem frightened at him.

'I know why you weep,' said Curdie, 'and I am sorry for you.'

'It is hard not to be believed just because one speaks the truth,' said
the girl, 'but that seems reason enough with some people.  My mother
taught me to speak the truth, and took such pains with me that I should
find it hard to tell a lie, though I could invent many a story these
servants would believe at once; for the truth is a strange thing here,
and they don't know it when they see it. Show it them, and they all
stare as if it were a wicked lie, and that with the lie yet warm that
has just left their own mouths! You are a stranger,' she said, and
burst out weeping afresh, 'but the stranger you are to such a place and
such people the better!'

'I am the person,' said Curdie, whom you saw carrying the things from
the supper table.'  He showed her the loaf.  'If you can trust, as well
as speak the truth, I will trust you.  Can you trust me?'

She looked at him steadily for a moment.

'I can,' she answered.

'One thing more,' said Curdie: 'have you courage as well as truth?'

'I think so.'

'Look my dog in the face and don't cry out.  Come here, Lina.'

Lina obeyed.  The girl looked at her, and laid her hand on Lina's head.

'Now I know you are a true woman,' said curdie.  'I am come to set
things right in this house.  Not one of the servants knows I am here.
Will you tell them tomorrow morning that, if they do not alter their
ways, and give over drinking, and lying, and stealing, and unkindness,
they shall every one of them be driven from the palace?'

'They will not believe me.'

'Most likely; but will you give them the chance?'

'I will.'

'Then I will be your friend.  Wait here till I come again.'

She looked him once more in the face, and sat down.

When he reached the royal chamber, he found His Majesty awake, and very
anxiously expecting him.  He received him with the utmost kindness, and
at once, as it were, put himself in his hands by telling him all he
knew concerning the state he was in.  His voice was feeble, but his eye
was clear, although now and then his words and thoughts seemed to
wander.  Curdie could not be certain that the cause of their not being
intelligible to him did not lie in himself.  The king told him that for
some years, ever since his queen's death, he had been losing heart over
the wickedness of his people.  He had tried hard to make them good, but
they got worse and worse.  Evil teachers, unknown to him, had crept
into the schools; there was a general decay of truth and right
principle at least in the city; and as that set the example to the
nation, it must spread.

The main cause of his illness was the despondency with which the
degeneration of his people affected him.  He could not sleep, and had
terrible dreams; while, to his unspeakable shame and distress, he
doubted almost everybody.  He had striven against his suspicion, but in
vain, and his heart was sore, for his courtiers and councillors were
really kind; only he could not think why none of their ladies came near
his princess.  The whole country was discontented, he heard, and there
were signs of gathering storm outside as well as inside his borders.
The master of the horse gave him sad news of the insubordination of the
army; and his great white horse was dead, they told him; and his sword
had lost its temper: it bent double the last time he tried it!--only
perhaps that was in a dream; and they could not find his shield; and
one of his spurs had lost the rowel.

Thus the poor king went wandering in a maze of sorrows, some of which
were purely imaginary, while others were truer than he understood.  He
told how thieves came at night and tried to take his crown, so that he
never dared let it out of his hands even when he slept; and how, every
night, an evil demon in the shape of his physician came and poured
poison down his throat.  He knew it to be poison, he said, somehow,
although it tasted like wine.

Here he stopped, faint with the unusual exertion of talking.

Curdie seized the flagon, and ran to the wine cellar.

In the servants' hall the girl still sat by the fire, waiting for him.
As he returned he told her to follow him, and left her at the chamber
door until he should rejoin her.  When the king had had a little wine,
he informed him that he had already discovered certain of His Majesty's
enemies, and one of the worst of them was the doctor, for it was no
other demon than the doctor himself who had been coming every night,
and giving him a slow poison.

'So!' said the king.  'Then I have not been suspicious enough, for I
thought it was but a dream!  Is it possible Kelman can be such a
wretch?  Who then am I to trust?'

'Not one in the house, except the princess and myself,' said Curdie.

'I will not go to sleep,' said the king.

'That would be as bad as taking the poison,' said Curdie.  'No, no,
sire; you must show your confidence by leaving all the watching to me,
and doing all the sleeping Your Majesty can.'

The king smiled a contented smile, turned on his side, and was
presently fast asleep.  Then Curdie persuaded the princess also to go
to sleep, and telling Lina to watch, went to the housemaid.  He asked
her if she could inform him which of the council slept in the palace,
and show him their rooms.  She knew every one of them, she said, and
took him the round of all their doors, telling him which slept in each
room.  He then dismissed her, and returning to the king's chamber,
seated himself behind a curtain at the head of the bed, on the side
farthest from the king.  He told Lina to get under the bed, and make no
noise.

About one o'clock the doctor came stealing in.  He looked round for the
princess, and seeing no one, smiled with satisfaction as he approached
the wine where it stood under the lamp.  Having partly filled a glass,
he took from his pocket a small phial, and filled up the glass from it.
The light fell upon his face from above, and Curdie saw the snake in it
plainly visible.  He had never beheld such an evil countenance: the man
hated the king, and delighted in doing him wrong.

With the glass in his hand, he drew near the bed, set it down, and
began his usual rude rousing of His Majesty.  Not at once succeeding,
he took a lancet from his pocket, and was parting its cover with an
involuntary hiss of hate between his closed teeth, when Curdie stooped
and whispered to Lina.

'Take him by the leg, Lina.'  She darted noiselessly upon him. With a
face of horrible consternation, he gave his leg one tug to free it; the
next instant Curdie heard the one scrunch with which she crushed the
bone like a stick of celery.  He tumbled on the floor with a yell.

'Drag him out, Lina,' said Curdie. Lina took him by the collar, and
dragged him out.  Her master followed her to direct her, and they left
the doctor lying across the lord chamberlain's door, where he gave
another horrible yell, and fainted.

The king had waked at his first cry, and by the time Curdie re-entered
he had got at his sword where it hung from the centre of the tester,
had drawn it, and was trying to get out of bed.  But when Curdie told
him all was well, he lay down again as quietly as a child comforted by
his mother from a troubled dream.  Curdie went to the door to watch.

The doctor's yells had aroused many, but not one had yet ventured to
appear.  Bells were rung violently, but none were answered; and in a
minute or two Curdie had what he was watching for.  The door of the
lord chamberlain's room opened, and, pale with hideous terror, His
Lordship peeped out.  Seeing no one, he advanced to step into the
corridor, and tumbled over the doctor.  Curdie ran up, and held out his
hand.  He received in it the claw of a bird of prey--vulture or eagle,
he could not tell which.

His Lordship, as soon as he was on his legs, taking him for one of the
pages abused him heartily for not coming sooner, and threatened him
with dismissal from the king's service for cowardice and neglect.  He
began indeed what bade fair to be a sermon on the duties of a page, but
catching sight of the man who lay at his door, and seeing it was the
doctor, he fell upon Curdie afresh for standing there doing nothing,
and ordered him to fetch immediate assistance.  Curdie left him, but
slipped into the King's chamber, closed and locked the door, and left
the rascals to look after each other.  Ere long he heard hurrying
footsteps, and for a few minutes there was a great muffled tumult of
scuffling feet, low voices and deep groanings; then all was still again.

Irene slept through the whole--so confidently did she rest, knowing
Curdie was in her father's room watching over him.



CHAPTER 24

The Prophecy

Curdie sat and watched every motion of the sleeping king.  All the
night, to his ear, the palace lay as quiet as a nursery of healthful
children.  At sunrise he called the princess.

'How has His Majesty slept?' were her first words as she entered the
room.

'Quite quietly,' answered Curdie; 'that is, since the doctor was got
rid of.'

'How did you manage that?' inquired Irene; and Curdie had to tell all
about it.

'How terrible!' she said.  'Did it not startle the king dreadfully?'

'It did rather.  I found him getting out of bed, sword in hand.'

'The brave old man!' cried the princess.

'Not so old!' said Curdie, 'as you will soon see.  He went off again in
a minute or so; but for a little while he was restless, and once when
he lifted his hand it came down on the spikes of his crown, and he half
waked.'

'But where is the crown?' cried Irene, in sudden terror.

'I stroked his hands,' answered Curdie, 'and took the crown from them;
and ever since he has slept quietly, and again and again smiled in his
sleep.'

'I have never seen him do that,' said the princess.  'But what have you
done with the crown, Curdie?'

'Look,' said Curdie, moving away from the bedside.

Irene followed him--and there, in the middle of the floor, she saw a
strange sight.  Lina lay at full length, fast asleep, her tail
stretched out straight behind her and her forelegs before her: between
the two paws meeting in front of it, her nose just touching it behind,
glowed and flashed the crown, like a nest of the humming birds of
heaven.

Irene gazed, and looked up with a smile.

'But what if the thief were to come, and she not to wake?' she said.
'Shall I try her?'  And as she spoke she stooped toward the crown.

'No, no, no!' cried Curdie, terrified.  'She would frighten you out of
your wits.  I would do it to show you, but she would wake your father.
You have no conception with what a roar she would spring at my throat.
But you shall see how lightly she wakes the moment I speak to her.
Lina!'

She was on her feet the same instant, with her great tail sticking out
straight behind her, just as it had been lying.

'Good dog!' said the princess, and patted her head.  Lina wagged her
tail solemnly, like the boom of an anchored sloop.  Irene took the
crown, and laid it where the king would see it when he woke.

'Now, Princess,' said Curdie, 'I must leave you for a few minutes. You
must bolt the door, please, and not open it to any one.'

Away to the cellar he went with Lina, taking care, as they passed
through the servants' hall, to get her a good breakfast.  In about one
minute she had eaten what he gave her, and looked up in his face: it
was not more she wanted, but work.  So out of the cellar they went
through the passage, and Curdie into the dungeon, where he pulled up
Lina, opened the door, let her out, and shut it again behind her.  As
he reached the door of the king's chamber, Lina was flying out of the
gate of Gwyntystorm as fast as her mighty legs could carry her.

'What's come to the wench?' growled the menservants one to another,
when the chambermaid appeared among them the next morning.  There was
something in her face which they could not understand, and did not like.

'Are we all dirt?' they said.  'What are you thinking about?  Have you
seen yourself in the glass this morning, miss?'

She made no answer.

'Do you want to be treated as you deserve, or will you speak, you
hussy?' said the first woman-cook.  'I would fain know what right you
have to put on a face like that!'

'You won't believe me,' said the girl.

'Of course not.  What is it?'

'I must tell you, whether you believe me or not,' she said.

'Of course you must.'

'It is this, then: if you do not repent of your bad ways, you are all
going to be punished--all turned out of the palace together.'

'A mighty punishment!' said the butler.  'A good riddance, say I, of
the trouble of keeping minxes like you in order!  And why, pray, should
we be turned out?  What have I to repent of now, your holiness?'

'That you know best yourself,' said the girl.

'A pretty piece of insolence!  How should I know, forsooth, what a
menial like you has got against me!  There are people in this
house--oh! I'm not blind to their ways!--but every one for himself, say
I!  Pray, Miss judgement, who gave you such an impertinent message to
His Majesty's household?'

'One who is come to set things right in the king's house.'

'Right, indeed!' cried the butler; but that moment the thought came
back to him of the roar he had heard in the cellar, and he turned pale
and was silent.

The steward took it up next.

'And pray, pretty prophetess,' he said, attempting to chuck her under
the chin, 'what have I got to repent of?'

'That you know best yourself,' said the girl.  'You have but to look
into your books or your heart.'

'Can you tell me, then, what I have to repent of?' said the groom of
the chambers.  'That you know best yourself,' said the girl once more.
'The person who told me to tell you said the servants of this house had
to repent of thieving, and lying, and unkindness, and drinking; and
they will be made to repent of them one way, if they don't do it of
themselves another.'

Then arose a great hubbub; for by this time all the servants in the
house were gathered about her, and all talked together, in towering
indignation.

'Thieving, indeed!' cried one.  'A pretty word in a house where
everything is left lying about in a shameless way, tempting poor
innocent girls!  A house where nobody cares for anything, or has the
least respect to the value of property!'

'I suppose you envy me this brooch of mine,' said another.  'There was
just a half sheet of note paper about it, not a scrap more, in a drawer
that's always open in the writing table in the study! What sort of a
place is that for a jewel?  Can you call it stealing to take a thing
from such a place as that?  Nobody cared a straw about it.  It might as
well have been in the dust hole!  If it had been locked up--then, to be
sure!'

'Drinking!' said the chief porter, with a husky laugh.  'And who
wouldn't drink when he had a chance?  Or who would repent it, except
that the drink was gone?  Tell me that, Miss Innocence.'

'Lying!' said a great, coarse footman.  'I suppose you mean when I told
you yesterday you were a pretty girl when you didn't pout? Lying,
indeed!  Tell us something worth repenting of!  Lying is the way of
Gwyntystorm.  You should have heard Jabez lying to the cook last night!
He wanted a sweetbread for his pup, and pretended it was for the
princess!  Ha! ha! ha!'

'Unkindness!  I wonder who's unkind!  Going and listening to any
stranger against her fellow servants, and then bringing back his wicked
words to trouble them!' said the oldest and worst of the housemaids.
'One of ourselves, too!  Come, you hypocrite!  This is all an invention
of yours and your young man's, to take your revenge of us because we
found you out in a lie last night.  Tell true now: wasn't it the same
that stole the loaf and the pie that sent you with the impudent
message?'

As she said this, she stepped up to the housemaid and gave her, instead
of time to answer, a box on the ear that almost threw her down; and
whoever could get at her began to push and bustle and pinch and punch
her.

'You invite your fate,' she said quietly.

They fell furiously upon her, drove her from the hall with kicks and
blows, hustled her along the passage, and threw her down the stair to
the wine cellar, then locked the door at the top of it, and went back
to their breakfast.

In the meantime the king and the princess had had their bread and wine,
and the princess, with Curdie's help, had made the room as tidy as she
could--they were terribly neglected by the servants. And now Curdie set
himself to interest and amuse the king, and prevent him from thinking
too much, in order that he might the sooner think the better.
Presently, at His Majesty's request, he began from the beginning, and
told everything he could recall of his life, about his father and
mother and their cottage on the mountain, of the inside of the mountain
and the work there, about the goblins and his adventures with them.

When he came to finding the princess and her nurse overtaken by the
twilight on the mountain, Irene took up her share of the tale, and told
all about herself to that point, and then Curdie took it up again; and
so they went on, each fitting in the part that the other did not know,
thus keeping the hoop of the story running straight; and the king
listened with wondering and delighted ears, astonished to find what he
could so ill comprehend, yet fitting so well together from the lips of
two narrators.

At last, with the mission given him by the wonderful princess and his
consequent adventures, Curdie brought up the whole tale to the present
moment.  Then a silence fell, and Irene and Curdie thought the king was
asleep.  But he was far from it; he was thinking about many things.
After a long pause he said:

'Now at last, MY children, I am compelled to believe many things I
could not and do not yet understand--things I used to hear, and
sometimes see, as often as I visited my mother's home.  Once, for
instance, I heard my mother say to her father--speaking of me--"He is a
good, honest boy, but he will be an old man before he understands"; and
my grandfather answered, "Keep up your heart, child: my mother will
look after him."  I thought often of their words, and the many strange
things besides I both heard and saw in that house; but by degrees,
because I could not understand them, I gave up thinking of them.  And
indeed I had almost forgotten them, when you, my child, talking that
day about the Queen Irene and her pigeons, and what you had seen in her
garret, brought them all back to my mind in a vague mass.  But now they
keep coming back to me, one by one, every one for itself; and I shall
just hold my peace, and lie here quite still, and think about them all
till I get well again.'

What he meant they could not quite understand, but they saw plainly
that already he was better.

'Put away my crown,' he said.  'I am tired of seeing it, and have no
more any fear of its safety.'  They put it away together, withdrew from
the bedside, and left him in peace.



CHAPTER 25

The Avengers

There was nothing now to be dreaded from Dr Kelman, but it made Curdie
anxious, as the evening drew near, to think that not a soul belonging
to the court had been to visit the king, or ask how he did, that day.
He feared, in some shape or other, a more determined assault.  He had
provided himself a place in the room, to which he might retreat upon
approach, and whence he could watch; but not once had he had to betake
himself to it.

Towards night the king fell asleep.  Curdie thought more and more
uneasily of the moment when he must again leave them for a little
while.  Deeper and deeper fell the shadows.  No one came to light the
lamp.  The princess drew her chair close to Curdie: she would rather it
were not so dark, she said.  She was afraid of something--she could not
tell what; nor could she give any reason for her fear but that all was
so dreadfully still.

When it had been dark about an hour, Curdie thought Lina might have
returned; and reflected that the sooner he went the less danger was
there of any assault while he was away.  There was more risk of his own
presence being discovered, no doubt, but things were now drawing to a
crisis, and it must be run.  So, telling the princess to lock all the
doors of the bedchamber, and let no one in, he took his mattock, and
with here a run, and there a halt under cover, gained the door at the
head of the cellar stair in safety.  To his surprise he found it
locked, and the key was gone.  There was no time for deliberation.  He
felt where the lock was, and dealt it a tremendous blow with his
mattock.  It needed but a second to dash the door open.  Someone laid a
hand on his arm.

'Who is it?' said Curdie.

'I told you they wouldn't believe me, sir,' said the housemaid.  'I
have been here all day.'

He took her hand, and said, 'You are a good, brave girl.  Now come with
me, lest your enemies imprison you again.'

He took her to the cellar, locked the door, lighted a bit of candle,
gave her a little wine, told her to wait there till he came, and went
out the back way.

Swiftly he swung himself up into the dungeon.  Lina had done her part.
The place was swarming with creatures--animal forms wilder and more
grotesque than ever ramped in nightmare dream.  Close by the hole,
waiting his coming, her green eyes piercing the gulf below, Lina had
but just laid herself down when he appeared.  All about the vault and
up the slope of the rubbish heap lay and stood and squatted the
forty-nine whose friendship Lina had conquered in the wood.  They all
came crowding about Curdie.

He must get them into the cellar as quickly as ever he could.  But when
he looked at the size of some of them, he feared it would be a long
business to enlarge the hole sufficiently to let them through.  At it
he rushed, hitting vigorously at the edge with his mattock.  At the
very first blow came a splash from the water beneath, but ere he could
heave a third, a creature like a tapir, only that the grasping point of
its proboscis was hard as the steel of Curdie's hammer, pushed him
gently aside, making room for another creature, with a head like a
great club, which it began banging upon the floor with terrible force
and noise.  After about a minute of this battery, the tapir came up
again, shoved Clubhead aside, and putting its own head into the hole
began gnawing at the sides of it with the finger of its nose, in such a
fashion that the fragments fell in a continuous gravelly shower into
the water.  In a few minutes the opening was large enough for the
biggest creature among them to get through it.

Next came the difficulty of letting them down: some were quite light,
but the half of them were too heavy for the rope, not to say for his
arms.  The creatures themselves seemed to be puzzling where or how they
were to go.  One after another of them came up, looked down through the
hole, and drew back.  Curdie thought if he let Lina down, perhaps that
would suggest something; possibly they did not see the opening on the
other side.  He did so, and Lina stood lighting up the entrance of the
passage with her gleaming eyes.

One by one the creatures looked down again, and one by one they drew
back, each standing aside to glance at the next, as if to say, Now you
have a look.  At last it came to the turn of the serpent with the long
body, the four short legs behind, and the little wings before.  No
sooner had he poked his head through than he poked it farther
through--and farther, and farther yet, until there was little more than
his legs left in the dungeon.  By that time he had got his head and
neck well into the passage beside Lina.  Then his legs gave a great
waddle and spring, and he tumbled himself, far as there was betwixt
them, heels over head into the passage.

'That is all very well for you, Mr Legserpent!' thought Curdie to
himself; 'but what is to be done with the rest?'  He had hardly time to
think it, however, before the creature's head appeared again through
the floor.  He caught hold of the bar of iron to which Curdie's rope
was tied, and settling it securely across the narrowest part of the
irregular opening, held fast to it with his teeth.  It was plain to
Curdie, from the universal hardness among them, that they must all, at
one time or another, have been creatures of the mines.

He saw at once what this one was after.  The beast had planted his feet
firmly upon the floor of the passage, and stretched his long body up
and across the chasm to serve as a bridge for the rest. Curdie mounted
instantly upon his neck, threw his arms round him as far as they would
go, and slid down in ease and safety, the bridge just bending a little
as his weight glided over it.  But he thought some of the creatures
would try the legserpent's teeth.

One by one the oddities followed, and slid down in safety.  When they
seemed to be all landed, he counted them: there were but forty-eight.
Up the rope again he went, and found one which had been afraid to trust
himself to the bridge, and no wonder! for he had neither legs nor head
nor arms nor tail: he was just a round thing, about a foot in diameter,
with a nose and mouth and eyes on one side of the ball.  He had made
his journey by rolling as swiftly as the fleetest of them could run.
The back of the legserpent not being flat, he could not quite trust
himself to roll straight and not drop into the gulf.  Curdie took him
in his arms, and the moment he looked down through the hole, the bridge
made itself again, and he slid into the passage in safety, with
Ballbody in his bosom.

He ran first to the cellar to warn the girl not to be frightened at the
avengers of wickedness.  Then he called to Lina to bring in her friends.

One after another they came trooping in, till the cellar seemed full of
them.  The housemaid regarded them without fear.

'Sir,' she said, 'there is one of the pages I don't take to be a bad
fellow.'

'Then keep him near you,' said Curdie.  'And now can you show me a way
to the king's chamber not through the servants' hall?'

'There is a way through the chamber of the colonel of the guard,' she
answered, 'but he is ill, and in bed.'

'Take me that way,' said Curdie.

By many ups and downs and windings and turnings she brought him to a
dimly lighted room, where lay an elderly man asleep.  His arm was
outside the coverlid, and Curdie gave his hand a hurried grasp as he
went by.  His heart beat for joy, for he had found a good, honest,
human hand.

'I suppose that is why he is ill,' he said to himself.

It was now close upon suppertime, and when the girl stopped at the door
of the king's chamber, he told her to go and give the servants one
warning more.

'Say the messenger sent you,' he said.  'I will be with you very soon.'

The king was still asleep.  Curdie talked to the princess for a few
minutes, told her not to be frightened whatever noises she heard, only
to keep her door locked till he came, and left her.



CHAPTER 26

The Vengeance

By the time the girl reached the servants' hall they were seated at
supper.  A loud, confused exclamation arose when she entered.  No one
made room for her; all stared with unfriendly eyes.  A page, who
entered the next minute by another door, came to her side.

'Where do you come from, hussy?' shouted the butler, and knocked his
fist on the table with a loud clang.

He had gone to fetch wine, had found the stair door broken open and the
cellar door locked, and had turned and fled.  Among his fellows,
however, he had now regained what courage could be called his.

'From the cellar,' she replied.  'The messenger broke open the door,
and sent me to you again.'

'The messenger!  Pooh!  What messenger?'

'The same who sent me before to tell you to repent.'

'What!  Will you go fooling it still?  Haven't you had enough of it?'
cried the butler in a rage, and starting to his feet, drew near
threateningly.

'I must do as I am told,' said the girl.

'Then why don't you do as I tell you, and hold your tongue?' said the
butler.  'Who wants your preachments?  If anybody here has anything to
repent Of, isn't that enough--and more than enough for him--but you
must come bothering about, and stirring up, till not a drop of quiet
will settle inside him?  You come along with me, young woman; we'll see
if we can't find a lock somewhere in the house that'll hold you in!'

'Hands off, Mr Butler!' said the page, and stepped between.

'Oh, ho!' cried the butler, and pointed his fat finger at him. 'That's
you, is it, my fine fellow?  So it's you that's up to her tricks, is
it?'

The youth did not answer, only stood with flashing eyes fixed on him,
until, growing angrier and angrier, but not daring a step nearer, he
burst out with a rude but quavering authority:

'Leave the house, both of you!  Be off, or I'll have Mr Steward to talk
to you.  Threaten your masters, indeed!  Out of the house with you, and
show us the way you tell us of!'

Two or three of the footmen got up and ranged themselves behind the
butler.

'Don't say I threaten you, Mr Butler,' expostulated the girl from
behind the page.  'The messenger said I was to tell you again, and give
you one chance more.'

'Did the messenger mention me in particular?' asked the butler, looking
the page unsteadily in the face.

'No, sir,' answered the girl.

'I thought not!  I should like to hear him!'

'Then hear him now,' said Curdie, who that moment entered at the
opposite corner of the hall.  'I speak of the butler in particular when
I say that I know more evil of him than of any of the rest. He will not
let either his own conscience or my messenger speak to him: I therefore
now speak myself.  I proclaim him a villain, and a traitor to His
Majesty the king.  But what better is any one of you who cares only for
himself, eats, drinks, takes good money, and gives vile service in
return, stealing and wasting the king's property, and making of the
palace, which ought to be an example of order and sobriety, a disgrace
to the country?'

For a moment all stood astonished into silence by this bold speech from
a stranger.  True, they saw by his mattock over his shoulder that he
was nothing but a miner boy, yet for a moment the truth told
notwithstanding.  Then a great roaring laugh burst from the biggest of
the footmen as he came shouldering his way through the crowd toward
Curdie.

'Yes, I'm right,' he cried; 'I thought as much!  This messenger,
forsooth, is nothing but a gallows bird--a fellow the city marshal was
going to hang, but unfortunately put it off till he should be starved
enough to save rope and be throttled with a pack thread. He broke
prison, and here he is preaching!'  As he spoke, he stretched out his
great hand to lay hold of him.  Curdie caught it in his left hand, and
heaved his mattock with the other.  Finding, however, nothing worse
than an ox hoof, he restrained himself, stepped back a pace or two,
shifted his mattock to his left hand, and struck him a little smart
blow on the shoulder.  His arm dropped by his side, he gave a roar, and
drew back.

His fellows came crowding upon Curdie.  Some called to the dogs; others
swore; the women screamed; the footmen and pages got round him in a
half circle, which he kept from closing by swinging his mattock, and
here and there threatening a blow.

'Whoever confesses to having done anything wrong in this house, however
small, however great, and means to do better, let him come to this
corner of the room,' he cried.

None moved but the page, who went toward him skirting the wall. When
they caught sight of him, the crowd broke into a hiss of derision.

'There!  See!  Look at the sinner!  He confesses!  Actually confesses!
Come, what is it you stole?  The barefaced hypocrite! There's your sort
to set up for reproving other people!  Where's the other now?'

But the maid had left the room, and they let the page pass, for he
looked dangerous to stop.  Curdie had just put him betwixt him and the
wall, behind the door, when in rushed the butler with the huge kitchen
poker, the point of which he had blown red-hot in the fire, followed by
the cook with his longest spit.  Through the crowd, which scattered
right and left before them, they came down upon Curdie.  Uttering a
shrill whistle, he caught the poker a blow with his mattock, knocking
the point to the ground, while the page behind him started forward, and
seizing the point of the spit, held on to it with both hands, the cook
kicking him furiously.

Ere the butler could raise the poker again, or the cook recover the
spit, with a roar to terrify the dead, Lina dashed into the room, her
eyes flaming like candles.  She went straight at the butler. He was
down in a moment, and she on the top of him, wagging her tail over him
like a lioness.

'Don't kill him, Lina,' said Curdie.

'Oh, Mr Miner!' cried the butler.

'Put your foot on his mouth, Lina,' said Curdie.  'The truth Fear tells
is not much better than her lies.'

The rest of the creatures now came stalking, rolling, leaping, gliding,
hobbling into the room, and each as he came took the next place along
the wall, until, solemn and grotesque, all stood ranged, awaiting
orders.

And now some of the culprits were stealing to the doors nearest them.
Curdie whispered to the two creatures next him.  Off went Ballbody,
rolling and bounding through the crowd like a spent cannon shot, and
when the foremost reached the door to the corridor, there he lay at the
foot of it grinning; to the other door scuttled a scorpion, as big as a
huge crab.  The rest stood so still that some began to think they were
only boys dressed up to look awful; they persuaded themselves they were
only another part of the housemaid's and page's vengeful contrivance,
and their evil spirits began to rise again.  Meantime Curdie had, with
a second sharp blow from the hammer of his mattock, disabled the cook,
so that he yielded the spit with a groan.  He now turned to the
avengers.

'Go at them,' he said.

The whole nine-and-forty obeyed at once, each for himself, and after
his own fashion.  A scene of confusion and terror followed. The crowd
scattered like a dance of flies.  The creatures had been instructed not
to hurt much, but to hunt incessantly, until everyone had rushed from
the house.  The women shrieked, and ran hither and thither through the
hall, pursued each by her own horror, and snapped at by every other in
passing.  If one threw herself down in hysterical despair, she was
instantly poked or clawed or nibbled up again.

Though they were quite as frightened at first, the men did not run so
fast; and by and by some of them finding they were only glared at, and
followed, and pushed, began to summon up courage once more, and with
courage came impudence.  The tapir had the big footman in charge: the
fellow stood stock-still, and let the beast come up to him, then put
out his finger and playfully patted his nose.  The tapir gave the nose
a little twist, and the finger lay on the floor.

Then indeed did the footman run.

Gradually the avengers grew more severe, and the terrors of the
imagination were fast yielding to those of sensuous experience, when a
page, perceiving one of the doors no longer guarded, sprang at it, and
ran out.  Another and another followed.  Not a beast went after, until,
one by one, they were every one gone from the hall, and the whole crew
in the kitchen.

There they were beginning to congratulate themselves that all was over,
when in came the creatures trooping after them, and the second act of
their terror and pain began.  They were flung about in all directions;
their clothes were torn from them; they were pinched and scratched any-
and everywhere; Ballbody kept rolling up them and over them, confining
his attentions to no one in particular; the scorpion kept grabbing at
their legs with his huge pincers; a three-foot centipede kept screwing
up their bodies, nipping as he went; varied as numerous were their
woes.  Nor was it long before the last of them had fled from the
kitchen to the sculleries.

But thither also they were followed, and there again they were hunted
about.  They were bespattered with the dirt of their own neglect; they
were soused in the stinking water that had boiled greens; they were
smeared with rancid dripping; their faces were rubbed in maggots: I
dare not tell all that was done to them.  At last they got the door
into a back yard open, and rushed out.  Then first they knew that the
wind was howling and the rain falling in sheets.  But there was no rest
for them even there.  Thither also were they followed by the inexorable
avengers, and the only door here was a door out of the palace: out
every soul of them was driven, and left, some standing, some lying,
some crawling, to the farther buffeting of the waterspouts and
whirlwinds ranging every street of the city.  The door was flung to
behind them, and they heard it locked and bolted and barred against
them.



CHAPTER 27

More Vengeance

As soon as they were gone, Curdie brought the creatures back to the
servants' hall, and told them to eat up everything on the table. It was
a sight to see them all standing round it--except such as had to get
upon it--eating and drinking, each after its fashion, without a smile,
or a word, or a glance of fellowship in the act. A very few moments
served to make everything eatable vanish, and then Curdie requested
them to clean house, and the page who stood by to assist them.

Every one set about it except Ballbody: he could do nothing at
cleaning, for the more he rolled, the more he spread the dirt. Curdie
was curious to know what he had been, and how he had come to be such as
he was: but he could only conjecture that he was a gluttonous alderman
whom nature had treated homeopathically. And now there was such a
cleaning and clearing out of neglected places, such a burying and
burning of refuse, such a rinsing of jugs, such a swilling of sinks,
and such a flushing of drains as would have delighted the eyes of all
true housekeepers and lovers of cleanliness generally.

Curdie meantime was with the king, telling him all he had done. They
had heard a little noise, but not much, for he had told the avengers to
repress outcry as much as possible; and they had seen to it that the
more anyone cried out the more he had to cry out upon, while the
patient ones they scarcely hurt at all.

Having promised His Majesty and Her Royal Highness a good breakfast,
Curdie now went to finish the business.  The courtiers must be dealt
with.  A few who were the worst, and the leaders of the rest, must be
made examples of; the others should be driven to the street.

He found the chiefs of the conspiracy holding a final consultation in
the smaller room off the hall.  These were the lord chamberlain, the
attorney-general, the master of the horse, and the king's private
secretary: the lord chancellor and the rest, as foolish as faithless,
were but the tools of these.

The housemaid had shown him a little closet, opening from a passage
behind, where he could overhear all that passed in that room; and now
Curdie heard enough to understand that they had determined, in the dead
of that night, rather in the deepest dark before the morning, to bring
a certain company of soldiers into the palace, make away with the king,
secure the princess, announce the sudden death of His Majesty, read as
his the will they had drawn up, and proceed to govern the country at
their ease, and with results: they would at once levy severer taxes,
and pick a quarrel with the most powerful of their neighbours.
Everything settled, they agreed to retire, and have a few hours' quiet
sleep first--all but the secretary, who was to sit up and call them at
the proper moment. Curdie allowed them half an hour to get to bed, and
then set about completing his purgation of the palace.

First he called Lina, and opened the door of the room where the
secretary sat.  She crept in, and laid herself down against it. When
the secretary, rising to stretch his legs, caught sight of her eyes, he
stood frozen with terror.  She made neither motion nor sound.
Gathering courage, and taking the thing for a spectral illusion, he
made a step forward.  She showed her other teeth, with a growl neither
more than audible nor less than horrible.  The secretary sank fainting
into a chair.  He was not a brave man, and besides, his conscience had
gone over to the enemy, and was sitting against the door by Lina.

To the lord chamberlain's door next, Curdie conducted the legserpent,
and let him in.

Now His Lordship had had a bedstead made for himself, sweetly fashioned
of rods of silver gilt: upon it the legserpent found him asleep, and
under it he crept.  But out he came on the other side, and crept over
it next, and again under it, and so over it, under it, over it, five or
six times, every time leaving a coil of himself behind him, until he
had softly folded all his length about the lord chamberlain and his
bed.  This done, he set up his head, looking down with curved neck
right over His Lordship's, and began to hiss in his face.

He woke in terror unspeakable, and would have started up but the moment
he moved, the legserpent drew his coils closer, and closer still, and
drew and drew until the quaking traitor heard the joints of his
bedstead grinding and gnarring.  Presently he persuaded himself that it
was only a horrid nightmare, and began to struggle with all his
strength to throw it off.  Thereupon the legserpent gave his hooked
nose such a bite that his teeth met through it--but it was hardly
thicker than the bowl of a spoon; and then the vulture knew that he was
in the grasp of his enemy the snake, and yielded.

As soon as he was quiet the legserpent began to untwist and retwist, to
uncoil and recoil himself, swinging and swaying, knotting and relaxing
himself with strangest curves and convolutions, always, however,
leaving at least one coil around his victim.  At last he undid himself
entirely, and crept from the bed. Then first the lord chamberlain
discovered that his tormentor had bent and twisted the bedstead, legs
and canopy and all, so about him that he was shut in a silver cage out
of which it was impossible for him to find a way.  Once more, thinking
his enemy was gone, he began to shout for help.  But the instant he
opened his mouth his keeper darted at him and bit him, and after three
or four such essays, he lay still.

The master of the horse Curdie gave in charge to the tapir.  When the
soldier saw him enter--for he was not yet asleep--he sprang from his
bed, and flew at him with his sword.  But the creature's hide was
invulnerable to his blows, and he pecked at his legs with his proboscis
until he jumped into bed again, groaning, and covered himself up; after
which the tapir contented himself with now and then paying a visit to
his toes.

As for the attorney-general, Curdie led to his door a huge spider,
about two feet long in the body, which, having made an excellent
supper, was full of webbing.  The attorney-general had not gone to bed,
but sat in a chair asleep before a great mirror.  He had been trying
the effect of a diamond star which he had that morning taken from the
jewel room.  When he woke he fancied himself paralysed; every limb,
every finger even, was motionless: coils and coils of broad spider
ribbon bandaged his members to his body, and all to the chair.  In the
glass he saw himself wound about with slavery infinite.  On a footstool
a yard off sat the spider glaring at him.

Clubhead had mounted guard over the butler, where he lay tied hand and
foot under the third cask.  From that cask he had seen the wine run
into a great bath, and therein he expected to be drowned.  The doctor,
with his crushed leg, needed no one to guard him.

And now Curdie proceeded to the expulsion of the rest.  Great men or
underlings, he treated them all alike.  From room to room over the
house he went, and sleeping or waking took the man by the hand. Such
was the state to which a year of wicked rule had reduced the moral
condition of the court, that in it all he found but three with human
hands.  The possessors of these he allowed to dress themselves and
depart in peace.  When they perceived his mission, and how he was
backed, they yielded.

Then commenced a general hunt, to clear the house of the vermin. Out of
their beds in their night clothing, out of their rooms, gorgeous
chambers or garret nooks, the creatures hunted them.  Not one was
allowed to escape.  Tumult and noise there was little, for fear was too
deadly for outcry.  Ferreting them out everywhere, following them
upstairs and downstairs, yielding no instant of repose except upon the
way out, the avengers persecuted the miscreants, until the last of them
was shivering outside the palace gates, with hardly sense enough left
to know where to turn.

When they set out to look for shelter, they found every inn full of the
servants expelled before them, and not one would yield his place to a
superior suddenly levelled with himself.  Most houses refused to admit
them on the ground of the wickedness that must have drawn on them such
a punishment; and not a few would have been left in the streets all
night, had not Derba, roused by the vain entreaties at the doors on
each side of her cottage, opened hers, and given up everything to them.
The lord chancellor was only too glad to share a mattress with a
stableboy, and steal his bare feet under his jacket.

In the morning Curdie appeared, and the outcasts were in terror,
thinking he had come after them again.  But he took no notice of them:
his object was to request Derba to go to the palace: the king required
her services.  She need take no trouble about her cottage, he said; the
palace was henceforward her home: she was the king's chatelaine over
men and maidens of his household.  And this very morning she must cook
His Majesty a nice breakfast.



CHAPTER 28

The Preacher

Various reports went undulating through the city as to the nature of
what had taken place in the palace.  The people gathered, and stared at
the house, eyeing it as if it had sprung up in the night. But it looked
sedate enough, remaining closed and silent, like a house that was dead.
They saw no one come out or go in.  Smoke arose from a chimney or two;
there was hardly another sign of life. It was not for some little time
generally understood that the highest officers of the crown as well as
the lowest menials of the palace had been dismissed in disgrace: for
who was to recognize a lord chancellor in his nightshirt?  And what
lord chancellor would, so attired in the street, proclaim his rank and
office aloud? Before it was day most of the courtiers crept down to the
river, hired boats, and betook themselves to their homes or their
friends in the country.  It was assumed in the city that the domestics
had been discharged upon a sudden discovery of general and unpardonable
peculation; for, almost everybody being guilty of it himself, petty
dishonesty was the crime most easily credited and least easily passed
over in Gwyntystorm.

Now that same day was Religion day, and not a few of the clergy, always
glad to seize on any passing event to give interest to the dull and
monotonic grind of their intellectual machines, made this remarkable
one the ground of discourse to their congregations. More especially
than the rest, the first priest of the great temple where was the royal
pew, judged himself, from his relation to the palace, called upon to
'improve the occasion', for they talked ever about improvement at
Gwyntystorm, all the time they were going down hill with a rush.

The book which had, of late years, come to be considered the most
sacred, was called The Book of Nations, and consisted of proverbs, and
history traced through custom: from it the first priest chose his text;
and his text was, 'Honesty Is the Best Policy.'  He was considered a
very eloquent man, but I can offer only a few of the larger bones of
his sermon.

The main proof of the verity of their religion, he said, was that
things always went well with those who profess it; and its first
fundamental principle, grounded in inborn invariable instinct, was,
that every One should take care of that One.  This was the first duty
of Man.  If every one would but obey this law, number one, then would
every one be perfectly cared for--one being always equal to one.  But
the faculty of care was in excess of need, and all that overflowed, and
would otherwise run to waste, ought to be gently turned in the
direction of one's neighbour, seeing that this also wrought for the
fulfilling of the law, inasmuch as the reaction of excess so directed
was upon the director of the same, to the comfort, that is, and
well-being of the original self.  To be just and friendly was to build
the warmest and safest of all nests, and to be kind and loving was to
line it with the softest of all furs and feathers, for the one
precious, comfort-loving self there to lie, revelling in downiest
bliss.  One of the laws therefore most binding upon men because of its
relation to the first and greatest of all duties, was embodied in the
Proverb he had just read; and what stronger proof of its wisdom and
truth could they desire than the sudden and complete vengeance which
had fallen upon those worse than ordinary sinners who had offended
against the king's majesty by forgetting that 'Honesty Is the Best
Policy'?

At this point of the discourse the head of the legserpent rose from the
floor of the temple, towering above the pulpit, above the priest, then
curving downward, with open mouth slowly descended upon him.  Horror
froze the sermon-pump.  He stared upward aghast. The great teeth of the
animal closed upon a mouthful of the sacred vestments, and slowly he
lifted the preacher from the pulpit, like a handful of linen from a
washtub, and, on his four solemn stumps, bore him out of the temple,
dangling aloft from his jaws.  At the back of it he dropped him into
the dust hole among the remnants of a library whose age had destroyed
its value in the eyes of the chapter.  They found him burrowing in it,
a lunatic henceforth--whose madness presented the peculiar feature,
that in its paroxysms he jabbered sense.

Bone-freezing horror pervaded Gwyntystorm.  If their best and wisest
were treated with such contempt, what might not the rest of them look
for?  Alas for their city!  Their grandly respectable city!  Their
loftily reasonable city!  Where it was all to end, who could tell!

But something must be done.  Hastily assembling, the priests chose a
new first priest, and in full conclave unanimously declared and
accepted that the king in his retirement had, through the practice of
the blackest magic, turned the palace into a nest of demons in the
midst of them.  A grand exorcism was therefore indispensable.

In the meantime the fact came out that the greater part of the
courtiers had been dismissed as well as the servants, and this fact
swelled the hope of the Party of Decency, as they called themselves.
Upon it they proceeded to act, and strengthened themselves on all sides.

The action of the king's bodyguard remained for a time uncertain. But
when at length its officers were satisfied that both the master of the
horse and their colonel were missing, they placed themselves under the
orders of the first priest.

Every one dated the culmination of the evil from the visit of the miner
and his mongrel; and the butchers vowed, if they could but get hold of
them again, they would roast both of them alive.  At once they formed
themselves into a regiment, and put their dogs in training for attack.

Incessant was the talk, innumerable were the suggestions, and great was
the deliberation.  The general consent, however, was that as soon as
the priests should have expelled the demons, they would depose the
king, and attired in all his regal insignia, shut him in a cage for
public show; then choose governors, with the lord chancellor at their
head, whose first duty should be to remit every possible tax; and the
magistrates, by the mouth of the city marshal, required all able-bodied
citizens, in order to do their part toward the carrying out of these
and a multitude of other reforms, to be ready to take arms at the first
summons.

Things needful were prepared as speedily as possible, and a mighty
ceremony, in the temple, in the market place, and in front of the
palace, was performed for the expulsion of the demons.  This over, the
leaders retired to arrange an attack upon the palace.

But that night events occurred which, proving the failure of their
first, induced the abandonment of their second, intent.  Certain of the
prowling order of the community, whose numbers had of late been
steadily on the increase, reported frightful things.  Demons of
indescribable ugliness had been espied careering through the midnight
streets and courts.  A citizen--some said in the very act of
housebreaking, but no one cared to look into trifles at such a
crisis--had been seized from behind, he could not see by what, and
soused in the river.  A well-known receiver of stolen goods had had his
shop broken open, and when he came down in the morning had found
everything in ruin on the pavement.  The wooden image of justice over
the door of the city marshal had had the arm that held the sword bitten
off.  The gluttonous magistrate had been pulled from his bed in the
dark, by beings of which he could see nothing but the flaming eyes, and
treated to a bath of the turtle soup that had been left simmering by
the side of the kitchen fire.  Having poured it over him, they put him
again into his bed, where he soon learned how a mummy must feel in its
cerements.

Worst of all, in the market place was fixed up a paper, with the king's
own signature, to the effect that whoever henceforth should show
inhospitality to strangers, and should be convicted of the same, should
be instantly expelled the city; while a second, in the butchers'
quarter, ordained that any dog which henceforth should attack a
stranger should be immediately destroyed.  It was plain, said the
butchers, that the clergy were of no use; they could not exorcise
demons!  That afternoon, catching sight of a poor old fellow in rags
and tatters, quietly walking up the street, they hounded their dogs
upon him, and had it not been that the door of Derba's cottage was
standing open, and was near enough for him to dart in and shut it ere
they reached him, he would have been torn in pieces.

And thus things went on for some days.



CHAPTER 29

Barbara

In the meantime, with Derba to minister to his wants, with Curdie to
protect him, and Irene to nurse him, the king was getting rapidly
stronger.  Good food was what he most wanted and of that, at least of
certain kinds of it, there was plentiful store in the palace.
Everywhere since the cleansing of the lower regions of it, the air was
clean and sweet, and under the honest hands of the one housemaid the
king's chamber became a pleasure to his eyes.  With such changes it was
no wonder if his heart grew lighter as well as his brain clearer.

But still evil dreams came and troubled him, the lingering result of
the wicked medicines the doctor had given him.  Every night, sometimes
twice or thrice, he would wake up in terror, and it would be minutes
ere he could come to himself.  The consequence was that he was always
worse in the morning, and had loss to make up during the day.  While he
slept, Irene or Curdie, one or the other, must still be always by his
side.

One night, when it was Curdie's turn with the king, he heard a cry
somewhere in the house, and as there was no other child, concluded,
notwithstanding the distance of her grandmother's room, that it must be
Barbara.  Fearing something might be wrong, and noting the king's sleep
more quiet than usual, he ran to see.  He found the child in the middle
of the floor, weeping bitterly, and Derba slumbering peacefully in bed.
The instant she saw him the night-lost thing ceased her crying, smiled,
and stretched out her arms to him.  Unwilling to wake the old woman,
who had been working hard all day, he took the child, and carried her
with him.  She clung to him so, pressing her tear-wet radiant face
against his, that her little arms threatened to choke him.

When he re-entered the chamber, he found the king sitting up in bed,
fighting the phantoms of some hideous dream.  Generally upon such
occasions, although he saw his watcher, he could not dissociate him
from the dream, and went raving on.  But the moment his eyes fell upon
little Barbara, whom he had never seen before, his soul came into them
with a rush, and a smile like the dawn of an eternal day overspread his
countenance; the dream was nowhere, and the child was in his heart.  He
stretched out his arms to her, the child stretched out hers to him, and
in five minutes they were both asleep, each in the other's embrace.

From that night Barbara had a crib in the king's chamber, and as often
as he woke, Irene or Curdie, whichever was watching, took the sleeping
child and laid her in his arms, upon which, invariably and instantly,
the dream would vanish.  A great part of the day too she would be
playing on or about the king's bed; and it was a delight to the heart
of the princess to see her amusing herself with the crown, now sitting
upon it, now rolling it hither and thither about the room like a hoop.
Her grandmother entering once while she was pretending to make porridge
in it, held up her hands in horror-struck amazement; but the king would
not allow her to interfere, for the king was now Barbara's playmate,
and his crown their plaything.

The colonel of the guard also was growing better.  Curdie went often to
see him.  They were soon friends, for the best people understand each
other the easiest, and the grim old warrior loved the miner boy as if
he were at once his son and his angel.  He was very anxious about his
regiment.  He said the officers were mostly honest men, he believed,
but how they might be doing without him, or what they might resolve, in
ignorance of the real state of affairs, and exposed to every
misrepresentation, who could tell? Curdie proposed that he should send
for the major, offering to be the messenger.  The colonel agreed, and
Curdie went--not without his mattock, because of the dogs.

But the officers had been told by the master of the horse that their
colonel was dead, and although they were amazed he should be buried
without the attendance of his regiment, they never doubted the
information.  The handwriting itself of their colonel was insufficient,
counteracted by the fresh reports daily current, to destroy the lie.
The major regarded the letter as a trap for the next officer in
command, and sent his orderly to arrest the messenger.  But Curdie had
had the wisdom not to wait for an answer.

The king's enemies said that he had first poisoned the good colonel of
the guard, and then murdered the master of the horse, and other
faithful councillors; and that his oldest and most attached domestics
had but escaped from the palace with their lives--not all of them, for
the butler was missing.  Mad or wicked, he was not only unfit to rule
any longer, but worse than unfit to have in his power and under his
influence the young princess, only hope of Gwyntystorm and the kingdom.

The moment the lord chancellor reached his house in the country and had
got himself clothed, he began to devise how yet to destroy his master;
and the very next morning set out for the neighbouring kingdom of
Borsagrass to invite invasion, and offer a compact with its monarch.



CHAPTER 30

Peter

At the cottage in the mountain everything for a time went on just as
before.  It was indeed dull without Curdie, but as often as they looked
at the emerald it was gloriously green, and with nothing to fear or
regret, and everything to hope, they required little comforting.  One
morning, however, at last, Peter, who had been consulting the gem,
rather now from habit than anxiety, as a farmer his barometer in
undoubtful weather, turned suddenly to his wife, the stone in his hand,
and held it up with a look of ghastly dismay.

'Why, that's never the emerald!' said Joan.

'It is,' answered Peter; 'but it were small blame to any one that took
it for a bit of bottle glass!'

For, all save one spot right in the centre, of intensest and most
brilliant green, it looked as if the colour had been burnt out of it.

'Run, run, Peter!' cried his wife.  'Run and tell the old princess.  It
may not be too late.  The boy must be lying at death's door.'

Without a word Peter caught up his mattock, darted from the cottage,
and was at the bottom of the hill in less time than he usually took to
get halfway.

The door of the king's house stood open; he rushed in and up the stair.
But after wandering about in vain for an hour, opening door after door,
and finding no way farther up, the heart of the old man had well-nigh
failed him.  Empty rooms, empty rooms!--desertion and desolation
everywhere.

At last he did come upon the door to the tower stair.  Up he darted.
Arrived at the top, he found three doors, and, one after the other,
knocked at them all.  But there was neither voice nor hearing.  Urged
by his faith and his dread, slowly, hesitatingly, he opened one.  It
revealed a bare garret room, nothing in it but one chair and one
spinning wheel.  He closed it, and opened the next--to start back in
terror, for he saw nothing but a great gulf, a moonless night, full of
stars, and, for all the stars, dark, dark!--a fathomless abyss.  He
opened the third door, and a rush like the tide of a living sea invaded
his ears.  Multitudinous wings flapped and flashed in the sun, and,
like the ascending column from a volcano, white birds innumerable shot
into the air, darkening the day with the shadow of their cloud, and
then, with a sharp sweep, as if bent sideways by a sudden wind, flew
northward, swiftly away, and vanished.  The place felt like a tomb.
There seemed no breath of life left in it.

Despair laid hold upon him; he rushed down thundering with heavy feet.
Out upon him darted the housekeeper like an ogress-spider, and after
her came her men; but Peter rushed past them, heedless and
careless--for had not the princess mocked him?--and sped along the road
to Gwyntystorm.  What help lay in a miner's mattock, a man's arm, a
father's heart, he would bear to his boy.

Joan sat up all night waiting his return, hoping and hoping.  The
mountain was very still, and the sky was clear; but all night long the
miner sped northward, and the heart of his wife was troubled.



CHAPTER 31

The Sacrifice

Things in the palace were in a strange condition: the king playing with
a child and dreaming wise dreams, waited upon by a little princess with
the heart of a queen, and a youth from the mines, who went nowhere, not
even into the king's chamber, without his mattock on his shoulder and a
horrible animal at his heels; in a room nearby the colonel of his
guard, also in bed, without a soldier to obey him; in six other rooms,
far apart, six miscreants, each watched by a beast-jailer; ministers to
them all, an old woman and a page; and in the wine cellar, forty-three
animals, creatures more grotesque than ever brain of man invented.
None dared approach its gates, and seldom one issued from them.

All the dwellers in the city were united in enmity to the palace. It
swarmed with evil spirits, they said, whereas the evil spirits were in
the city, unsuspected.  One consequence of their presence was that,
when the rumour came that a great army was on the march against
Gwyntystorm, instead of rushing to their defences, to make new gates,
free portcullises and drawbridges, and bar the river, each band flew
first to their treasures, burying them in their cellars and gardens,
and hiding them behind stones in their chimneys; and, next to
rebellion, signing an invitation to His Majesty of Borsagrass to enter
at their open gates, destroy their king, and annex their country to his
own.

The straits of isolation were soon found in the palace: its invalids
were requiring stronger food, and what was to be done? For if the
butchers sent meat to the palace, was it not likely enough to be
poisoned?  Curdie said to Derba he would think of some plan before
morning.

But that same night, as soon as it was dark, Lina came to her master,
and let him understand she wanted to go out.  He unlocked a little
private postern for her, left it so that she could push it open when
she returned, and told the crocodile to stretch himself across it
inside.  Before midnight she came back with a young deer.

Early the next morning the legserpent crept out of the wine cellar,
through the broken door behind, shot into the river, and soon appeared
in the kitchen with a splendid sturgeon.  Every night Lina went out
hunting, and every morning Legserpent went out fishing, and both
invalids and household had plenty to eat.  As to news, the page, in
plain clothes, would now and then venture out into the market place,
and gather some.

One night he came back with the report that the army of the king of
Borsagrass had crossed the border.  Two days after, he brought the news
that the enemy was now but twenty miles from Gwyntystorm.

The colonel of the guard rose, and began furbishing his armour--but
gave it over to the page, and staggered across to the barracks, which
were in the next street.  The sentry took him for a ghost or worse, ran
into the guardroom, bolted the door, and stopped his ears.  The poor
colonel, who was yet hardly able to stand, crawled back despairing.

For Curdie, he had already, as soon as the first rumour reached him,
resolved, if no other instructions came, and the king continued unable
to give orders, to call Lina and the creatures, and march to meet the
enemy.  If he died, he died for the right, and there was a right end of
it.  He had no preparations to make, except a good sleep.

He asked the king to let the housemaid take his place by His Majesty
that night, and went and lay down on the floor of the corridor, no
farther off than a whisper would reach from the door of the chamber.
There, with an old mantle of the king's thrown over him, he was soon
fast asleep.

Somewhere about the middle of the night, he woke suddenly, started to
his feet, and rubbed his eyes.  He could not tell what had waked him.
But could he be awake, or was he not dreaming?  The curtain of the
king's door, a dull red ever before, was glowing a gorgeous, a radiant
purple; and the crown wrought upon it in silks and gems was flashing as
if it burned!  What could it mean?  Was the king's chamber on fire?  He
darted to the door and lifted the curtain. Glorious terrible sight!

A long and broad marble table, that stood at one end of the room, had
been drawn into the middle of it, and thereon burned a great fire, of a
sort that Curdie knew--a fire of glowing, flaming roses, red and white.
In the midst of the roses lay the king, moaning, but motionless.  Every
rose that fell from the table to the floor, someone, whom Curdie could
not plainly see for the brightness, lifted and laid burning upon the
king's face, until at length his face too was covered with the live
roses, and he lay all within the fire, moaning still, with now and then
a shuddering sob.

And the shape that Curdie saw and could not see, wept over the king as
he lay in the fire, and often she hid her face in handfuls of her
shadowy hair, and from her hair the water of her weeping dropped like
sunset rain in the light of the roses.  At last she lifted a great
armful of her hair, and shook it over the fire, and the drops fell from
it in showers, and they did not hiss in the flames, but there arose
instead as it were the sound of running brooks.

And the glow of the red fire died away, and the glow of the white fire
grew grey, and the light was gone, and on the table all was
black--except the face of the king, which shone from under the burnt
roses like a diamond in the ashes of a furnace.

Then Curdie, no longer dazzled, saw and knew the old princess.  The
room was lighted with the splendour of her face, of her blue eyes, of
her sapphire crown.  Her golden hair went streaming out from her
through the air till it went off in mist and light.  She was large and
strong as a Titaness.  She stooped over the table-altar, put her mighty
arms under the living sacrifice, lifted the king, as if he were but a
little child, to her bosom, walked with him up the floor, and laid him
in his bed.  Then darkness fell.

The miner boy turned silent away, and laid himself down again in the
corridor.  An absolute joy filled his heart, his bosom, his head, his
whole body.  All was safe; all was well.  With the helve of his mattock
tight in his grasp, he sank into a dreamless sleep.



CHAPTER 32

The King's Army

He woke like a giant refreshed with wine.

When he went into the king's chamber, the housemaid sat where he had
left her, and everything in the room was as it had been the night
before, save that a heavenly odour of roses filled the air of it.  He
went up to the bed.  The king opened his eyes, and the soul of perfect
health shone out of them.  Nor was Curdie amazed in his delight.

'Is it not time to rise, Curdie?' said the king.

'It is, Your Majesty.  Today we must be doing,' answered Curdie.

'What must we be doing today, Curdie?'

'Fighting, sire.'

'Then fetch me my armour--that of plated steel, in the chest there.
You will find the underclothing with it.'

As he spoke, he reached out his hand for his sword, which hung in the
bed before him, drew it, and examined the blade.

'A little rusty!' he said, 'but the edge is there.  We shall polish it
ourselves today--not on the wheel.  Curdie, my son, I wake from a
troubled dream.  A glorious torture has ended it, and I live.  I know
now well how things are, but you shall explain them to me as I get on
my armour.  No, I need no bath.  I am clean.  Call the colonel of the
guard.'

In complete steel the old man stepped into the chamber.  He knew it
not, but the old princess had passed through his room in the night.

'Why, Sir Bronzebeard!' said the king, 'you are dressed before me! You
need no valet, old man, when there is battle in the wind!'

'Battle, sire!' returned the colonel.  'Where then are our soldiers?'

'Why, there and here,' answered the king, pointing to the colonel
first, and then to himself.  'Where else, man?  The enemy will be upon
us ere sunset, if we be not upon him ere noon.  What other thing was in
your brave brain when you donned your armour, friend?'

'Your Majesty's orders, sire,' answered Sir Bronzebeard.

The king smiled and turned to Curdie.

'And what was in yours, Curdie, for your first word was of battle?'

'See, Your Majesty,' answered Curdie; 'I have polished my mattock. If
Your Majesty had not taken the command, I would have met the enemy at
the head of my beasts, and died in comfort, or done better.'

'Brave boy!' said the king.  'He who takes his life in his hand is the
only soldier.  You shall head your beasts today.  Sir Bronzebeard, will
you die with me if need be?'

'Seven times, my king,' said the colonel.

'Then shall we win this battle!' said the king.  'Curdie, go and bind
securely the six, that we lose not their guards.  Can you find me a
horse, think you, Sir Bronzebeard?  Alas! they told me my white charger
was dead.'

'I will go and fright the varletry with my presence, and secure, I
trust, a horse for Your Majesty, and one for myself.'

'And look you, brother!' said the king; 'bring one for my miner boy
too, and a sober old charger for the princess, for she too must go to
the battle, and conquer with us.'

'Pardon me, sire,' said Curdie; 'a miner can fight best on foot. I
might smite my horse dead under me with a missed blow.  And besides
that, I must be near to my beasts.'

'As you will,' said the king.  'Three horses then, Sir Bronzebeard.'

The colonel departed, doubting sorely in his heart how to accoutre and
lead from the barrack stables three horses, in the teeth of his
revolted regiment.

In the hall he met the housemaid.

'Can you lead a horse?' he asked.

'Yes, sir.'

'Are you willing to die for the king?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Can you do as you are bid?'

'I can keep on trying, sir.'

'Come then.  Were I not a man I would be a woman such as you.'

When they entered the barrack yard, the soldiers scattered like autumn
leaves before a blast of winter.  They went into the stable
unchallenged--and lo! in a stall, before the colonel's eyes, stood the
king's white charger, with the royal saddle and bridle hung high beside
him!

'Traitorous thieves!' muttered the old man in his beard, and went along
the stalls, looking for his own black charger.  Having found him, he
returned to saddle first the king's.  But the maid had already the
saddle upon him, and so girt that the colonel could thrust no finger
tip between girth and skin.  He left her to finish what she had so well
begun, and went and made ready his own.  He then chose for the princess
a great red horse, twenty years old, which he knew to possess every
equine virtue.  This and his own he led to the palace, and the maid led
the king's.

The king and Curdie stood in the court, the king in full armour of
silvered steel, with a circlet of rubies and diamonds round his helmet.
He almost leaped for joy when he saw his great white charger come in,
gentle as a child to the hand of the housemaid. But when the horse saw
his master in his armour, he reared and bounded in jubilation, yet did
not break from the hand that held him.  Then out came the princess
attired and ready, with a hunting knife her father had given her by her
side.  They brought her mother's saddle, splendent with gems and gold,
set it on the great red horse, and lifted her to it.  But the saddle
was so big, and the horse so tall, that the child found no comfort in
them.

'Please, King Papa,' she said, 'can I not have my white pony?'

'I did not think of him, little one,' said the king.  'Where is he?'

'In the stable,' answered the maid.  'I found him half starved, the
only horse within the gates, the day after the servants were driven
out.  He has been well fed since.'

'Go and fetch him,' said the king.

As the maid appeared with the pony, from a side door came Lina and the
forty-nine, following Curdie.

'I will go with Curdie and the Uglies,' cried the princess; and as soon
as she was mounted she got into the middle of the pack.

So out they set, the strangest force that ever went against an enemy.
The king in silver armour sat stately on his white steed, with the
stones flashing on his helmet; beside him the grim old colonel, armed
in steel, rode his black charger; behind the king, a little to the
right, Curdie walked afoot, his mattock shining in the sun; Lina
followed at his heel; behind her came the wonderful company of Uglies;
in the midst of them rode the gracious little Irene, dressed in blue,
and mounted on the prettiest of white ponies; behind the colonel, a
little to the left, walked the page, armed in a breastplate, headpiece,
and trooper's sword he had found in the palace, all much too big for
him, and carrying a huge brass trumpet which he did his best to blow;
and the king smiled and seemed pleased with his music, although it was
but the grunt of a brazen unrest.  Alongside the beasts walked Derba
carrying Barbara--their refuge the mountains, should the cause of the
king be lost; as soon as they were over the river they turned aside to
ascend the Cliff, and there awaited the forging of the day's history.
Then first Curdie saw that the housemaid, whom they had all forgotten,
was following, mounted on the great red horse, and seated in the royal
saddle.

Many were the eyes unfriendly of women that had stared at them from
door and window as they passed through the city; and low laughter and
mockery and evil words from the lips of children had rippled about
their ears; but the men were all gone to welcome the enemy, the
butchers the first, the king's guard the last.  And now on the heels of
the king's army rushed out the women and children also, to gather
flowers and branches, wherewith to welcome their conquerors.

About a mile down the river, Curdie, happening to look behind him, saw
the maid, whom he had supposed gone with Derba, still following on the
great red horse.  The same moment the king, a few paces in front of
him, caught sight of the enemy's tents, pitched where, the cliffs
receding, the bank of the river widened to a little plain.



CHAPTER 33

The Battle

He commanded the page to blow his trumpet; and, in the strength of the
moment, the youth uttered a right warlike defiance.

But the butchers and the guard, who had gone over armed to the enemy,
thinking that the king had come to make his peace also, and that it
might thereafter go hard with them, rushed at once to make short work
with him, and both secure and commend themselves.  The butchers came on
first--for the guards had slackened their saddle girths--brandishing
their knives, and talking to their dogs. Curdie and the page, with Lina
and her pack, bounded to meet them. Curdie struck down the foremost
with his mattock.  The page, finding his sword too much for him, threw
it away and seized the butcher's knife, which as he rose he plunged
into the foremost dog. Lina rushed raging and gnashing among them.  She
would not look at a dog so long as there was a butcher on his legs, and
she never stopped to kill a butcher, only with one grind of her jaws
crushed a leg of him.  When they were all down, then indeed she flashed
among the dogs.

Meantime the king and the colonel had spurred toward the advancing
guard.  The king clove the major through skull and collar bone, and the
colonel stabbed the captain in the throat.  Then a fierce combat
commenced--two against many.  But the butchers and their dogs quickly
disposed of, up came Curdie and his beasts.  The horses of the guard,
struck with terror, turned in spite of the spur, and fled in confusion.

Thereupon the forces of Borsagrass, which could see little of the
affair, but correctly imagined a small determined body in front of
them, hastened to the attack.  No sooner did their first advancing wave
appear through the foam of the retreating one, than the king and the
colonel and the page, Curdie and the beasts, went charging upon them.
Their attack, especially the rush of the Uglies, threw the first line
into great confusion, but the second came up quickly; the beasts could
not be everywhere, there were thousands to one against them, and the
king and his three companions were in the greatest possible danger.

A dense cloud came over the sun, and sank rapidly toward the earth. The
cloud moved all together, and yet the thousands of white flakes of
which it was made up moved each for itself in ceaseless and rapid
motion: those flakes were the wings of pigeons.  Down swooped the birds
upon the invaders; right in the face of man and horse they flew with
swift-beating wings, blinding eyes and confounding brain.  Horses
reared and plunged and wheeled.  All was at once in confusion.  The men
made frantic efforts to seize their tormentors, but not one could they
touch; and they outdoubled them in numbers. Between every wild clutch
came a peck of beak and a buffet of pinion in the face.  Generally the
bird would, with sharp-clapping wings, dart its whole body, with the
swiftness of an arrow, against its singled mark, yet so as to glance
aloft the same instant, and descend skimming; much as the thin stone,
shot with horizontal cast of arm, having touched and torn the surface
of the lake, ascends to skim, touch, and tear again.  So mingled the
feathered multitude in the grim game of war.  It was a storm in which
the wind was birds, and the sea men.  And ever as each bird arrived at
the rear of the enemy, it turned, ascended, and sped to the front to
charge again.

The moment the battle began, the princess's pony took fright, and
turned and fled.  But the maid wheeled her horse across the road and
stopped him; and they waited together the result of the battle.

And as they waited, it seemed to the princess right strange that the
pigeons, every one as it came to the rear, and fetched a compass to
gather force for the reattack, should make the head of her attendant on
the red horse the goal around which it turned; so that about them was
an unintermittent flapping and flashing of wings, and a curving,
sweeping torrent of the side-poised wheeling bodies of birds.  Strange
also it seemed that the maid should be constantly waving her arm toward
the battle.  And the time of the motion of her arm so fitted with the
rushes of birds, that it looked as if the birds obeyed her gesture, and
she was casting living javelins by the thousand against the enemy.  The
moment a pigeon had rounded her head, it went off straight as bolt from
bow, and with trebled velocity.

But of these strange things, others besides the princess had taken
note.  From a rising ground whence they watched the battle in growing
dismay, the leaders of the enemy saw the maid and her motions, and,
concluding her an enchantress, whose were the airy legions humiliating
them, set spurs to their horses, made a circuit, outflanked the king,
and came down upon her.  But suddenly by her side stood a stalwart old
man in the garb of a miner, who, as the general rode at her, sword in
hand, heaved his swift mattock, and brought it down with such force on
the forehead of his charger, that he fell to the ground like a log.
His rider shot over his head and lay stunned.  Had not the great red
horse reared and wheeled, he would have fallen beneath that of the
general.

With lifted sabre, one of his attendant officers rode at the miner. But
a mass of pigeons darted in the faces of him and his horse, and the
next moment he lay beside his commander.

The rest of them turned and fled, pursued by the birds.

'Ah, friend Peter!' said the maid; 'thou hast come as I told thee!
Welcome and thanks!'

By this time the battle was over.  The rout was general.  The enemy
stormed back upon their own camp, with the beasts roaring in the midst
of them, and the king and his army, now reinforced by one, pursuing.
But presently the king drew rein.

'Call off your hounds, Curdie, and let the pigeons do the rest,' he
shouted, and turned to see what had become of the princess.

In full panic fled the invaders, sweeping down their tents, stumbling
over their baggage, trampling on their dead and wounded, ceaselessly
pursued and buffeted by the white-winged army of heaven.  Homeward they
rushed the road they had come, straight for the borders, many dropping
from pure fatigue, and lying where they fell.  And still the pigeons
were in their necks as they ran.  At length to the eyes of the king and
his army nothing was visible save a dust cloud below, and a bird cloud
above.  Before night the bird cloud came back, flying high over
Gwyntystorm.  Sinking swiftly, it disappeared among the ancient roofs
of the palace.



CHAPTER 34

Judgement

The king and his army returned, bringing with them one prisoner only,
the lord chancellor.  Curdie had dragged him from under a fallen tent,
not by the hand of a man, but by the foot of a mule.

When they entered the city, it was still as the grave.  The citizens
had fled home.  'We must submit,' they cried, 'or the king and his
demons will destroy us.'  The king rode through the streets in silence,
ill-pleased with his people.  But he stopped his horse in the midst of
the market place, and called, in a voice loud and clear as the cry of a
silver trumpet, 'Go and find your own.  Bury your dead, and bring home
your wounded.'  Then he turned him gloomily to the palace.

Just as they reached the gates, Peter, who, as they went, had been
telling his tale to Curdie, ended it with the words:

'And so there I was, in the nick of time to save the two princesses!'

'The two princesses, Father!  The one on the great red horse was the
housemaid,' said Curdie, and ran to open the gates for the king.

They found Derba returned before them, and already busy preparing them
food.  The king put up his charger with his own hands, rubbed him down,
and fed him.

When they had washed, and eaten and drunk, he called the colonel, and
told Curdie and the page to bring out the traitors and the beasts, and
attend him to the market place.

By this time the people were crowding back into the city, bearing their
dead and wounded.  And there was lamentation in Gwyntystorm, for no one
could comfort himself, and no one had any to comfort him.  The nation
was victorious, but the people were conquered.

The king stood in the centre of the market place, upon the steps of the
ancient cross.  He had laid aside his helmet and put on his crown, but
he stood all armed beside, with his sword in his hand. He called the
people to him, and, for all the terror of the beasts, they dared not
disobey him.  Those, even, who were carrying their wounded laid them
down, and drew near trembling.

Then the king said to Curdie and the page:

'Set the evil men before me.'

He looked upon them for a moment in mingled anger and pity, then turned
to the people and said:

'Behold your trust!  Ye slaves, behold your leaders!  I would have
freed you, but ye would not be free.  Now shall ye be ruled with a rod
of iron, that ye may learn what freedom is, and love it and seek it.
These wretches I will send where they shall mislead you no longer.'

He made a sign to Curdie, who immediately brought up the legserpent.
To the body of the animal they bound the lord chamberlain, speechless
with horror.  The butler began to shriek and pray, but they bound him
on the back of Clubhead.  One after another, upon the largest of the
creatures they bound the whole seven, each through the unveiling terror
looking the villain he was.  Then said the king:

'I thank you, my good beasts; and I hope to visit you ere long. Take
these evil men with you, and go to your place.'

Like a whirlwind they were in the crowd, scattering it like dust. Like
hounds they rushed from the city, their burdens howling and raving.

What became of them I have never heard.

Then the king turned once more to the people and said, 'Go to your
houses'; nor vouchsafed them another word.  They crept home like
chidden hounds.

The king returned to the palace.  He made the colonel a duke, and the
page a knight, and Peter he appointed general of all his mines. But to
Curdie he said:

'You are my own boy, Curdie.  My child cannot choose but love you, and
when you are grown up--if you both will--you shall marry each other,
and be king and queen when I am gone.  Till then be the king's Curdie.'

Irene held out her arms to Curdie.  He raised her in his, and she
kissed him.

'And my Curdie too!' she said.

Thereafter the people called him Prince Conrad; but the king always
called him either just Curdie, or my miner boy.

They sat down to supper, and Derba and the knight and the housemaid
waited, and Barbara sat at the king's left hand.  The housemaid poured
out the wine; and as she poured for Curdie red wine that foamed in the
cup, as if glad to see the light whence it had been banished so long,
she looked him in the eyes.  And Curdie started, and sprang from his
seat, and dropped on his knees, and burst into tears.  And the maid
said with a smile, such as none but one could smile:

'Did I not tell you, Curdie, that it might be you would not know me
when next you saw me?'

Then she went from the room, and in a moment returned in royal purple,
with a crown of diamonds and rubies, from under which her hair went
flowing to the floor, all about her ruby-slippered feet. Her face was
radiant with joy, the joy overshadowed by a faint mist as of
unfulfilment.  The king rose and kneeled on one knee before her.  All
kneeled in like homage.  Then the king would have yielded her his royal
chair.  But she made them all sit down, and with her own hands placed
at the table seats for Derba and the page.  Then in ruby crown and
royal purple she served them all.



CHAPTER 35

The End

The king sent Curdie out into his dominions to search for men and women
that had human hands.  And many such he found, honest and true, and
brought them to his master.  So a new and upright court was formed, and
strength returned to the nation.

But the exchequer was almost empty, for the evil men had squandered
everything, and the king hated taxes unwillingly paid.  Then came
Curdie and said to the king that the city stood upon gold.  And the
king sent for men wise in the ways of the earth, and they built
smelting furnaces, and Peter brought miners, and they mined the gold,
and smelted it, and the king coined it into money, and therewith
established things well in the land.

The same day on which he found his boy, Peter set out to go home. When
he told the good news to Joan, his wife, she rose from her chair and
said, 'Let us go.'  And they left the cottage, and repaired to
Gwyntystorm.  And on a mountain above the city they built themselves a
warm house for their old age, high in the clear air.

As Peter mined one day, at the back of the king's wine Cellar, he broke
into a cavern crusted with gems, and much wealth flowed therefrom, and
the king used it wisely.

Queen Irene--that was the right name of the old princess--was
thereafter seldom long absent from the palace.  Once or twice when she
was missing, Barbara, who seemed to know of her sometimes when nobody
else had a notion whither she had gone, said she was with the dear old
Uglies in the wood.  Curdie thought that perhaps her business might be
with others there as well.  All the uppermost rooms in the palace were
left to her use, and when any one was in need of her help, up thither
he must go.  But even when she was there, he did not always succeed in
finding her.  She, however, always knew that such a one had been
looking for her.

Curdie went to find her one day.  As he ascended the last stair, to
meet him came the well-known scent of her roses; and when he opened the
door, lo! there was the same gorgeous room in which his touch had been
glorified by her fire!  And there burned the fire--a huge heap of red
and white roses.  Before the hearth stood the princess, an old
grey-haired woman, with Lina a little behind her, slowly wagging her
tail, and looking like a beast of prey that can hardly so long restrain
itself from springing as to be sure of its victim. The queen was
casting roses, more and more roses, upon the fire. At last she turned
and said, 'Now Lina!'--and Lina dashed burrowing into the fire.  There
went up a black smoke and a dust, and Lina was never more seen in the
palace.

Irene and Curdie were married.  The old king died, and they were king
and queen.  As long as they lived Gwyntystorm was a better city, and
good people grew in it.  But they had no children, and when they died
the people chose a king.  And the new king went mining and mining in
the rock under the city, and grew more and more eager after the gold,
and paid less and less heed to his people.  Rapidly they sank toward
their old wickedness.  But still the king went on mining, and coining
gold by the pailful, until the people were worse even than in the old
time.  And so greedy was the king after gold, that when at last the ore
began to fail, he caused the miners to reduce the pillars which Peter
and they that followed him had left standing to bear the city.  And
from the girth of an oak of a thousand years, they chipped them down to
that of a fir tree of fifty.

One day at noon, when life was at its highest, the whole city fell with
a roaring crash.  The cries of men and the shrieks of women went up
with its dust, and then there was a great silence.

Where the mighty rock once towered, crowded with homes and crowned with
a palace, now rushes and raves a stone-obstructed rapid of the river.
All around spreads a wilderness of wild deer, and the very name of
Gwyntystorm had ceased from the lips of men.





CHAPTER 1

Why the Princess Has a Story About Her

There was once a little princess whose father was king over a great
country full of mountains and valleys.  His palace was built upon one
of the mountains, and was very grand and beautiful.  The princess,
whose name was Irene, was born there, but she was sent soon after her
birth, because her mother was not very strong, to be brought up by
country people in a large house, half castle, half farmhouse, on the
side of another mountain, about half-way between its base and its peak.

The princess was a sweet little creature, and at the time my story
begins was about eight years old, I think, but she got older very fast.
Her face was fair and pretty, with eyes like two bits of night sky,
each with a star dissolved in the blue.  Those eyes you would have
thought must have known they came from there, so often were they turned
up in that direction.  The ceiling of her nursery was blue, with stars
in it, as like the sky as they could make it. But I doubt if ever she
saw the real sky with the stars in it, for a reason which I had better
mention at once.

These mountains were full of hollow places underneath; huge caverns,
and winding ways, some with water running through them, and some
shining with all colours of the rainbow when a light was taken in.
There would not have been much known about them, had there not been
mines there, great deep pits, with long galleries and passages running
off from them, which had been dug to get at the ore of which the
mountains were full.  In the course of digging, the miners came upon
many of these natural caverns.  A few of them had far-off openings out
on the side of a mountain, or into a ravine.

Now in these subterranean caverns lived a strange race of beings,
called by some gnomes, by some kobolds, by some goblins.  There was a
legend current in the country that at one time they lived above ground,
and were very like other people.  But for some reason or other,
concerning which there were different legendary theories, the king had
laid what they thought too severe taxes upon them, or had required
observances of them they did not like, or had begun to treat them with
more severity, in some way or other, and impose stricter laws; and the
consequence was that they had all disappeared from the face of the
country.  According to the legend, however, instead of going to some
other country, they had all taken refuge in the subterranean caverns,
whence they never came out but at night, and then seldom showed
themselves in any numbers, and never to many people at once.  It was
only in the least frequented and most difficult parts of the mountains
that they were said to gather even at night in the open air.  Those who
had caught sight of any of them said that they had greatly altered in
the course of generations; and no wonder, seeing they lived away from
the sun, in cold and wet and dark places.  They were now, not
ordinarily ugly, but either absolutely hideous, or ludicrously
grotesque both in face and form.  There was no invention, they said, of
the most lawless imagination expressed by pen or pencil, that could
surpass the extravagance of their appearance.  But I suspect those who
said so had mistaken some of their animal companions for the goblins
themselves--of which more by and by.  The goblins themselves were not
so far removed from the human as such a description would imply.  And
as they grew misshapen in body they had grown in knowledge and
cleverness, and now were able to do things no mortal could see the
possibility of.  But as they grew in cunning, they grew in mischief,
and their great delight was in every way they could think of to annoy
the people who lived in the open-air storey above them.  They had
enough of affection left for each other to preserve them from being
absolutely cruel for cruelty's sake to those that came in their way;
but still they so heartily cherished the ancestral grudge against those
who occupied their former possessions and especially against the
descendants of the king who had caused their expulsion, that they
sought every opportunity of tormenting them in ways that were as odd as
their inventors; and although dwarfed and misshapen, they had strength
equal to their cunning.  In the process of time they had got a king and
a government of their own, whose chief business, beyond their own
simple affairs, was to devise trouble for their neighbours.  It will
now be pretty evident why the little princess had never seen the sky at
night.  They were much too afraid of the goblins to let her out of the
house then, even in company with ever so many attendants; and they had
good reason, as we shall see by and by.



CHAPTER 2

The Princess Loses Herself

I have said the Princess Irene was about eight years old when my story
begins.  And this is how it begins.

One very wet day, when the mountain was covered with mist which was
constantly gathering itself together into raindrops, and pouring down
on the roofs of the great old house, whence it fell in a fringe of
water from the eaves all round about it, the princess could not of
course go out.  She got very tired, so tired that even her toys could
no longer amuse her.  You would wonder at that if I had time to
describe to you one half of the toys she had.  But then, you wouldn't
have the toys themselves, and that makes all the difference: you can't
get tired of a thing before you have it.  It was a picture, though,
worth seeing--the princess sitting in the nursery with the sky ceiling
over her head, at a great table covered with her toys.  If the artist
would like to draw this, I should advise him not to meddle with the
toys.  I am afraid of attempting to describe them, and I think he had
better not try to draw them.  He had better not.  He can do a thousand
things I can't, but I don't think he could draw those toys.  No man
could better make the princess herself than he could, though--leaning
with her back bowed into the back of the chair, her head hanging down,
and her hands in her lap, very miserable as she would say herself, not
even knowing what she would like, except it were to go out and get
thoroughly wet, and catch a particularly nice cold, and have to go to
bed and take gruel.  The next moment after you see her sitting there,
her nurse goes out of the room.

Even that is a change, and the princess wakes up a little, and looks
about her.  Then she tumbles off her chair and runs out of the door,
not the same door the nurse went out of, but one which opened at the
foot of a curious old stair of worm-eaten oak, which looked as if never
anyone had set foot upon it.  She had once before been up six steps,
and that was sufficient reason, in such a day, for trying to find out
what was at the top of it.

Up and up she ran--such a long way it seemed to her!--until she came to
the top of the third flight.  There she found the landing was the end
of a long passage.  Into this she ran.  It was full of doors on each
side.  There were so many that she did not care to open any, but ran on
to the end, where she turned into another passage, also full of doors.
When she had turned twice more, and still saw doors and only doors
about her, she began to get frightened.  It was so silent!  And all
those doors must hide rooms with nobody in them!  That was dreadful.
Also the rain made a great trampling noise on the roof.  She turned and
started at full speed, her little footsteps echoing through the sounds
of the rain--back for the stairs and her safe nursery.  So she thought,
but she had lost herself long ago.  It doesn't follow that she was
lost, because she had lost herself, though.

She ran for some distance, turned several times, and then began to be
afraid.  Very soon she was sure that she had lost the way back. Rooms
everywhere, and no stair!  Her little heart beat as fast as her little
feet ran, and a lump of tears was growing in her throat. But she was
too eager and perhaps too frightened to cry for some time.  At last her
hope failed her.  Nothing but passages and doors everywhere!  She threw
herself on the floor, and burst into a wailing cry broken by sobs.

She did not cry long, however, for she was as brave as could be
expected of a princess of her age.  After a good cry, she got up, and
brushed the dust from her frock.  Oh, what old dust it was! Then she
wiped her eyes with her hands, for princesses don't always have their
handkerchiefs in their pockets, any more than some other little girls I
know of.  Next, like a true princess, she resolved on going wisely to
work to find her way back: she would walk through the passages, and
look in every direction for the stair. This she did, but without
success.  She went over the same ground again an again without knowing
it, for the passages and doors were all alike.  At last, in a corner,
through a half-open door, she did see a stair.  But alas! it went the
wrong way: instead of going down, it went up.  Frightened as she was,
however, she could not help wishing to see where yet further the stair
could lead.  It was very narrow, and so steep that she went on like a
four-legged creature on her hands and feet.



CHAPTER 3

The Princess and--We Shall See Who

When she came to the top, she found herself in a little square place,
with three doors, two opposite each other, and one opposite the top of
the stair.  She stood for a moment, without an idea in her little head
what to do next.  But as she stood, she began to hear a curious humming
sound.  Could it be the rain?  No.  It was much more gentle, and even
monotonous than the sound of the rain, which now she scarcely heard.
The low sweet humming sound went on, sometimes stopping for a little
while and then beginning again.  It was more like the hum of a very
happy bee that had found a rich well of honey in some globular flower,
than anything else I can think of at this moment.  Where could it come
from?  She laid her ear first to one of the doors to hearken if it was
there--then to another.  When she laid her ear against the third door,
there could be no doubt where it came from: it must be from something
in that room.  What could it be?  She was rather afraid, but her
curiosity was stronger than her fear, and she opened the door very
gently and peeped in.  What do you think she saw?  A very old lady who
sat spinning.

Perhaps you will wonder how the princess could tell that the old lady
was an old lady, when I inform you that not only was she beautiful, but
her skin was smooth and white.  I will tell you more.  Her hair was
combed back from her forehead and face, and hung loose far down and all
over her back.  That is not much like an old lady--is it?  Ah! but it
was white almost as snow.  And although her face was so smooth, her
eyes looked so wise that you could not have helped seeing she must be
old.  The princess, though she could not have told you why, did think
her very old indeed--quite fifty, she said to herself.  But she was
rather older than that, as you shall hear.

While the princess stared bewildered, with her head just inside the
door, the old lady lifted hers, and said, in a sweet, but old and
rather shaky voice, which mingled very pleasantly with the continued
hum of her wheel:

'Come in, my dear; come in.  I am glad to see you.'

That the princess was a real princess you might see now quite plainly;
for she didn't hang on to the handle of the door, and stare without
moving, as I have known some do who ought to have been princesses but
were only rather vulgar little girls.  She did as she was told, stepped
inside the door at once, and shut it gently behind her.

'Come to me, my dear,' said the old lady.

And again the princess did as she was told.  She approached the old
lady--rather slowly, I confess--but did not stop until she stood by her
side, and looked up in her face with her blue eyes and the two melted
stars in them.

'Why, what have you been doing with your eyes, child?' asked the old
lady.

'Crying,' answered the princess.

'Why, child?'

'Because I couldn't find my way down again.'

'But you could find your way up.'

'Not at first--not for a long time.'

'But your face is streaked like the back of a zebra.  Hadn't you a
handkerchief to wipe your eyes with?'

'No.'

'Then why didn't you come to me to wipe them for you?'

'Please, I didn't know you were here.  I will next time.'

'There's a good child!' said the old lady.

Then she stopped her wheel, and rose, and, going out of the room,
returned with a little silver basin and a soft white towel, with which
she washed and wiped the bright little face.  And the princess thought
her hands were so smooth and nice!

When she carried away the basin and towel, the little princess wondered
to see how straight and tall she was, for, although she was so old, she
didn't stoop a bit.  She was dressed in black velvet with thick white
heavy-looking lace about it; and on the black dress her hair shone like
silver.  There was hardly any more furniture in the room than there
might have been in that of the poorest old woman who made her bread by
her spinning.  There was no carpet on the floor--no table
anywhere--nothing but the spinning-wheel and the chair beside it.  When
she came back, she sat down and without a word began her spinning once
more, while Irene, who had never seen a spinning-wheel, stood by her
side and looked on.  When the old lady had got her thread fairly going
again, she said to the princess, but without looking at her:

'Do you know my name, child?'

'No, I don't know it,' answered the princess.

'My name is Irene.'

'That's my name!' cried the princess.

'I know that.  I let you have mine.  I haven't got your name. You've
got mine.'

'How can that be?' asked the princess, bewildered.  'I've always had my
name.'

'Your papa, the king, asked me if I had any objection to your having
it; and, of course, I hadn't.  I let you have it with pleasure.'

'It was very kind of you to give me your name--and such a pretty one,'
said the princess.

'Oh, not so very kind!' said the old lady.  'A name is one of those
things one can give away and keep all the same.  I have a good many
such things.  Wouldn't you like to know who I am, child?'

'Yes, that I should--very much.'

'I'm your great-great-grandmother,' said the lady.

'What's that?' asked the princess.

'I'm your father's mother's father's mother.'

'Oh, dear! I can't understand that,' said the princess.

'I dare say not.  I didn't expect you would.  But that's no reason why
I shouldn't say it.'

'Oh, no!' answered the princess.

'I will explain it all to you when you are older,' the lady went on.
'But you will be able to understand this much now: I came here to take
care of you.'

'Is it long since you came?  Was it yesterday?  Or was it today,
because it was so wet that I couldn't get out?'

'I've been here ever since you came yourself.'

'What a long time!' said the princess.  'I don't remember it at all.'

'No.  I suppose not.'

'But I never saw you before.'

'No.  But you shall see me again.'

'Do you live in this room always?'

'I don't sleep in it.  I sleep on the opposite side of the landing. I
sit here most of the day.'

'I shouldn't like it.  My nursery is much prettier.  You must be a
queen too, if you are my great big grand-mother.'

'Yes, I am a queen.'

'Where is your crown, then?' 'In my bedroom.'

'I should like to see it.'

'You shall some day--not today.'

'I wonder why nursie never told me.'

'Nursie doesn't know.  She never saw me.'

'But somebody knows that you are in the house?'

'No; nobody.'

'How do you get your dinner, then?'

'I keep poultry--of a sort.'

'Where do you keep them?'

'I will show you.'

'And who makes the chicken broth for you?'

'I never kill any of MY chickens.'

'Then I can't understand.'

'What did you have for breakfast this morning?' asked the lady.

'Oh! I had bread and milk, and an egg--I dare say you eat their eggs.'

'Yes, that's it.  I eat their eggs.'

'Is that what makes your hair so white?'

'No, my dear.  It's old age.  I am very old.'

'I thought so.  Are you fifty?'

'Yes--more than that.'

'Are you a hundred?'

'Yes--more than that.  I am too old for you to guess.  Come and see my
chickens.'

Again she stopped her spinning.  She rose, took the princess by the
hand, led her out of the room, and opened the door opposite the stair.
The princess expected to see a lot of hens and chickens, but instead of
that, she saw the blue sky first, and then the roofs of the house, with
a multitude of the loveliest pigeons, mostly white, but of all colours,
walking about, making bows to each other, and talking a language she
could not understand.  She clapped her hands with delight, and up rose
such a flapping of wings that she in her turn was startled.

'You've frightened my poultry,' said the old lady, smiling.

'And they've frightened me,' said the princess, smiling too.  'But what
very nice poultry!  Are the eggs nice?'

'Yes, very nice.' 'What a small egg-spoon you must have!  Wouldn't it
be better to keep hens, and get bigger eggs?'

'How should I feed them, though?'

'I see,' said the princess.  'The pigeons feed themselves.  They've got
wings.'

'Just so.  If they couldn't fly, I couldn't eat their eggs.'

'But how do you get at the eggs?  Where are their nests?'

The lady took hold of a little loop of string in the wall at the side
of the door and, lifting a shutter, showed a great many pigeon-holes
with nests, some with young ones and some with eggs in them.  The birds
came in at the other side, and she took out the eggs on this side.  She
closed it again quickly, lest the young ones should be frightened.

'Oh, what a nice way!' cried the princess.  'Will you give me an egg to
eat?  I'm rather hungry.'

'I will some day, but now you must go back, or nursie will be miserable
about you.  I dare say she's looking for you everywhere.'

'Except here,' answered the princess.  'Oh, how surprised she will be
when I tell her about my great big grand-grand-mother!'

'Yes, that she will!' said the old lady with a curious smile. 'Mind you
tell her all about it exactly.'

'That I will.  Please will you take me back to her?'

'I can't go all the way, but I will take you to the top of the stair,
and then you must run down quite fast into your own room.'

The little princess put her hand in the old lady's, who, looking this
way and that, brought her to the top of the first stair, and thence to
the bottom of the second, and did not leave her till she saw her
half-way down the third.  When she heard the cry of her nurse's
pleasure at finding her, she turned and walked up the stairs again,
very fast indeed for such a very great grandmother, and sat down to her
spinning with another strange smile on her sweet old face.

About this spinning of hers I will tell you more another time.

Guess what she was spinning.



CHAPTER 4

What the Nurse Thought of It

'Why, where can you have been, princess?' asked the nurse, taking her
in her arms.  'It's very unkind of you to hide away so long. I began to
be afraid--'  Here she checked herself.

'What were you afraid of, nursie?' asked the princess.

'Never mind,' she answered.  'Perhaps I will tell you another day. Now
tell me where you have been.'

'I've been up a long way to see my very great, huge, old grandmother,'
said the princess.

'What do you mean by that?' asked the nurse, who thought she was making
fun.

'I mean that I've been a long way up and up to see My GREAT
grandmother.  Ah, nursie, you don't know what a beautiful mother of
grandmothers I've got upstairs.  She is such an old lady, with such
lovely white hair--as white as my silver cup.  Now, when I think of it,
I think her hair must be silver.'

'What nonsense you are talking, princess!' said the nurse.

'I'm not talking nonsense,' returned Irene, rather offended.  'I will
tell you all about her.  She's much taller than you, and much prettier.'

'Oh, I dare say!' remarked the nurse.

'And she lives upon pigeons' eggs.'

'Most likely,' said the nurse.

'And she sits in an empty room, spin-spinning all day long.'

'Not a doubt of it,' said the nurse.

'And she keeps her crown in her bedroom.'

'Of course--quite the proper place to keep her crown in.  She wears it
in bed, I'll be bound.'

'She didn't say that.  And I don't think she does.  That wouldn't be
comfortable--would it?  I don't think my papa wears his crown for a
night-cap.  Does he, nursie?'

'I never asked him.  I dare say he does.'

'And she's been there ever since I came here--ever so many years.'

'Anybody could have told you that,' said the nurse, who did not believe
a word Irene was saying.

'Why didn't you tell me, then?'

'There was no necessity.  You could make it all up for yourself.'

'You don't believe me, then!' exclaimed the princess, astonished and
angry, as she well might be.

'Did you expect me to believe you, princess?' asked the nurse coldly.
'I know princesses are in the habit of telling make-believes, but you
are the first I ever heard of who expected to have them believed,' she
added, seeing that the child was strangely in earnest.

The princess burst into tears.

'Well, I must say,' remarked the nurse, now thoroughly vexed with her
for crying, 'it is not at all becoming in a princess to tell stories
and expect to be believed just because she is a princess.'

'But it's quite true, I tell you.'

'You've dreamt it, then, child.'

'No, I didn't dream it.  I went upstairs, and I lost myself, and if I
hadn't found the beautiful lady, I should never have found myself.'

'Oh, I dare say!'

'Well, you just come up with me, and see if I'm not telling the truth.'

'Indeed I have other work to do.  It's your dinnertime, and I won't
have any more such nonsense.'

The princess wiped her eyes, and her face grew so hot that they were
soon quite dry.  She sat down to her dinner, but ate next to nothing.
Not to be believed does not at all agree with princesses: for a real
princess cannot tell a lie.  So all the afternoon she did not speak a
word.  Only when the nurse spoke to her, she answered her, for a real
princess is never rude--even when she does well to be offended.

Of course the nurse was not comfortable in her mind--not that she
suspected the least truth in Irene's story, but that she loved her
dearly, and was vexed with herself for having been cross to her. She
thought her crossness was the cause of the princess's unhappiness, and
had no idea that she was really and deeply hurt at not being believed.
But, as it became more and more plain during the evening in her every
motion and look, that, although she tried to amuse herself with her
toys, her heart was too vexed and troubled to enjoy them, her nurse's
discomfort grew and grew.  When bedtime came, she undressed and laid
her down, but the child, instead of holding up her little mouth to be
kissed, turned away from her and lay still.  Then nursie's heart gave
way altogether, and she began to cry.  At the sound of her first sob
the princess turned again, and held her face to kiss her as usual.  But
the nurse had her handkerchief to her eyes, and did not see the
movement.

'Nursie,' said the princess, 'why won't you believe me?'

'Because I can't believe you,' said the nurse, getting angry again.

'Ah! then, you can't help it,' said Irene, 'and I will not be vexed
with you any more.  I will give you a kiss and go to sleep.'

'You little angel!' cried the nurse, and caught her out of bed, and
walked about the room with her in her arms, kissing and hugging her.

'You will let me take you to see my dear old great big grandmother,
won't you?' said the princess, as she laid her down again.

'And you won't say I'm ugly, any more--will you, princess?' 'Nursie, I
never said you were ugly.  What can you mean?'

'Well, if you didn't say it, you meant it.'

'Indeed, I never did.'

'You said I wasn't so pretty as that--'

'As my beautiful grandmother--yes, I did say that; and I say it again,
for it's quite true.'

'Then I do think you are unkind!' said the nurse, and put her
handkerchief to her eyes again.

'Nursie, dear, everybody can't be as beautiful as every other body, you
know.  You are very nice-looking, but if you had been as beautiful as
my grandmother--'

'Bother your grandmother!' said the nurse.

'Nurse, that's very rude.  You are not fit to be spoken to till you can
behave better.'

The princess turned away once more, and again the nurse was ashamed of
herself.

'I'm sure I beg your pardon, princess,' she said, though still in an
offended tone.  But the princess let the tone pass, and heeded only the
words.

'You won't say it again, I am sure,' she answered, once more turning
towards her nurse.  'I was only going to say that if you had been twice
as nice-looking as you are, some king or other would have married you,
and then what would have become of me?'

'You are an angel!' repeated the nurse, again embracing her. 'Now,'
insisted Irene, 'you will come and see my grandmother--won't you?'

'I will go with you anywhere you like, my cherub,' she answered; and in
two minutes the weary little princess was fast asleep.



CHAPTER 5

The Princess Lets Well Alone

When she woke the next morning, the first thing she heard was the rain
still falling.  Indeed, this day was so like the last that it would
have been difficult to tell where was the use of It.  The first thing
she thought of, however, was not the rain, but the lady in the tower;
and the first question that occupied her thoughts was whether she
should not ask the nurse to fulfil her promise this very morning, and
go with her to find her grandmother as soon as she had had her
breakfast.  But she came to the conclusion that perhaps the lady would
not be pleased if she took anyone to see her without first asking
leave; especially as it was pretty evident, seeing she lived on
pigeons' eggs, and cooked them herself, that she did not want the
household to know she was there.  So the princess resolved to take the
first opportunity of running up alone and asking whether she might
bring her nurse.  She believed the fact that she could not otherwise
convince her she was telling the truth would have much weight with her
grandmother.

The princess and her nurse were the best of friends all dressing-time,
and the princess in consequence ate an enormous little breakfast.

'I wonder, Lootie'--that was her pet name for her nurse--'what pigeons'
eggs taste like?' she said, as she was eating her egg--not quite a
common one, for they always picked out the pinky ones for her.

'We'll get you a pigeon's egg, and you shall judge for yourself,' said
the nurse.

'Oh, no, no!' returned Irene, suddenly reflecting they might disturb
the old lady in getting it, and that even if they did not, she would
have one less in consequence.

'What a strange creature you are,' said the nurse--'first to want a
thing and then to refuse it!'

But she did not say it crossly, and the princess never minded any
remarks that were not unfriendly.

'Well, you see, Lootie, there are reasons,' she returned, and said no
more, for she did not want to bring up the subject of their former
strife, lest her nurse should offer to go before she had had her
grandmother's permission to bring her.  Of course she could refuse to
take her, but then she would believe her less than ever.

Now the nurse, as she said herself afterwards, could not be every
moment in the room; and as never before yesterday had the princess
given her the smallest reason for anxiety, it had not yet come into her
head to watch her more closely.  So she soon gave her a chance, and,
the very first that offered, Irene was off and up the stairs again.

This day's adventure, however, did not turn out like yesterday's,
although it began like it; and indeed to-day is very seldom like
yesterday, if people would note the differences--even when it rains.
The princess ran through passage after passage, and could not find the
stair of the tower.  My own suspicion is that she had not gone up high
enough, and was searching on the second instead of the third floor.
When she turned to go back, she failed equally in her search after the
stair.  She was lost once more.

Something made it even worse to bear this time, and it was no wonder
that she cried again.  Suddenly it occurred to her that it was after
having cried before that she had found her grandmother's stair.  She
got up at once, wiped her eyes, and started upon a fresh quest.

This time, although she did not find what she hoped, she found what was
next best: she did not come on a stair that went up, but she came upon
one that went down.  It was evidently not the stair she had come up,
yet it was a good deal better than none; so down she went, and was
singing merrily before she reached the bottom. There, to her surprise,
she found herself in the kitchen.  Although she was not allowed to go
there alone, her nurse had often taken her, and she was a great
favourite with the servants.  So there was a general rush at her the
moment she appeared, for every one wanted to have her; and the report
of where she was soon reached the nurse's ears.  She came at once to
fetch her; but she never suspected how she had got there, and the
princess kept her own counsel.

Her failure to find the old lady not only disappointed her, but made
her very thoughtful.  Sometimes she came almost to the nurse's opinion
that she had dreamed all about her; but that fancy never lasted very
long.  She wondered much whether she should ever see her again, and
thought it very sad not to have been able to find her when she
particularly wanted her.  She resolved to say nothing more to her nurse
on the subject, seeing it was so little in her power to prove her words.



CHAPTER 6

The Little Miner

The next day the great cloud still hung over the mountain, and the rain
poured like water from a full sponge.  The princess was very fond of
being out of doors, and she nearly cried when she saw that the weather
was no better.  But the mist was not of such a dark dingy grey; there
was light in it; and as the hours went on it grew brighter and
brighter, until it was almost too brilliant to look at; and late in the
afternoon the sun broke out so gloriously that Irene clapped her hands,
crying:

'See, see, Lootie!  The sun has had his face washed.  Look how bright
he is!  Do get my hat, and let us go out for a walk.  Oh, dear! oh,
dear! how happy I am!'

Lootie was very glad to please the princess.  She got her hat and
cloak, and they set out together for a walk up the mountain; for the
road was so hard and steep that the water could not rest upon it, and
it was always dry enough for walking a few minutes after the rain
ceased.  The clouds were rolling away in broken pieces, like great,
overwoolly sheep, whose wool the sun had bleached till it was almost
too white for the eyes to bear.  Between them the sky shone with a
deeper and purer blue, because of the rain.  The trees on the roadside
were hung all over with drops, which sparkled in the sun like jewels.
The only things that were no brighter for the rain were the brooks that
ran down the mountain; they had changed from the clearness of crystal
to a muddy brown; but what they lost in colour they gained in sound--or
at least in noise, for a brook when it is swollen is not so musical as
before.  But Irene was in raptures with the great brown streams
tumbling down everywhere; and Lootie shared in her delight, for she too
had been confined to the house for three days.

At length she observed that the sun was getting low, and said it was
time to be going back.  She made the remark again and again, but, every
time, the princess begged her to go on just a little farther and a
little farther; reminding her that it was much easier to go downhill,
and saying that when they did turn they would be at home in a moment.
So on and on they did go, now to look at a group of ferns over whose
tops a stream was pouring in a watery arch, now to pick a shining stone
from a rock by the wayside, now to watch the flight of some bird.
Suddenly the shadow of a great mountain peak came up from behind, and
shot in front of them.  When the nurse saw it, she started and shook,
and catching hold of the princess's hand turned and began to run down
the hill.

'What's all the haste, nursie?' asked Irene, running alongside of her.

'We must not be out a moment longer.'

'But we can't help being out a good many moments longer.'

It was too true.  The nurse almost cried.  They were much too far from
home.  It was against express orders to be out with the princess one
moment after the sun was down; and they were nearly a mile up the
mountain!  If His Majesty, Irene's papa, were to hear of it, Lootie
would certainly be dismissed; and to leave the princess would break her
heart.  It was no wonder she ran.  But Irene was not in the least
frightened, not knowing anything to be frightened at.  She kept on
chattering as well as she could, but it was not easy.

'Lootie! Lootie! why do you run so fast?  It shakes my teeth when I
talk.'

'Then don't talk,' said Lootie.

'But the princess went on talking.  She was always saying: 'Look, look,
Lootie!' but Lootie paid no more heed to anything she said, only ran on.

'Look, look, Lootie!  Don't you see that funny man peeping over the
rock?'

Lootie only ran the faster.  They had to pass the rock, and when they
came nearer, the princess saw it was only a lump of the rock itself
that she had taken for a man.

'Look, look, Lootie!  There's such a curious creature at the foot of
that old tree.  Look at it, Lootie!  It's making faces at us, I do
think.'

Lootie gave a stifled cry, and ran faster still--so fast that Irene's
little legs could not keep up with her, and she fell with a crash.  It
was a hard downhill road, and she had been running very fast--so it was
no wonder she began to cry.  This put the nurse nearly beside herself;
but all she could do was to run on, the moment she got the princess on
her feet again.

'Who's that laughing at me?' said the princess, trying to keep in her
sobs, and running too fast for her grazed knees.

'Nobody, child,' said the nurse, almost angrily.

But that instant there came a burst of coarse tittering from somewhere
near, and a hoarse indistinct voice that seemed to say: 'Lies! lies!
lies!'

'Oh!' cried the nurse with a sigh that was almost a scream, and ran on
faster than ever.

'Nursie! Lootie! I can't run any more.  Do let us walk a bit.'

'What am I to do?' said the nurse.  'Here, I will carry you.'

She caught her up; but found her much too heavy to run with, and had to
set her down again.  Then she looked wildly about her, gave a great
cry, and said:

'We've taken the wrong turning somewhere, and I don't know where we
are.  We are lost, lost!'

The terror she was in had quite bewildered her.  It was true enough
they had lost the way.  They had been running down into a little valley
in which there was no house to be seen.

Now Irene did not know what good reason there was for her nurse's
terror, for the servants had all strict orders never to mention the
goblins to her, but it was very discomposing to see her nurse in such a
fright.  Before, however, she had time to grow thoroughly alarmed like
her, she heard the sound of whistling, and that revived her.  Presently
she saw a boy coming up the road from the valley to meet them.  He was
the whistler; but before they met his whistling changed to singing.
And this is something like what he sang:

  'Ring! dod! bang!
  Go the hammers' clang!
  Hit and turn and bore!
  Whizz and puff and roar!
  Thus we rive the rocks,
  Force the goblin locks.--
  See the shining ore!
  One, two, three--
  Bright as gold can be!
  Four, five, six--
  Shovels, mattocks, picks!
  Seven, eight, nine--
  Light your lamp at mine.
  Ten, eleven, twelve--
  Loosely hold the helve.
  We're the merry miner-boys,
  Make the goblins hold their noise.'


'I wish YOU would hold your noise,' said the nurse rudely, for the very
word GOBLIN at such a time and in such a place made her tremble.  It
would bring the goblins upon them to a certainty, she thought, to defy
them in that way.  But whether the boy heard her or not, he did not
stop his singing.


  'Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen--
  This is worth the siftin';
  Sixteen, seventeen, eighteen--
  There's the match, and lay't in.
  Nineteen, twenty--
  Goblins in a plenty.'


'Do be quiet,' cried the nurse, in a whispered shriek.  But the boy,
who was now close at hand, still went on.

  'Hush! scush! scurry!
  There you go in a hurry!
  Gobble! gobble! goblin!
  There you go a wobblin';
  Hobble, hobble, hobblin'--
  Cobble! cobble! cobblin'!
  Hob-bob-goblin!--
  Huuuuuh!'


'There!' said the boy, as he stood still opposite them.  'There!
that'll do for them.  They can't bear singing, and they can't stand
that song.  They can't sing themselves, for they have no more voice
than a crow; and they don't like other people to sing.'

The boy was dressed in a miner's dress, with a curious cap on his head.
He was a very nice-looking boy, with eyes as dark as the mines in which
he worked and as sparkling as the crystals in their rocks.  He was
about twelve years old.  His face was almost too pale for beauty, which
came of his being so little in the open air and the sunlight--for even
vegetables grown in the dark are white; but he looked happy, merry
indeed--perhaps at the thought of having routed the goblins; and his
bearing as he stood before them had nothing clownish or rude about it.

'I saw them,' he went on, 'as I came up; and I'm very glad I did. I
knew they were after somebody, but I couldn't see who it was. They
won't touch you so long as I'm with you.'

'Why, who are you?' asked the nurse, offended at the freedom with which
he spoke to them.

'I'm Peter's son.'

'Who's Peter?'

'Peter the miner.'

'I don't know him.' 'I'm his son, though.'

'And why should the goblins mind you, pray?'

'Because I don't mind them.  I'm used to them.'

'What difference does that make?'

'If you're not afraid of them, they're afraid of you.  I'm not afraid
of them.  That's all.  But it's all that's wanted--up here, that is.
It's a different thing down there.  They won't always mind that song
even, down there.  And if anyone sings it, they stand grinning at him
awfully; and if he gets frightened, and misses a word, or says a wrong
one, they--oh! don't they give it him!'

'What do they do to him?' asked Irene, with a trembling voice.

'Don't go frightening the princess,' said the nurse.

'The princess!' repeated the little miner, taking off his curious cap.
'I beg your pardon; but you oughtn't to be out so late. Everybody knows
that's against the law.'

'Yes, indeed it is!' said the nurse, beginning to cry again.  'And I
shall have to suffer for it.'

'What does that matter?' said the boy.  'It must be your fault.  It is
the princess who will suffer for it.  I hope they didn't hear you call
her the princess.  If they did, they're sure to know her again: they're
awfully sharp.'

'Lootie! Lootie!' cried the princess.  'Take me home.'

'Don't go on like that,' said the nurse to the boy, almost fiercely.
'How could I help it?  I lost my way.'

'You shouldn't have been out so late.  You wouldn't have lost your way
if you hadn't been frightened,' said the boy.  'Come along. I'll soon
set you right again.  Shall I carry your little Highness?'

'Impertinence!' murmured the nurse, but she did not say it aloud, for
she thought if she made him angry he might take his revenge by telling
someone belonging to the house, and then it would be sure to come to
the king's ears.  'No, thank you,' said Irene.  'I can walk very well,
though I can't run so fast as nursie.  If you will give me one hand,
Lootie will give me another, and then I shall get on famously.'

They soon had her between them, holding a hand of each.

'Now let's run,' said the nurse.

'No, no!' said the little miner.  'That's the worst thing you can do.
If you hadn't run before, you would not have lost your way. And if you
run now, they will be after you in a moment.'

'I don't want to run,' said Irene.

'You don't think of me,' said the nurse.

'Yes, I do, Lootie.  The boy says they won't touch us if we don't run.'

'Yes, but if they know at the house that I've kept you out so late I
shall be turned away, and that would break my heart.'

'Turned away, Lootie!  Who would turn you away?'

'Your papa, child.'

'But I'll tell him it was all my fault.  And you know it was, Lootie.'

'He won't mind that.  I'm sure he won't.'

'Then I'll cry, and go down on my knees to him, and beg him not to take
away my own dear Lootie.'

The nurse was comforted at hearing this, and said no more.  They went
on, walking pretty fast, but taking care not to run a step.

'I want to talk to you,' said Irene to the little miner; 'but it's so
awkward!  I don't know your name.'

'My name's Curdie, little princess.'

'What a funny name! Curdie!  What more?'

'Curdie Peterson.  What's your name, please?'

'Irene.'

'What more?'

'I don't know what more.  What more is my name, Lootie?'

'Princesses haven't got more than one name.  They don't want it.'

'Oh, then, Curdie, you must call me just Irene and no more.'

'No, indeed,' said the nurse indignantly.  'He shall do no such thing.'

'What shall he call me, then, Lootie?'

'Your Royal Highness.' 'My Royal Highness!  What's that?  No, no,
Lootie.  I won't be called names.  I don't like them.  You told me once
yourself it's only rude children that call names; and I'm sure Curdie
wouldn't be rude.  Curdie, my name's Irene.'

'Well, Irene,' said Curdie, with a glance at the nurse which showed he
enjoyed teasing her; 'it is very kind of you to let me call you
anything.  I like your name very much.'

He expected the nurse to interfere again; but he soon saw that she was
too frightened to speak.  She was staring at something a few yards
before them in the middle of the path, where it narrowed between rocks
so that only one could pass at a time.

'It is very much kinder of you to go out of your way to take us home,'
said Irene.

'I'm not going out of my way yet,' said Curdie.  'It's on the other
side of those rocks the path turns off to my father's.'

'You wouldn't think of leaving us till we're safe home, I'm sure,'
gasped the nurse.

'Of course not,' said Curdie.

'You dear, good, kind Curdie!  I'll give you a kiss when we get home,'
said the princess.

The nurse gave her a great pull by the hand she held.  But at that
instant the something in the middle of the way, which had looked like a
great lump of earth brought down by the rain, began to move. One after
another it shot out four long things, like two arms and two legs, but
it was now too dark to tell what they were.  The nurse began to tremble
from head to foot.  Irene clasped Curdie's hand yet faster, and Curdie
began to sing again:

  'One, two--
  Hit and hew!
  Three, four--
  Blast and bore!
  Five, six--
  There's a fix!
  Seven, eight--
  Hold it straight!
  Nine, ten--
  Hit again!
  Hurry! scurry!
  Bother! smother!
  There's a toad
  In the road!
  Smash it!
  Squash it!
  Fry it!
  Dry it!
  You're another!
  Up and off!
  There's enough!--
  Huuuuuh!'


As he uttered the last words, Curdie let go his hold of his companion,
and rushed at the thing in the road as if he would trample it under his
feet.  It gave a great spring, and ran straight up one of the rocks
like a huge spider.  Curdie turned back laughing, and took Irene's hand
again.  She grasped his very tight, but said nothing till they had
passed the rocks.  A few yards more and she found herself on a part of
the road she knew, and was able to speak again.

'Do you know, Curdie, I don't quite like your song: it sounds to me
rather rude,' she said.

'Well, perhaps it is,' answered Curdie.  'I never thought of that; it's
a way we have.  We do it because they don't like it.'

'Who don't like it?'

'The cobs, as we call them.'

'Don't!' said the nurse.

'Why not?' said Curdie.

'I beg you won't.  Please don't.'

'Oh! if you ask me that way, of course, I won't; though I don't a bit
know why.  Look! there are the lights of your great house down below.
You'll be at home in five minutes now.'

Nothing more happened.  They reached home in safety.  Nobody had missed
them, or even known they had gone out; and they arrived at the door
belonging to their part of the house without anyone seeing them.  The
nurse was rushing in with a hurried and not over-gracious good night to
Curdie; but the princess pulled her hand from hers, and was just
throwing her arms round Curdie's neck, when she caught her again and
dragged her away.

'Lootie! Lootie! I promised a kiss,' cried Irene.

'A princess mustn't give kisses.  It's not at all proper,' said Lootie.

'But I promised,' said the princess.

'There's no occasion; he's only a miner-boy.'

'He's a good boy, and a brave boy, and he has been very kind to us.
Lootie! Lootie! I promised.'

'Then you shouldn't have promised.'

'Lootie, I promised him a kiss.'

'Your Royal Highness,' said Lootie, suddenly grown very respectful,
'must come in directly.'

'Nurse, a princess must not break her word,' said Irene, drawing
herself up and standing stock-still.

Lootie did not know which the king might count the worst--to let the
princess be out after sunset, or to let her kiss a miner-boy. She did
not know that, being a gentleman, as many kings have been, he would
have counted neither of them the worse.  However much he might have
disliked his daughter to kiss the miner-boy, he would not have had her
break her word for all the goblins in creation. But, as I say, the
nurse was not lady enough to understand this, and so she was in a great
difficulty, for, if she insisted, someone might hear the princess cry
and run to see, and then all would come out.  But here Curdie came
again to the rescue.

'Never mind, Princess Irene,' he said.  'You mustn't kiss me tonight.
But you shan't break your word.  I will come another time.  You may be
sure I will.'

'Oh, thank you, Curdie!' said the princess, and stopped crying.

'Good night, Irene; good night, Lootie,' said Curdie, and turned and
was out of sight in a moment.

'I should like to see him!' muttered the nurse, as she carried the
princess to the nursery.

'You will see him,' said Irene.  'You may be sure Curdie will keep his
word.  He's sure to come again.'

'I should like to see him!' repeated the nurse, and said no more. She
did not want to open a new cause of strife with the princess by saying
more plainly what she meant.  Glad enough that she had succeeded both
in getting home unseen, and in keeping the princess from kissing the
miner's boy, she resolved to watch her far better in future.  Her
carelessness had already doubled the danger she was in.  Formerly the
goblins were her only fear; now she had to protect her charge from
Curdie as well.



CHAPTER 7

The Mines

Curdie went home whistling.  He resolved to say nothing about the
princess for fear of getting the nurse into trouble, for while he
enjoyed teasing her because of her absurdity, he was careful not to do
her any harm.  He saw no more of the goblins, and was soon fast asleep
in his bed.

He woke in the middle of the night, and thought he heard curious noises
outside.  He sat up and listened; then got up, and, opening the door
very quietly, went out.  When he peeped round the corner, he saw, under
his own window, a group of stumpy creatures, whom he at once recognized
by their shape.  Hardly, however, had he begun his 'One, two, three!'
when they broke asunder, scurried away, and were out of sight.  He
returned laughing, got into bed again, and was fast asleep in a moment.

Reflecting a little over the matter in the morning, he came to the
conclusion that, as nothing of the kind had ever happened before, they
must be annoyed with him for interfering to protect the princess.  By
the time he was dressed, however, he was thinking of something quite
different, for he did not value the enmity of the goblins in the least.
As soon as they had had breakfast, he set off with his father for the
mine.

They entered the hill by a natural opening under a huge rock, where a
little stream rushed out.  They followed its course for a few yards,
when the passage took a turn, and sloped steeply into the heart of the
hill.  With many angles and windings and branchings-off, and sometimes
with steps where it came upon a natural gulf, it led them deep into the
hill before they arrived at the place where they were at present
digging out the precious ore. This was of various kinds, for the
mountain was very rich in the better sorts of metals.  With flint and
steel, and tinder-box, they lighted their lamps, then fixed them on
their heads, and were soon hard at work with their pickaxes and shovels
and hammers.  Father and son were at work near each other, but not in
the same gang--the passages out of which the ore was dug, they called
gangs--for when the lode, or vein of ore, was small, one miner would
have to dig away alone in a passage no bigger than gave him just room
to work--sometimes in uncomfortable cramped positions.  If they stopped
for a moment they could hear everywhere around them, some nearer, some
farther off, the sounds of their companions burrowing away in all
directions in the inside of the great mountain--some boring holes in
the rock in order to blow it up with gunpowder, others shovelling the
broken ore into baskets to be carried to the mouth of the mine, others
hitting away with their pickaxes. Sometimes, if the miner was in a very
lonely part, he would hear only a tap-tapping, no louder than that of a
woodpecker, for the sound would come from a great distance off through
the solid mountain rock.

The work was hard at best, for it is very warm underground; but it was
not particularly unpleasant, and some of the miners, when they wanted
to earn a little more money for a particular purpose, would stop behind
the rest and work all night.  But you could not tell night from day
down there, except from feeling tired and sleepy; for no light of the
sun ever came into those gloomy regions.  Some who had thus remained
behind during the night, although certain there were none of their
companions at work, would declare the next morning that they heard,
every time they halted for a moment to take breath, a tap-tapping all
about them, as if the mountain were then more full of miners than ever
it was during the day; and some in consequence would never stay
overnight, for all knew those were the sounds of the goblins.  They
worked only at night, for the miners' night was the goblins' day.
Indeed, the greater number of the miners were afraid of the goblins;
for there were strange stories well known amongst them of the treatment
some had received whom the goblins had surprised at their work during
the night.  The more courageous of them, however, amongst them Peter
Peterson and Curdie, who in this took after his father, had stayed in
the mine all night again and again, and although they had several times
encountered a few stray goblins, had never yet failed in driving them
away.  As I have indicated already, the chief defence against them was
verse, for they hated verse of every kind, and some kinds they could
not endure at all.  I suspect they could not make any themselves, and
that was why they disliked it so much.  At all events, those who were
most afraid of them were those who could neither make verses themselves
nor remember the verses that other people made for them; while those
who were never afraid were those who could make verses for themselves;
for although there were certain old rhymes which were very effectual,
yet it was well known that a new rhyme, if of the right sort, was even
more distasteful to them, and therefore more effectual in putting them
to flight.

Perhaps my readers may be wondering what the goblins could be about,
working all night long, seeing they never carried up the ore and sold
it; but when I have informed them concerning what Curdie learned the
very next night, they will be able to understand.

For Curdie had determined, if his father would permit him, to remain
there alone this night--and that for two reasons: first, he wanted to
get extra wages that he might buy a very warm red petticoat for his
mother, who had begun to complain of the cold of the mountain air
sooner than usual this autumn; and second, he had just a faint hope of
finding out what the goblins were about under his window the night
before.

When he told his father, he made no objection, for he had great
confidence in his boy's courage and resources.

'I'm sorry I can't stay with you,' said Peter; 'but I want to go and
pay the parson a visit this evening, and besides I've had a bit of a
headache all day.'

'I'm sorry for that, father,' said Curdie.

'Oh, it's not much.  You'll be sure to take care of yourself, won't
you?'

'Yes, father; I will.  I'll keep a sharp look-out, I promise you.'
Curdie was the only one who remained in the mine.  About six o'clock
the rest went away, everyone bidding him good night, and telling him to
take care of himself; for he was a great favourite with them all.

'Don't forget your rhymes,' said one.

'No, no,'answered Curdie.

'It's no matter if he does,' said another, 'for he'll only have to make
a new one.'

'Yes: but he mightn't be able to make it fast enough,' said another;
'and while it was cooking in his head, they might take a mean advantage
and set upon him.'

'I'll do my best,' said Curdie.  'I'm not afraid.' 'We all know that,'
they returned, and left him.



CHAPTER 8

The Goblins

For some time Curdie worked away briskly, throwing all the ore he had
disengaged on one side behind him, to be ready for carrying out in the
morning.  He heard a good deal of goblin-tapping, but it all sounded
far away in the hill, and he paid it little heed.  Towards midnight he
began to feel rather hungry; so he dropped his pickaxe, got out a lump
of bread which in the morning he had laid in a damp hole in the rock,
sat down on a heap of ore, and ate his supper. Then he leaned back for
five minutes' rest before beginning his work again, and laid his head
against the rock.  He had not kept the position for one minute before
he heard something which made him sharpen his ears.  It sounded like a
voice inside the rock. After a while he heard it again.  It was a
goblin voice--there could be no doubt about that--and this time he
could make out the words.

'Hadn't we better be moving?'it said.

A rougher and deeper voice replied:

'There's no hurry.  That wretched little mole won't be through tonight,
if he work ever so hard.  He's not by any means at the thinnest place.'

'But you still think the lode does come through into our house?' said
the first voice.

'Yes, but a good bit farther on than he has got to yet.  If he had
struck a stroke more to the side just here,' said the goblin, tapping
the very stone, as it seemed to Curdie, against which his head lay, 'he
would have been through; but he's a couple of yards past it now, and if
he follow the lode it will be a week before it leads him in.  You see
it back there--a long way.  Still, perhaps, in case of accident it
would be as well to be getting out of this. Helfer, you'll take the
great chest.  That's your business, you know.'

'Yes, dad,' said a third voice.  'But you must help me to get it on my
back.  It's awfully heavy, you know.'

'Well, it isn't just a bag of smoke, I admit.  But you're as strong as
a mountain, Helfer.'

'You say so, dad.  I think myself I'm all right.  But I could carry ten
times as much if it wasn't for my feet.'

'That is your weak point, I confess, my boy.' 'Ain't it yours too,
father?'

'Well, to be honest, it's a goblin weakness.  Why they come so soft, I
declare I haven't an idea.'

'Specially when your head's so hard, you know, father.'

'Yes my boy.  The goblin's glory is his head.  To think how the fellows
up above there have to put on helmets and things when they go fighting!
Ha! ha!'

'But why don't we wear shoes like them, father?  I should like
it--especially when I've got a chest like that on my head.'

'Well, you see, it's not the fashion.  The king never wears shoes.'

'The queen does.'

'Yes; but that's for distinction.  The first queen, you see--I mean the
king's first wife--wore shoes, of course, because she came from
upstairs; and so, when she died, the next queen would not be inferior
to her as she called it, and would wear shoes too.  It was all pride.
She is the hardest in forbidding them to the rest of the women.'

'I'm sure I wouldn't wear them--no, not for--that I wouldn't!' said the
first voice, which was evidently that of the mother of the family.  'I
can't think why either of them should.'

'Didn't I tell you the first was from upstairs?' said the other. 'That
was the only silly thing I ever knew His Majesty guilty of. Why should
he marry an outlandish woman like that-one of our natural enemies too?'

'I suppose he fell in love with her.' 'Pooh! pooh!  He's just as happy
now with one of his own people.'

'Did she die very soon?  They didn't tease her to death, did they?'

'Oh, dear, no!  The king worshipped her very footmarks.'

'What made her die, then?  Didn't the air agree with her?'

'She died when the young prince was born.'

'How silly of her!  We never do that.  It must have been because she
wore shoes.'

'I don't know that.'

'Why do they wear shoes up there?'

'Ah, now that's a sensible question, and I will answer it.  But in
order to do so, I must first tell you a secret.  I once saw the queen's
feet.'

'Without her shoes?'

'Yes--without her shoes.'

'No!  Did you?  How was it?'

'Never you mind how it was.  She didn't know I saw them.  And what do
you think!--they had toes!'

'Toes!  What's that?'

'You may well ask!  I should never have known if I had not seen the
queen's feet.  Just imagine! the ends of her feet were split up into
five or six thin pieces!'

'Oh, horrid!  How could the king have fallen in love with her?'

'You forget that she wore shoes.  That is just why she wore them. That
is why all the men, and women too, upstairs wear shoes.  They can't
bear the sight of their own feet without them.'

'Ah! now I understand.  If ever you wish for shoes again, Helfer, I'll
hit your feet--I will.'

'No, no, mother; pray don't.'

'Then don't you.'

'But with such a big box on my head--'

A horrid scream followed, which Curdie interpreted as in reply to a
blow from his mother upon the feet of her eldest goblin.

'Well, I never knew so much before!' remarked a fourth voice.

'Your knowledge is not universal quite yet,' said the father.  'You
were only fifty last month.  Mind you see to the bed and bedding. As
soon as we've finished our supper, we'll be up and going.  Ha! ha! ha!'

'What are you laughing at, husband?'

'I'm laughing to think what a mess the miners will find themselves
in--somewhere before this day ten years.'

'Why, what do you mean?'

'Oh, nothing.'

'Oh, yes, you do mean something.  You always do mean something.'

'It's more than you do, then, wife.' 'That may be; but it's not more
than I find out, you know.'

'Ha! ha!  You're a sharp one.  What a mother you've got, Helfer!'

'Yes, father.'

'Well, I suppose I must tell you.  They're all at the palace consulting
about it tonight; and as soon as we've got away from this thin place
I'm going there to hear what night they fix upon. I should like to see
that young ruffian there on the other side, struggling in the agonies
of--'

He dropped his voice so low that Curdie could hear only a growl. The
growl went on in the low bass for a good while, as inarticulate as if
the goblin's tongue had been a sausage; and it was not until his wife
spoke again that it rose to its former pitch.

'But what shall we do when you are at the palace?' she asked.

'I will see you safe in the new house I've been digging for you for the
last two months.  Podge, you mind the table and chairs.  I commit them
to your care.  The table has seven legs--each chair three.  I shall
require them all at your hands.'

After this arose a confused conversation about the various household
goods and their transport; and Curdie heard nothing more that was of
any importance.

He now knew at least one of the reasons for the constant sound of the
goblin hammers and pickaxes at night.  They were making new houses for
themselves, to which they might retreat when the miners should threaten
to break into their dwellings.  But he had learned two things of far
greater importance.  The first was, that some grievous calamity was
preparing, and almost ready to fall upon the heads of the miners; the
second was--the one weak point of a goblin's body; he had not known
that their feet were so tender as he had now reason to suspect.  He had
heard it said that they had no toes: he had never had opportunity of
inspecting them closely enough, in the dusk in which they always
appeared, to satisfy himself whether it was a correct report.  Indeed,
he had not been able even to satisfy himself as to whether they had no
fingers, although that also was commonly said to be the fact.  One of
the miners, indeed, who had had more schooling than the rest, was wont
to argue that such must have been the primordial condition of humanity,
and that education and handicraft had developed both toes and
fingers--with which proposition Curdie had once heard his father
sarcastically agree, alleging in support of it the probability that
babies' gloves were a traditional remnant of the old state of things;
while the stockings of all ages, no regard being paid in them to the
toes, pointed in the same direction.  But what was of importance was
the fact concerning the softness of the goblin feet, which he foresaw
might be useful to all miners.  What he had to do in the meantime,
however, was to discover, if possible, the special evil design the
goblins had now in their heads.

Although he knew all the gangs and all the natural galleries with which
they communicated in the mined part of the mountain, he had not the
least idea where the palace of the king of the gnomes was; otherwise he
would have set out at once on the enterprise of discovering what the
said design was.  He judged, and rightly, that it must lie in a farther
part of the mountain, between which and the mine there was as yet no
communication.  There must be one nearly completed, however; for it
could be but a thin partition which now separated them.  If only he
could get through in time to follow the goblins as they retreated!  A
few blows would doubtless be sufficient--just where his ear now lay;
but if he attempted to strike there with his pickaxe, he would only
hasten the departure of the family, put them on their guard, and
perhaps lose their involuntary guidance.  He therefore began to feel
the wall With his hands, and soon found that some of the stones were
loose enough to be drawn out with little noise.

Laying hold of a large one with both his hands, he drew it gently out,
and let it down softly.

'What was that noise?' said the goblin father.

Curdie blew out his light, lest it should shine through.

'It must be that one miner that stayed behind the rest,' said the
mother.

'No; he's been gone a good while.  I haven't heard a blow for an hour.
Besides, it wasn't like that.'

'Then I suppose it must have been a stone carried down the brook
inside.'

'Perhaps.  It will have more room by and by.'

Curdie kept quite still.  After a little while, hearing nothing but the
sounds of their preparations for departure, mingled with an occasional
word of direction, and anxious to know whether the removal of the stone
had made an opening into the goblins' house, he put in his hand to
feel.  It went in a good way, and then came in contact with something
soft.  He had but a moment to feel it over, it was so quickly
withdrawn: it was one of the toeless goblin feet.  The owner of it gave
a cry of fright.

'What's the matter, Helfer?' asked his mother.

'A beast came out of the wall and licked my foot.'

'Nonsense!  There are no wild beasts in our country,' said his father.

'But it was, father.  I felt it.'

'Nonsense, I say.  Will you malign your native realms and reduce them
to a level with the country upstairs?  That is swarming with wild
beasts of every description.'

'But I did feel it, father.'

'I tell you to hold your tongue.  You are no patriot.'

Curdie suppressed his laughter, and lay still as a mouse--but no
stiller, for every moment he kept nibbling away with his fingers at the
edges of the hole.  He was slowly making it bigger, for here the rock
had been very much shattered with the blasting.

There seemed to be a good many in the family, to judge from the mass of
confused talk which now and then came through the hole; but when all
were speaking together, and just as if they had bottle-brushes--each at
least one--in their throats, it was not easy to make out much that was
said.  At length he heard once more what the father goblin was saying.

'Now, then,' he said, 'get your bundles on your backs.  Here, Helfer,
I'll help you up with your chest.'

'I wish it was my chest, father.'

'Your turn will come in good time enough!  Make haste.  I must go to
the meeting at the palace tonight.  When that's over, we can come back
and clear out the last of the things before our enemies return in the
morning.  Now light your torches, and come along. What a distinction it
is, to provide our own light, instead of being dependent on a thing
hung up in the air--a most disagreeable contrivance--intended no doubt
to blind us when we venture out under its baleful influence!  Quite
glaring and vulgar, I call it, though no doubt useful to poor creatures
who haven't the wit to make light for themselves.'

Curdie could hardly keep himself from calling through to know whether
they made the fire to light their torches by.  But a moment's
reflection showed him that they would have said they did, inasmuch as
they struck two stones together, and the fire came.



CHAPTER 9

The Hall of the Goblin Palace

A sound of many soft feet followed, but soon ceased.  Then Curdie flew
at the hole like a tiger, and tore and pulled.  The sides gave way, and
it was soon large enough for him to crawl through.  He would not betray
himself by rekindling his lamp, but the torches of the retreating
company, which he found departing in a straight line up a long avenue
from the door of their cave, threw back light enough to afford him a
glance round the deserted home of the goblins.  To his surprise, he
could discover nothing to distinguish it from an ordinary natural cave
in the rock, upon many of which he had come with the rest of the miners
in the progress of their excavations.  The goblins had talked of coming
back for the rest of their household gear: he saw nothing that would
have made him suspect a family had taken shelter there for a single
night.  The floor was rough and stony; the walls full of projecting
corners; the roof in one place twenty feet high, in another endangering
his forehead; while on one side a stream, no thicker than a needle, it
is true, but still sufficient to spread a wide dampness over the wall,
flowed down the face of the rock.  But the troop in front of him was
toiling under heavy burdens.  He could distinguish Helfer now and then,
in the flickering light and shade, with his heavy chest on his bending
shoulders; while the second brother was almost buried in what looked
like a great feather bed.  'Where do they get the feathers?' thought
Curdie; but in a moment the troop disappeared at a turn of the way, and
it was now both safe and necessary for Curdie to follow them, lest they
should be round the next turning before he saw them again, for so he
might lose them altogether.  He darted after them like a greyhound.
When he reached the corner and looked cautiously round, he saw them
again at some distance down another long passage.  None of the
galleries he saw that night bore signs of the work of man--or of goblin
either.  Stalactites, far older than the mines, hung from their roofs;
and their floors were rough with boulders and large round stones,
showing that there water must have once run.  He waited again at this
corner till they had disappeared round the next, and so followed them a
long way through one passage after another.  The passages grew more and
more lofty, and were more and more covered in the roof with shining
stalactites.

It was a strange enough procession which he followed.  But the
strangest part of it was the household animals which crowded amongst
the feet of the goblins.  It was true they had no wild animals down
there--at least they did not know of any; but they had a wonderful
number of tame ones.  I must, however, reserve any contributions
towards the natural history of these for a later position in my story.

At length, turning a corner too abruptly, he had almost rushed into the
middle of the goblin family; for there they had already set down all
their burdens on the floor of a cave considerably larger than that
which they had left.  They were as yet too breathless to speak, else he
would have had warning of their arrest.  He started back, however,
before anyone saw him, and retreating a good way, stood watching till
the father should come out to go to the palace.

Before very long, both he and his son Helfer appeared and kept on in
the same direction as before, while Curdie followed them again with
renewed precaution.  For a long time he heard no sound except something
like the rush of a river inside the rock; but at length what seemed the
far-off noise of a great shouting reached his ears, which, however,
presently ceased.  After advancing a good way farther, he thought he
heard a single voice.  It sounded clearer and clearer as he went on,
until at last he could almost distinguish the words.  In a moment or
two, keeping after the goblins round another corner, he once more
started back--this time in amazement.

He was at the entrance of a magnificent cavern, of an oval shape, once
probably a huge natural reservoir of water, now the great palace hall
of the goblins.  It rose to a tremendous height, but the roof was
composed of such shining materials, and the multitude of torches
carried by the goblins who crowded the floor lighted up the place so
brilliantly, that Curdie could see to the top quite well.  But he had
no idea how immense the place was until his eyes had got accustomed to
it, which was not for a good many minutes. The rough projections on the
walls, and the shadows thrown upwards from them by the torches, made
the sides of the chamber look as if they were crowded with statues upon
brackets and pedestals, reaching in irregular tiers from floor to roof.
The walls themselves were, in many parts, of gloriously shining
substances, some of them gorgeously coloured besides, which powerfully
contrasted with the shadows.  Curdie could not help wondering whether
his rhymes would be of any use against such a multitude of goblins as
filled the floor of the hall, and indeed felt considerably tempted to
begin his shout of 'One, two, three!', but as there was no reason for
routing them and much for endeavouring to discover their designs, he
kept himself perfectly quiet, and peering round the edge of the
doorway, listened with both his sharp ears.

At the other end of the hall, high above the heads of the multitude,
was a terrace-like ledge of considerable height, caused by the receding
of the upper part of the cavern-wall.  Upon this sat the king and his
court: the king on a throne hollowed out of a huge block of green
copper ore, and his court upon lower seats around it.  The king had
been making them a speech, and the applause which followed it was what
Curdie had heard.  One of the court was now addressing the multitude.
What he heard him say was to the following effect: 'Hence it appears
that two plans have been for some time together working in the strong
head of His Majesty for the deliverance of his people.  Regardless of
the fact that we were the first possessors of the regions they now
inhabit; regardless equally of the fact that we abandoned that region
from the loftiest motives; regardless also of the self-evident fact
that we excel them so far in mental ability as they excel us in
stature, they look upon us as a degraded race and make a mockery of all
our finer feelings.  But, the time has almost arrived when--thanks to
His Majesty's inventive genius--it will be in our power to take a
thorough revenge upon them once for all, in respect of their unfriendly
behaviour.'

'May it please Your Majesty--' cried a voice close by the door, which
Curdie recognized as that of the goblin he had followed.

'Who is he that interrupts the Chancellor?' cried another from near the
throne.

'Glump,' answered several voices.

'He is our trusty subject,' said the king himself, in a slow and
stately voice: 'let him come forward and speak.'

A lane was parted through the crowd, and Glump, having ascended the
platform and bowed to the king, spoke as follows:

'Sire, I would have held my peace, had I not known that I only knew how
near was the moment, to which the Chancellor had just referred.

In all probability, before another day is past, the enemy will have
broken through into my house--the partition between being even now not
more than a foot in thickness.'

'Not quite so much,' thought Curdie to himself.

'This very evening I have had to remove my household effects; therefore
the sooner we are ready to carry out the plan, for the execution of
which His Majesty has been making such magnificent preparations, the
better.  I may just add, that within the last few days I have perceived
a small outbreak in my dining-room, which, combined with observations
upon the course of the river escaping where the evil men enter, has
convinced me that close to the spot must be a deep gulf in its channel.
This discovery will, I trust, add considerably to the otherwise immense
forces at His Majesty's disposal.'

He ceased, and the king graciously acknowledged his speech with a bend
of his head; whereupon Glump, after a bow to His Majesty, slid down
amongst the rest of the undistinguished multitude.  Then the Chancellor
rose and resumed.

'The information which the worthy Glump has given us,' he said, 'might
have been of considerable import at the present moment, but for that
other design already referred to, which naturally takes precedence.
His Majesty, unwilling to proceed to extremities, and well aware that
such measures sooner or later result in violent reactions, has
excogitated a more fundamental and comprehensive measure, of which I
need say no more.  Should His Majesty be successful--as who dares to
doubt?--then a peace, all to the advantage of the goblin kingdom, will
be established for a generation at least, rendered absolutely secure by
the pledge which His Royal Highness the prince will have and hold for
the good behaviour of her relatives.  Should His Majesty fail--which
who shall dare even to imagine in his most secret thoughts?--then will
be the time for carrying out with rigour the design to which Glump
referred, and for which our preparations are even now all but
completed.  The failure of the former will render the latter
imperative.'

Curdie, perceiving that the assembly was drawing to a close and that
there was little chance of either plan being more fully discovered, now
thought it prudent to make his escape before the goblins began to
disperse, and slipped quietly away.

There was not much danger of meeting any goblins, for all the men at
least were left behind him in the palace; but there was considerable
danger of his taking a wrong turning, for he had now no light, and had
therefore to depend upon his memory and his hands.  After he had left
behind him the glow that issued from the door of Glump's new abode, he
was utterly without guide, so far as his eyes were concerned.

He was most anxious to get back through the hole before the goblins
should return to fetch the remains of their furniture.  It was not that
he was in the least afraid of them, but, as it was of the utmost
importance that he should thoroughly discover what the plans they were
cherishing were, he must not occasion the slightest suspicion that they
were watched by a miner.

He hurried on, feeling his way along the walls of rock.  Had he not
been very courageous, he must have been very anxious, for he could not
but know that if he lost his way it would be the most difficult thing
in the world to find it again.  Morning would bring no light into these
regions; and towards him least of all, who was known as a special
rhymester and persecutor, could goblins be expected to exercise
courtesy.  Well might he wish that he had brought his lamp and
tinder-box with him, of which he had not thought when he crept so
eagerly after the goblins!  He wished it all the more when, after a
while, he found his way blocked up, and could get no farther.  It was
of no use to turn back, for he had not the least idea where he had
begun to go wrong.  Mechanically, however, he kept feeling about the
walls that hemmed him in.  His hand came upon a place where a tiny
stream of water was running down the face of the rock.  'What a stupid
I am!' he said to himself.  'I am actually at the end of my journey!
And there are the goblins coming back to fetch their things!' he added,
as the red glimmer of their torches appeared at the end of the long
avenue that led up to the cave.  In a moment he had thrown himself on
the floor, and wriggled backwards through the hole.  The floor on the
other side was several feet lower, which made it easier to get back.
It was all he could do to lift the largest stone he had taken out of
the hole, but he did manage to shove it in again.  He sat down on the
ore-heap and thought.

He was pretty sure that the latter plan of the goblins was to inundate
the mine by breaking outlets for the water accumulated in the natural
reservoirs of the mountain, as well as running through portions of it.
While the part hollowed by the miners remained shut off from that
inhabited by the goblins, they had had no opportunity of injuring them
thus; but now that a passage was broken through, and the goblins' part
proved the higher in the mountain, it was clear to Curdie that the mine
could be destroyed in an hour.  Water was always the chief danger to
which the miners were exposed.  They met with a little choke-damp
sometimes, but never with the explosive firedamp so common in
coal-mines.  Hence they were careful as soon as they saw any appearance
of water. As the result of his reflections while the goblins were busy
in their old home, it seemed to Curdie that it would be best to build
up the whole of this gang, filling it with stone, and clay or lie, so
that there should be no smallest channel for the water to get into.
There was not, however, any immediate danger, for the execution of the
goblins' plan was contingent upon the failure of that unknown design
which was to take precedence of it; and he was most anxious to keep the
door of communication open, that he might if possible discover what the
former plan was.  At the same time they could not resume their
intermitted labours for the inundation without his finding it out; when
by putting all hands to the work, the one existing outlet might in a
single night be rendered impenetrable to any weight of water; for by
filling the gang entirely up, their embankment would be buttressed by
the sides of the mountain itself.

As soon as he found that the goblins had again retired, he lighted his
lamp, and proceeded to fill the hole he had made with such stones as he
could withdraw when he pleased.  He then thought it better, as he might
have occasion to be up a good many nights after this, to go home and
have some sleep.

How pleasant the night air felt upon the outside of the mountain after
what he had gone through in the inside of it!  He hurried up the hill
without meeting a single goblin on the way, and called and tapped at
the window until he woke his father, who soon rose and let him in.  He
told him the whole story; and, just as he had expected, his father
thought it best to work that lode no farther, but at the same time to
pretend occasionally to be at work there still in order that the
goblins might have no suspicions.  Both father and son then went to bed
and slept soundly until the morning.



CHAPTER 10

The Princess's King-Papa

The weather continued fine for weeks, and the little princess went out
every day.  So long a period of fine weather had indeed never been
known upon that mountain.  The only uncomfortable thing was that her
nurse was so nervous and particular about being in before the sun was
down that often she would take to her heels when nothing worse than a
fleecy cloud crossing the sun threw a shadow on the hillside; and many
an evening they were home a full hour before the sunlight had left the
weather-cock on the stables.  If it had not been for such odd behaviour
Irene would by this time have almost forgotten the goblins.  She never
forgot Curdie, but him she remembered for his own sake, and indeed
would have remembered him if only because a princess never forgets her
debts until they are paid.

One splendid sunshiny day, about an hour after noon, Irene, who was
playing on a lawn in the garden, heard the distant blast of a bugle.
She jumped up with a cry of joy, for she knew by that particular blast
that her father was on his way to see her.  This part of the garden lay
on the slope of the hill and allowed a full view of the country below.
So she shaded her eyes with her hand and looked far away to catch the
first glimpse of shining armour. In a few moments a little troop came
glittering round the shoulder of a hill.  Spears and helmets were
sparkling and gleaming, banners were flying, horses prancing, and again
came the bugle-blast which was to her like the voice of her father
calling across the distance: 'Irene, I'm coming.'

On and on they came until she could clearly distinguish the king. He
rode a white horse and was taller than any of the men with him. He wore
a narrow circle of gold set with jewels around his helmet, and as he
came still nearer Irene could discern the flashing of the stones in the
sun.  It was a long time since he had been to see her, and her little
heart beat faster and faster as the shining troop approached, for she
loved her king-papa very dearly and was nowhere so happy as in his
arms.  When they reached a certain point, after which she could see
them no more from the garden, she ran to the gate, and there stood till
up they came, clanging and stamping, with one more bright bugle-blast
which said: 'Irene, I am come.'

By this time the people of the house were all gathered at the gate, but
Irene stood alone in front of them.  When the horsemen pulled up she
ran to the side of the white horse and held up her arms. The king
stopped and took her hands.  In an instant she was on the saddle and
clasped in his great strong arms.

I wish I could describe the king so that you could see him in your
mind.  He had gentle, blue eyes, but a nose that made him look like an
eagle.  A long dark beard, streaked with silvery lines, flowed from his
mouth almost to his waist, and as Irene sat on the saddle and hid her
glad face upon his bosom it mingled with the golden hair which her
mother had given her, and the two together were like a cloud with
streaks of the sun woven through it.  After he had held her to his
heart for a minute he spoke to his white horse, and the great beautiful
creature, which had been prancing so proudly a little while before,
walked as gently as a lady--for he knew he had a little lady on his
back--through the gate and up to the door of the house.  Then the king
set her on the ground and, dismounting, took her hand and walked with
her into the great hall, which was hardly ever entered except when he
came to see his little princess.  There he sat down, with two of his
counsellors who had accompanied him, to have some refreshment, and
Irene sat on his right hand and drank her milk out of a wooden bowl
curiously carved.

After the king had eaten and drunk he turned to the princess and said,
stroking her hair:

'Now, my child, what shall we do next?'

This was the question he almost always put to her first after their
meal together; and Irene had been waiting for it with some impatience,
for now, she thought, she should be able to settle a question which
constantly perplexed her.

'I should like you to take me to see my great old grandmother.'

The king looked grave And said:

'What does my little daughter mean?'

'I mean the Queen Irene that lives up in the tower--the very old lady,
you know, with the long hair of silver.'

The king only gazed at his little princess with a look which she could
not understand.

'She's got her crown in her bedroom,' she went on; 'but I've not been
in there yet.  You know she's there, don't you?'

'No,' said the king, very quietly.

'Then it must all be a dream,' said Irene.  'I half thought it was; but
I couldn't be sure.  Now I am sure of it.  Besides, I couldn't find her
the next time I went up.'

At that moment a snow-white pigeon flew in at an open window and
settled upon Irene's head.  She broke into a merry laugh, cowered a
little, and put up her hands to her head, saying:

'Dear dovey, don't peck me.  You'll pull out my hair with your long
claws if you don't mind.'

The king stretched out his hand to take the pigeon, but it spread its
wings and flew again through the open window, when its Whiteness made
one flash in the sun and vanished.  The king laid his hand on his
princess's head, held it back a little, gazed in her face, smiled half
a smile, and sighed half a sigh.

'Come, my child; we'll have a walk in the garden together,' he said.

'You won't come up and see my huge, great, beautiful grandmother, then,
king-papa?' said the princess.

'Not this time,' said the king very gently.  'She has not invited me,
you know, and great old ladies like her do not choose to be visited
without leave asked and given.'

The garden was a very lovely place.  Being upon a Mountainside there
were parts in it where the rocks came through in great masses, and all
immediately about them remained quite wild.  Tufts of heather grew upon
them, and other hardy mountain plants and flowers, while near them
would be lovely roses and lilies and all pleasant garden flowers.  This
mingling of the wild mountain with the civilized garden was very
quaint, and it was impossible for any number of gardeners to make such
a garden look formal and stiff.

Against one of these rocks was a garden seat, shadowed from the
afternoon sun by the overhanging of the rock itself.  There was a
little winding path up to the top of the rock, and on top another seat;
but they sat on the seat at its foot because the sun was hot; and there
they talked together of many things.  At length the king said:

'You were out late one evening, Irene.'

'Yes, papa.  It was my fault; and Lootie was very sorry.'

'I must talk to Lootie about it,' said the king.

'Don't speak loud to her, please, papa,' said Irene.  'She's been so
afraid of being late ever since!  Indeed she has not been naughty.  It
was only a mistake for once.'

'Once might be too often,' murmured the king to himself, as he stroked
his child's head.

I can't tell you how he had come to know.  I am sure Curdie had not
told him.  Someone about the palace must have seen them, after all.

He sat for a good while thinking.  There was no sound to be heard
except that of a little stream which ran merrily out of an opening in
the rock by where they sat, and sped away down the hill through the
garden.  Then he rose and, leaving Irene where she was, went into the
house and sent for Lootie, with whom he had a talk that made her cry.

When in the evening he rode away upon his great white horse, he left
six of his attendants behind him, with orders that three of them should
watch outside the house every night, walking round and round it from
sunset to sunrise.  It was clear he was not quite comfortable about the
princess.



CHAPTER 11

The Old Lady's Bedroom

Nothing more happened worth telling for some time.  The autumn came and
went by.  There were no more flowers in the garden.  The wind blew
strong, and howled among the rocks.  The rain fell, and drenched the
few yellow and red leaves that could not get off the bare branches.
Again and again there would be a glorious morning followed by a pouring
afternoon, and sometimes, for a week together, there would be rain,
nothing but rain, all day, and then the most lovely cloudless night,
with the sky all out in full-blown stars--not one missing.  But the
princess could not see much of them, for she went to bed early.  The
winter drew on, and she found things growing dreary.  When it was too
stormy to go out, and she had got tired of her toys, Lootie would take
her about the house, sometimes to the housekeeper's room, where the
housekeeper, who was a good, kind old woman, made much of
her--sometimes to the servants' hall or the kitchen, where she was not
princess merely, but absolute queen, and ran a great risk of being
spoiled. Sometimes she would run off herself to the room where the
men-at-arms whom the king had left sat, and they showed her their arms
and accoutrements and did what they could to amuse her.  Still at times
she found it very dreary, and often and often wished that her huge
great grandmother had not been a dream.

One morning the nurse left her with the housekeeper for a while. To
amuse her she turned out the contents of an old cabinet upon the table.
The little princess found her treasures, queer ancient ornaments, and
many things the use of which she could not imagine, far more
interesting than her own toys, and sat playing with them for two hours
or more.  But, at length, in handling a curious old-fashioned brooch,
she ran the pin of it into her thumb, and gave a little scream with the
sharpness of the pain, but would have thought little more of it had not
the pain increased and her thumb begun to swell.  This alarmed the
housekeeper greatly.  The nurse was fetched; the doctor was sent for;
her hand was poulticed, and long before her usual time she was put to
bed.  The pain still continued, and although she fell asleep and
dreamed a good many dreams, there was the pain always in every dream.
At last it woke her UP.

The moon was shining brightly into the room.  The poultice had fallen
off her hand and it was burning hot.  She fancied if she could hold it
into the moonlight that would cool it.  So she got out of bed, without
waking the nurse who lay at the other end of the room, and went to the
window.  When she looked out she saw one of the men-at-arms walking in
the garden with the moonlight glancing on his armour.  She was just
going to tap on the window and call him, for she wanted to tell him all
about it, when she bethought herself that that might wake Lootie, and
she would put her into her bed again.  So she resolved to go to the
window of another room, and call him from there.  It was so much nicer
to have somebody to talk to than to lie awake in bed with the burning
pain in her hand.  She opened the door very gently and went through the
nursery, which did not look into the garden, to go to the other window.
But when she came to the foot of the old staircase there was the moon
shining down from some window high up, and making the worm-eaten oak
look very strange and delicate and lovely.  In a moment she was putting
her little feet one after the other in the silvery path up the stair,
looking behind as she went, to see the shadow they made in the middle
of the silver.  Some little girls would have been afraid to find
themselves thus alone in the middle of the night, but Irene was a
princess.

As she went slowly up the stair, not quite sure that she was not
dreaming, suddenly a great longing woke up in her heart to try once
more whether she could not find the old lady with the silvery hair. 'If
she is a dream,' she said to herself, 'then I am the likelier to find
her, if I am dreaming.'

So up and up she went, stair after stair, until she Came to the many
rooms--all just as she had seen them before.  Through passage after
passage she softly sped, comforting herself that if she should lose her
way it would not matter much, because when she woke she would find
herself in her own bed with Lootie not far off. But, as if she had
known every step of the way, she walked straight to the door at the
foot of the narrow stair that led to the tower.

'What if I should realreality-really find my beautiful old grandmother
up there!' she said to herself as she crept up the steep steps.

When she reached the top she stood a moment listening in the dark, for
there was no moon there.  Yes! it was! it was the hum of the
spinning-wheel!  What a diligent grandmother to work both day and
night!  She tapped gently at the door.

'Come in, Irene,'said the sweet voice.

The princess opened the door and entered.  There was the moonlight
streaming in at the window, and in the middle of the moonlight sat the
old lady in her black dress with the white lace, and her silvery hair
mingling with the moonlight, so that you could not have told which was
which.  'Come in, Irene,' she said again.  'Can you tell me what I am
spinning?'

'She speaks,' thought Irene, 'just as if she had seen me five minutes
ago, or yesterday at the farthest. --No,' she answered; 'I don't know
what you are spinning.  Please, I thought you were a dream.  Why
couldn't I find you before, great-great-grandmother?'

'That you are hardly old enough to understand.  But you would have
found me sooner if you hadn't come to think I was a dream.  I will give
you one reason though why you couldn't find me.  I didn't want you to
find me.'

'Why, please?'

'Because I did not want Lootie to know I was here.'

'But you told me to tell Lootie.'

'Yes.  But I knew Lootie would not believe you.  If she were to see me
sitting spinning here, she wouldn't believe me, either.'

'Why?'

'Because she couldn't.  She would rub her eyes, and go away and say she
felt queer, and forget half of it and more, and then say it had been
all a dream.'

'Just like me,' said Irene, feeling very much ashamed of herself.

'Yes, a good deal like you, but not just like you; for you've come
again; and Lootie wouldn't have come again.  She would have said, No,
no--she had had enough of such nonsense.'

'Is it naughty of Lootie, then?'

'It would be naughty of you.  I've never done anything for Lootie.'

'And you did wash my face and hands for me,' said Irene, beginning to
cry.

The old lady smiled a sweet smile and said:

'I'm not vexed with you, my child--nor with Lootie either.  But I don't
want you to say anything more to Lootie about me.  If she should ask
you, you must just be silent.  But I do not think she will ask you.'

All the time they talked the old lady kept on spinning.

'You haven't told me yet what I am spinning,' she said.

'Because I don't know.  It's very pretty stuff.'

It was indeed very pretty stuff.  There was a good bunch of it on the
distaff attached to the spinning-wheel, and in the moonlight it shone
like--what shall I say it was like?  It was not white enough for
silver--yes, it was like silver, but shone grey rather than white, and
glittered only a little.  And the thread the old lady drew out from it
was so fine that Irene could hardly see it. 'I am spinning this for
you, my child.'

'For me!  What am I to do with it, please?'

'I will tell you by and by.  But first I will tell you what it is. It
is spider-web--of a particular kind.  My pigeons bring it me from over
the great sea.  There is only one forest where the spiders live who
make this particular kind--the finest and strongest of any.  I have
nearly finished my present job.  What is on the rock now will be
enough.  I have a week's work there yet, though,' she added, looking at
the bunch.

'Do you work all day and all night, too,
great-great-great-great-grandmother?' said the princess, thinking to be
very polite with so many greats.

'I am not quite so great as all that,' she answered, smiling almost
merrily.  'If you call me grandmother, that will do.  No, I don't work
every night--only moonlit nights, and then no longer than the moon
shines upon my wheel.  I shan't work much longer tonight.'

'And what will you do next, grandmother?' 'Go to bed.  Would you like
to see my bedroom?'

'Yes, that I should.'

'Then I think I won't work any longer tonight.  I shall be in good
time.'

The old lady rose, and left her wheel standing just as it was.  You see
there was no good in putting it away, for where there was not any
furniture there was no danger of being untidy.

Then she took Irene by the hand, but it was her bad hand and Irene gave
a little cry of pain.  'My child!' said her grandmother, 'what is the
matter?'

Irene held her hand into the moonlight, that the old lady might see it,
and told her all about it, at which she looked grave.  But she only
said: 'Give me your other hand'; and, having led her out upon the
little dark landing, opened the door on the opposite side of it.  What
was Irene's surprise to see the loveliest room she had ever seen in her
life!  It was large and lofty, and dome-shaped. From the centre hung a
lamp as round as a ball, shining as if with the brightest moonlight,
which made everything visible in the room, though not so clearly that
the princess could tell what many of the things were.  A large oval bed
stood in the middle, with a coverlid of rose colour, and velvet
curtains all round it of a lovely pale blue.  The walls were also
blue--spangled all over with what looked like stars of silver.

The old lady left her and, going to a strange-looking cabinet, opened
it and took out a curious silver casket.  Then she sat down on a low
chair and, calling Irene, made her kneel before her while she looked at
her hand.  Having examined it, she opened the casket, and took from it
a little ointment.  The sweetest odour filled the room--like that of
roses and lilies--as she rubbed the ointment gently all over the hot
swollen hand.  Her touch was so pleasant and cool that it seemed to
drive away the pain and heat wherever it came.

'Oh, grandmother! it is so nice!' said Irene.  'Thank you; thank you.'

Then the old lady went to a chest of drawers, and took out a large
handkerchief of gossamer-like cambric, which she tied round her hand.

'I don't think I can let you go away tonight,' she said.  'Would you
like to sleep with me?'

'Oh, yes, yes, dear grandmother,' said Irene, and would have clapped
her hands, forgetting that she could not.

'You won't be afraid, then, to go to bed with such an old woman?'

'No.  You are so beautiful, grandmother.'

'But I am very old.'

'And I suppose I am very young.  You won't mind sleeping with such a
very young woman, grandmother?'

'You sweet little pertness!' said the old lady, and drew her towards
her, and kissed her on the forehead and the cheek and the mouth.  Then
she got a large silver basin, and having poured some water into it made
Irene sit on the chair, and washed her feet. This done, she was ready
for bed.  And oh, what a delicious bed it was into which her
grandmother laid her!  She hardly could have told she was lying upon
anything: she felt nothing but the softness.

The old lady having undressed herself lay down beside her.

'Why don't you put out your moon?' asked the princess.

'That never goes out, night or day,' she answered.  'In the darkest
night, if any of my pigeons are out on a message, they always see my
moon and know where to fly to.'

'But if somebody besides the pigeons were to see it--somebody about the
house, I mean--they would come to look what it was and find you.'

'The better for them, then,' said the old lady.  'But it does not
happen above five times in a hundred years that anyone does see it.

The greater part of those who do take it for a meteor, wink their eyes,
and forget it again.  Besides, nobody could find the room except I
pleased.  Besides, again--I will tell you a secret--if that light were
to go out you would fancy yourself lying in a bare garret, on a heap of
old straw, and would not see one of the pleasant things round about you
all the time.'

'I hope it will never go out,' said the princess.

'I hope not.  But it is time we both went to sleep.  Shall I take you
in my arms?'

The little princess nestled close up to the old lady, who took her in
both her arms and held her close to her bosom.

'Oh, dear! this is so nice!' said the princess.  'I didn't know
anything in the world could be so comfortable.  I should like to lie
here for ever.'

'You may if you will,' said the old lady.  'But I must put you to one
trial-not a very hard one, I hope.  This night week you must come back
to me.  If you don't, I do not know when you may find me again, and you
will soon want me very much.'

'Oh! please, don't let me forget.'

'You shall not forget.  The only question is whether you will believe I
am anywhere--whether you will believe I am anything but a dream.  You
may be sure I will do all I can to help you to come. But it will rest
with yourself, after all.  On the night of next Friday, you must come
to me.  Mind now.'

'I will try,' said the princess.

'Then good night,' said the old lady, and kissed the forehead which lay
in her bosom.

In a moment more the little princess was dreaming in the midst of the
loveliest dreams--of summer seas and moonlight and mossy springs and
great murmuring trees, and beds of wild flowers with such odours as she
had never smelled before.  But, after all, no dream could be more
lovely than what she had left behind when she fell asleep.

In the morning she found herself in her own bed.  There was no
handkerchief or anything else on her hand, only a sweet odour lingered
about it.  The swelling had all gone down; the prick of the brooch had
vanished--in fact, her hand was perfectly well.



CHAPTER 12

A Short Chapter About Curdie

Curdie spent many nights in the mine.  His father and he had taken Mrs.
Peterson into the secret, for they knew mother could hold her tongue,
which was more than could be said of all the miners' wives.

But Curdie did not tell her that every night he spent in the mine, part
of it went in earning a new red petticoat for her.

Mrs. Peterson was such a nice good mother!  All mothers are nice and
good more or less, but Mrs. Peterson was nice and good all more and no
less.  She made and kept a little heaven in that poor cottage on the
high hillside for her husband and son to go home to out of the low and
rather dreary earth in which they worked.  I doubt if the princess was
very much happier even in the arms of her huge great-grandmother than
Peter and Curdie were in the arms of Mrs. Peterson.  True, her hands
were hard and chapped and large, but it was with work for them; and
therefore, in the sight of the angels, her hands were so much the more
beautiful.  And if Curdie worked hard to get her a petticoat, she
worked hard every day to get him comforts which he would have missed
much more than she would a new petticoat even in winter.  Not that she
and Curdie ever thought of how much they worked for each other: that
would have spoiled everything.

When left alone in the mine Curdie always worked on for an hour or two
at first, following the lode which, according to Glump, would lead at
last into the deserted habitation.  After that, he would set out on a
reconnoitring expedition.  In order to manage this, or rather the
return from it, better than the first time, he had bought a huge ball
of fine string, having learned the trick from Hop-o'-my-Thumb, whose
history his mother had often told him.  Not that Hop-o'-my-Thumb had
ever used a ball of string--I should be sorry to be supposed so far out
in my classics--but the principle was the same as that of the pebbles.
The end of this string he fastened to his pickaxe, which figured no bad
anchor, and then, with the ball in his hand, unrolling it as he went,
set out in the dark through the natural gangs of the goblins'
territory.  The first night or two he came upon nothing worth
remembering; saw only a little of the home-life of the cobs in the
various caves they called houses; failed in coming upon anything to
cast light upon the foregoing design which kept the inundation for the
present in the background.  But at length, I think on the third or
fourth night, he found, partly guided by the noise of their implements,
a company of evidently the best sappers and miners amongst them, hard
at work.  What were they about?  It could not well be the inundation,
seeing that had in the meantime been postponed to something else.  Then
what was it?  He lurked and watched, every now and then in the greatest
risk of being detected, but without success.  He had again and again to
retreat in haste, a proceeding rendered the more difficult that he had
to gather up his string as he returned upon its course.  It was not
that he was afraid of the goblins, but that he was afraid of their
finding out that they were watched, which might have prevented the
discovery at which he aimed.  Sometimes his haste had to be such that,
when he reached home towards morning, his string, for lack of time to
wind it up as he 'dodged the cobs', would be in what seemed most
hopeless entanglement; but after a good sleep, though a short one, he
always found his mother had got it right again.  There it was, wound in
a most respectable ball, ready for use the moment he should want it!

'I can't think how you do it, mother,' he would say.

'I follow the thread,' she would answer--'just as you do in the mine.'
She never had more to say about it; but the less clever she was with
her words, the more clever she was with her hands; and the less his
mother said, the more Curdie believed she had to say.  But still he had
made no discovery as to what the goblin miners were about.



CHAPTER 13

The Cobs' Creatures

About this time the gentlemen whom the king had left behind him to
watch over the princess had each occasion to doubt the testimony of his
own eyes, for more than strange were the objects to which they would
bear witness.  They were of one sort--creatures--but so grotesque and
misshapen as to be more like a child's drawings upon his slate than
anything natural.  They saw them only at night, while on guard about
the house.  The testimony of the man who first reported having seen one
of them was that, as he was walking slowly round the house, while yet
in the shadow, he caught sight of a creature standing on its hind legs
in the moonlight, with its forefeet upon a window-ledge, staring in at
the window.  Its body might have been that of a dog or wolf, he
thought, but he declared on his honour that its head was twice the size
it ought to have been for the size of its body, and as round as a ball,
while the face, which it turned upon him as it fled, was more like one
carved by a boy upon the turnip inside which he is going to put a
candle than anything else he could think of.  It rushed into the
garden. He sent an arrow after it, and thought he must have struck it;
for it gave an unearthly howl, and he could not find his arrow any more
than the beast, although he searched all about the place where it
vanished.  They laughed at him until he was driven to hold his tongue,
and said he must have taken too long a pull at the ale-jug.

But before two nights were over he had one to side with him, for he,
too, had seen something strange, only quite different from that
reported by the other.  The description the second man gave of the
creature he had seen was yet more grotesque and unlikely.  They were
both laughed at by the rest; but night after night another came over to
their side, until at last there was only one left to laugh at all his
companions.  Two nights more passed, and he saw nothing; but on the
third he came rushing from the garden to the other two before the
house, in such an agitation that they declared--for it was their turn
now--that the band of his helmet was cracking under his chin with the
rising of his hair inside it. Running with him into that part of the
garden which I have already described, they saw a score of creatures,
to not one of which they could give a name, and not one of which was
like another, hideous and ludicrous at once, gambolling on the lawn in
the moonlight. The supernatural or rather subnatural ugliness of their
faces, the length of legs and necks in some, the apparent absence of
both or either in others, made the spectators, although in one consent
as to what they saw, yet doubtful, as I have said, of the evidence of
their own eyes--and ears as well; for the noises they made, although
not loud, were as uncouth and varied as their forms, and could be
described neither as grunts nor squeaks nor roars nor howls nor barks
nor yells nor screams nor croaks nor hisses nor mews nor shrieks, but
only as something like all of them mingled in one horrible dissonance.
Keeping in the shade, the watchers had a few moments to recover
themselves before the hideous assembly suspected their presence; but
all at once, as if by common consent, they scampered off in the
direction of a great rock, and vanished before the men had come to
themselves sufficiently to think of following them.

My readers will suspect what these were; but I will now give them full
information concerning them.  They were, of course, household animals
belonging to the goblins, whose ancestors had taken their ancestors
many centuries before from the upper regions of light into the lower
regions of darkness.  The original stocks of these horrible creatures
were very much the same as the animals now seen about farms and homes
in the country, with the exception of a few of them, which had been
wild creatures, such as foxes, and indeed wolves and small bears, which
the goblins, from their proclivity towards the animal creation, had
caught when cubs and tamed.  But in the course of time all had
undergone even greater changes than had passed upon their owners.  They
had altered--that is, their descendants had altered--into such
creatures as I have not attempted to describe except in the vaguest
manner--the various parts of their bodies assuming, in an apparently
arbitrary and self-willed manner, the most abnormal developments.
Indeed, so little did any distinct type predominate in some of the
bewildering results, that you could only have guessed at any known
animal as the original, and even then, what likeness remained would be
more one of general expression than of definable conformation.  But
what increased the gruesomeness tenfold was that, from constant
domestic, or indeed rather family association with the goblins, their
countenances had grown in grotesque resemblance to the human.

No one understands animals who does not see that every one of them,
even amongst the fishes, it may be with a dimness and vagueness
infinitely remote, yet shadows the human: in the case of these the
human resemblance had greatly increased: while their owners had sunk
towards them, they had risen towards their owners.  But the conditions
of subterranean life being equally unnatural for both, while the
goblins were worse, the creatures had not improved by the
approximation, and its result would have appeared far more ludicrous
than consoling to the warmest lover of animal nature.  I shall now
explain how it was that just then these animals began to show
themselves about the king's country house.

The goblins, as Curdie had discovered, were mining on--at work both day
and night, in divisions, urging the scheme after which he lay in wait.
In the course of their tunnelling they had broken into the channel of a
small stream, but the break being in the top of it, no water had
escaped to interfere with their work.  Some of the creatures, hovering
as they often did about their masters, had found the hole, and had,
with the curiosity which had grown to a passion from the restraints of
their unnatural circumstances, proceeded to explore the channel.  The
stream was the same which ran out by the seat on which Irene and her
king-papa had sat as I have told, and the goblin creatures found it
jolly fun to get out for a romp on a smooth lawn such as they had never
seen in all their poor miserable lives.  But although they had partaken
enough of the nature of their owners to delight in annoying and
alarming any of the people whom they met on the mountain, they were, of
course, incapable of designs of their own, or of intentionally
furthering those of their masters.

For several nights after the men-at-arms were at length of one mind as
to the fact of the visits of some horrible creatures, whether bodily or
spectral they could not yet say, they watched with special attention
that part of the garden where they had last seen them.  Perhaps indeed
they gave in consequence too little attention to the house.  But the
creatures were too cunning to be easily caught; nor were the watchers
quick-eyed enough to descry the head, or the keen eyes in it, which,
from the opening whence the stream issued, would watch them in turn,
ready, the moment they should leave the lawn, to report the place clear.



CHAPTER 14

That Night Week

During the whole of the week Irene had been thinking every other moment
of her promise to the old lady, although even now she could not feel
quite sure that she had not been dreaming.  Could it really be that an
old lady lived up in the top of the house, with pigeons and a
spinning-wheel, and a lamp that never went out?  She was, however, none
the less determined, on the coming Friday, to ascend the three stairs,
walk through the passages with the many doors, and try to find the
tower in which she had either seen or dreamed her grandmother.

Her nurse could not help wondering what had come to the child--she
would sit so thoughtfully silent, and even in the midst of a game with
her would so suddenly fall into a dreamy mood.  But Irene took care to
betray nothing, whatever efforts Lootie might make to get at her
thoughts.  And Lootie had to say to herself: 'What an odd child she
is!' and give it up.

At length the longed-for Friday arrived, and lest Lootie should be
moved to watch her, Irene endeavoured to keep herself as quiet as
possible.  In the afternoon she asked for her doll's house, and went on
arranging and rearranging the various rooms and their inhabitants for a
whole hour.  Then she gave a sigh and threw herself back in her chair.
One of the dolls would not sit, and another would not stand, and they
were all very tiresome.  Indeed, there was one would not even lie down,
which was too bad.  But it was now getting dark, and the darker it got
the more excited Irene became, and the more she felt it necessary to be
composed.

'I see you want your tea, princess,' said the nurse: 'I will go and get
it.  The room feels close: I will open the window a little. The evening
is mild: it won't hurt you.'

'There's no fear of that, Lootie,' said Irene, wishing she had put off
going for the tea till it was darker, when she might have made her
attempt with every advantage.

I fancy Lootie was longer in returning than she had intended; for when
Irene, who had been lost in thought, looked up, she saw it was nearly
dark, and at the same moment caught sight of a pair of eyes, bright
with a green light, glowering at her through the open window.  The next
instant something leaped into the room.  It was like a cat, with legs
as long as a horse's, Irene said, but its body no bigger and its legs
no thicker than those of a cat.  She was too frightened to cry out, but
not too frightened to jump from her chair and run from the room.

It is plain enough to every one of my readers what she ought to have
done--and indeed, Irene thought of it herself; but when she came to the
foot of the old stair, just outside the nursery door, she imagined the
creature running up those long ascents after her, and pursuing her
through the dark passages--which, after all, might lead to no tower!
That thought was too much.  Her heart failed her, and, turning from the
stair, she rushed along to the hall, whence, finding the front door
open, she darted into the court pursued--at least she thought so--by
the creature.  No one happening to see her, on she ran, unable to think
for fear, and ready to run anywhere to elude the awful creature with
the stilt-legs.  Not daring to look behind her, she rushed straight out
of the gate and up the mountain.  It was foolish indeed--thus to run
farther and farther from all who could help her, as if she had been
seeking a fit spot for the goblin creature to eat her in his leisure;
but that is the way fear serves us: it always sides with the thing we
are afraid of.

The princess was soon out of breath with running uphill; but she ran
on, for she fancied the horrible creature just behind her, forgetting
that, had it been after her such long legs as those must have overtaken
her long ago.  At last she could run no longer, and fell, unable even
to scream, by the roadside, where she lay for some time half dead with
terror.  But finding nothing lay hold of her, and her breath beginning
to come back, she ventured at length to get half up and peer anxiously
about her.  It was now so dark she could see nothing.  Not a single
star was out.  She could not even tell in what direction the house lay,
and between her and home she fancied the dreadful creature lying ready
to pounce upon her. She saw now that she ought to have run up the
stairs at once.  It was well she did not scream; for, although very few
of the goblins had come out for weeks, a stray idler or two might have
heard her. She sat down upon a stone, and nobody but one who had done
something wrong could have been more miserable.  She had quite
forgotten her promise to visit her grandmother.  A raindrop fell on her
face.  She looked up, and for a moment her terror was lost in
astonishment.  At first she thought the rising moon had left her place,
and drawn nigh to see what could be the matter with the little girl,
sitting alone, without hat or cloak, on the dark bare mountain; but she
soon saw she was mistaken, for there was no light on the ground at her
feet, and no shadow anywhere.  But a great silver globe was hanging in
the air; and as she gazed at the lovely thing, her courage revived.  If
she were but indoors again, she would fear nothing, not even the
terrible creature with the long legs!  But how was she to find her way
back?  What could that light be?  Could it be--? No, it couldn't.  But
what if it should be--yes--it must be--her great-great-grandmother's
lamp, which guided her pigeons home through the darkest night!  She
jumped up: she had but to keep that light in view and she must find the
house.  Her heart grew strong.  Speedily, yet softly, she walked down
the hill, hoping to pass the watching creature unseen.  Dark as it was,
there was little danger now of choosing the wrong road.  And--which was
most strange--the light that filled her eyes from the lamp, instead of
blinding them for a moment to the object upon which they next fell,
enabled her for a moment to see it, despite the darkness.  By looking
at the lamp and then dropping her eyes, she could see the road for a
yard or two in front of her, and this saved her from several falls, for
the road was very rough.  But all at once, to her dismay, it vanished,
and the terror of the beast, which had left her the moment she began to
return, again laid hold of her heart.  The same instant, however, she
caught the light of the windows, and knew exactly where she was.  It
was too dark to run, but she made what haste she could, and reached the
gate in safety.  She found the house door still open, ran through the
hall, and, without even looking into the nursery, bounded straight up
the stair, and the next, and the next; then turning to the right, ran
through the long avenue of silent rooms, and found her way at once to
the door at the foot of the tower stair.

When first the nurse missed her, she fancied she was playing her a
trick, and for some time took no trouble about her; but at last,
getting frightened, she had begun to search; and when the princess
entered, the whole household was hither and thither over the house,
hunting for her.  A few seconds after she reached the stair of the
tower they had even begun to search the neglected rooms, in which they
would never have thought of looking had they not already searched every
other place they could think of in vain.  But by this time she was
knocking at the old lady's door.



CHAPTER 15

Woven and Then Spun

'Come in, Irene,' said the silvery voice of her grandmother.

The princess opened the door and peeped in.  But the room was quite
dark and there was no sound of the spinning-wheel.  She grew frightened
once more, thinking that, although the room was there, the old lady
might be a dream after all.  Every little girl knows how dreadful it is
to find a room empty where she thought somebody was; but Irene had to
fancy for a moment that the person she came to find was nowhere at all.
She remembered, however, that at night she spun only in the moonlight,
and concluded that must be why there was no sweet, bee-like humming:
the old lady might be somewhere in the darkness.  Before she had time
to think another thought, she heard her voice again, saying as before:
'Come in, Irene.'  From the sound, she understood at once that she was
not in the room beside her.  Perhaps she was in her bedroom.  She
turned across the passage, feeling her way to the other door.  When her
hand fell on the lock, again the old lady spoke:

'Shut the other door behind you, Irene.  I always close the door of my
workroom when I go to my chamber.'

Irene wondered to hear her voice so plainly through the door: having
shut the other, she opened it and went in.  Oh, what a lovely haven to
reach from the darkness and fear through which she had come!  The soft
light made her feel as if she were going into the heart of the milkiest
pearl; while the blue walls and their silver stars for a moment
perplexed her with the fancy that they were in reality the sky which
she had left outside a minute ago covered with rainclouds.

'I've lighted a fire for you, Irene: you're cold and wet,' said her
grandmother.

Then Irene looked again, and saw that what she had taken for a huge
bouquet of red roses on a low stand against the wall was in fact a fire
which burned in the shapes of the loveliest and reddest roses, glowing
gorgeously between the heads and wings of two cherubs of shining
silver.  And when she came nearer, she found that the smell of roses
with which the room was filled came from the fire-roses on the hearth.
Her grandmother was dressed in the loveliest pale blue velvet, over
which her hair, no longer white, but of a rich golden colour, streamed
like a cataract, here falling in dull gathered heaps, there rushing
away in smooth shining falls.  And ever as she looked, the hair seemed
pouring down from her head and vanishing in a golden mist ere it
reached the floor.  It flowed from under the edge of a circle of
shining silver, set with alternated pearls and opals.  On her dress was
no ornament whatever, neither was there a ring on her hand, or a
necklace or carcanet about her neck.  But her slippers glimmered with
the light of the Milky Way, for they were covered with seed-pearls and
opals in one mass.  Her face was that of a woman of three-and-twenty.

The princess was so bewildered with astonishment and admiration that
she could hardly thank her, and drew nigh with timidity, feeling dirty
and uncomfortable.  The lady was seated on a low chair by the side of
the fire, with hands outstretched to take her, but the princess hung
back with a troubled smile.

'Why, what's the matter?' asked her grandmother.  'You haven't been
doing anything wrong--I know that by your face, though it is rather
miserable.  What's the matter, my dear?'

And she still held out her arms.

'Dear grandmother,' said Irene, 'I'm not so sure that I haven't done
something wrong.  I ought to have run up to you at once when the
long-legged cat came in at the window, instead of running out on the
mountain and making myself such a fright.'

'You were taken by surprise, my child, and you are not so likely to do
it again.  It is when people do wrong things wilfully that they are the
more likely to do them again.  Come.'

And still she held out her arms.

'But, grandmother, you're so beautiful and grand with your crown on;
and I am so dirty with mud and rain!  I should quite spoil your
beautiful blue dress.'

With a merry little laugh the lady sprung from her chair, more lightly
far than Irene herself could, caught the child to her bosom, and,
kissing the tear-stained face over and over, sat down with her in her
lap.

'Oh, grandmother!  You'll make yourself such a mess!' cried Irene,
clinging to her.

'You darling! do you think I care more for my dress than for my little
girl?  Besides--look here.'

As she spoke she set her down, and Irene saw to her dismay that the
lovely dress was covered with the mud of her fall on the mountain road.
But the lady stooped to the fire, and taking from it, by the stalk in
her fingers, one of the burning roses, passed it once and again and a
third time over the front of her dress; and when Irene looked, not a
single stain was to be discovered.

'There!' said her grandmother, 'you won't mind coming to me now?'

But Irene again hung back, eying the flaming rose which the lady held
in her hand.

'You're not afraid of the rose--are you?' she said, about to throw it
on the hearth again.

'Oh! don't, please!' cried Irene.  'Won't you hold it to my frock and
my hands and my face?  And I'm afraid my feet and my knees want it too.'

'No, answered her grandmother, smiling a little sadly, as she threw the
rose from her; 'it is too hot for you yet.  It would set your frock in
a flame.  Besides, I don't want to make you clean tonight.

I want your nurse and the rest of the people to see you as you are, for
you will have to tell them how you ran away for fear of the long-legged
cat.  I should like to wash you, but they would not believe you then.
Do you see that bath behind you?'

The princess looked, and saw a large oval tub of silver, shining
brilliantly in the light of the wonderful lamp.

'Go and look into it,' said the lady.

Irene went, and came back very silent with her eyes shining.

'What did you see?' asked her grandmother.

'The sky, and the moon and the stars,' she answered.  'It looked as if
there was no bottom to it.'

The lady smiled a pleased satisfied smile, and was silent also for a
few moments.  Then she said:

'Any time you want a bath, come to me.  I know YOU have a bath every
morning, but sometimes you want one at night, too.'

'Thank you, grandmother; I will--I will indeed,' answered Irene, and
was again silent for some moments thinking.  Then she said: 'How was
it, grandmother, that I saw your beautiful lamp--not the light of it
only--but the great round silvery lamp itself, hanging alone in the
great open air, high up?  It was your lamp I saw--wasn't it?'

'Yes, my child--it was my lamp.'

'Then how was it?  I don't see a window all round.'

'When I please I can make the lamp shine through the walls--shine so
strong that it melts them away from before the sight, and shows itself
as you saw it.  But, as I told you, it is not everybody can see it.'

'How is it that I can, then?  I'm sure I don't know.'

'It is a gift born with you.  And one day I hope everybody will have
it.'

'But how do you make it shine through the walls?'

'Ah! that you would not understand if I were to try ever so much to
make you--not yet--not yet.  But,' added the lady, rising, 'you must
sit in my chair while I get you the present I have been preparing for
you.  I told you my spinning was for you.  It is finished now, and I am
going to fetch it.  I have been keeping it warm under one of my
brooding pigeons.'

Irene sat down in the low chair, and her grandmother left her, shutting
the door behind her.  The child sat gazing, now at the rose fire, now
at the starry walls, now at the silver light; and a great quietness
grew in her heart.  If all the long-legged cats in the world had come
rushing at her then she would not have been afraid of them for a
moment.  How this was she could not tell--she only knew there was no
fear in her, and everything was so right and safe that it could not get
in.

She had been gazing at the lovely lamp for some minutes fixedly:
turning her eyes, she found the wall had vanished, for she was looking
out on the dark cloudy night.  But though she heard the wind blowing,
none of it blew upon her.  In a moment more the clouds themselves
parted, or rather vanished like the wall, and she looked straight into
the starry herds, flashing gloriously in the dark blue.  It was but for
a moment.  The clouds gathered again and shut out the stars; the wall
gathered again and shut out the clouds; and there stood the lady beside
her with the loveliest smile on her face, and a shimmering ball in her
hand, about the size of a pigeon's egg.

'There, Irene; there is my work for you!' she said, holding out the
ball to the princess.

She took it in her hand, and looked at it all over.  It sparkled a
little, and shone here and there, but not much.  It was of a sort of
grey-whiteness, something like spun glass.

'Is this all your spinning, grandmother?' she asked.

'All since you came to the house.  There is more there than you think.'

'How pretty it is!  What am I to do with it, please?'

'That I will now explain to you,' answered the lady, turning from her
and going to her cabinet.  She came back with a small ring in her hand.
Then she took the ball from Irene's, and did something with the
ring--Irene could not tell what.

'Give me your hand,' she said.  Irene held up her right hand.

'Yes, that is the hand I want,' said the lady, and put the ring on the
forefinger of it.

'What a beautiful ring!' said Irene.  'What is the stone called?'

'It is a fire-opal.' 'Please, am I to keep it?'

'Always.' 'Oh, thank you, grandmother!  It's prettier than anything I
ever saw, except those--of all colours-in your--Please, is that your
crown?'

'Yes, it is my crown.  The stone in your ring is of the same sort--only
not so good.  It has only red, but mine have all colours, you see.'

'Yes, grandmother.  I will take such care of it!  But--' she added,
hesitating.

'But what?' asked her grandmother.

'What am I to say when Lootie asks me where I got it?'

'You will ask her where you got it,' answered the lady smiling.

'I don't see how I can do that.'

'You will, though.'

'Of course I will, if you say so.  But, you know, I can't pretend not
to know.'

'Of course not.  But don't trouble yourself about it.  You will see
when the time comes.'

So saying, the lady turned, and threw the little ball into the rose
fire.

'Oh, grandmother!' exclaimed Irene; 'I thought you had spun it for me.'

'So I did, my child.  And you've got it.'

'No; it's burnt in the fire!'

The lady put her hand in the fire, brought out the ball, glimmering as
before, and held it towards her.  Irene stretched out her hand to take
it, but the lady turned and, going to her cabinet, opened a drawer, and
laid the ball in it.

'Have I done anything to vex you, grandmother?' said Irene pitifully.

'No, my darling.  But you must understand that no one ever gives
anything to another properly and really without keeping it.  That ball
is yours.'

'Oh! I'm not to take it with me!  You are going to keep it for me!'

'You are to take it with you.  I've fastened the end of it to the ring
on your finger.'

Irene looked at the ring.

'I can't see it there, grandmother,' she said.

'Feel--a little way from the ring--towards the cabinet,' said the lady.

'Oh! I do feel it!' exclaimed the princess.  'But I can't see it,' she
added, looking close to her outstretched hand.

'No.  The thread is too fine for you to see it.  You can only feel it.
Now you can fancy how much spinning that took, although it does seem
such a little ball.'

'But what use can I make of it, if it lies in your cabinet?'

'That is what I will explain to you.  It would be of no use to you--it
wouldn't be yours at all if it did not lie in my cabinet.  Now listen.
If ever you find yourself in any danger--such, for example, as you were
in this same evening--you must take off your ring and put it under the
pillow of your bed.  Then you must lay your finger, the same that wore
the ring, upon the thread, and follow the thread wherever it leads you.'

'Oh, how delightful!  It will lead me to you, grandmother, I know!'

'Yes.  But, remember, it may seem to you a very roundabout way indeed,
and you must not doubt the thread.  Of one thing you may be sure, that
while you hold it, I hold it too.'

'It is very wonderful!' said Irene thoughtfully.  Then suddenly
becoming aware, she jumped up, crying:

'Oh, grandmother! here have I been sitting all this time in your chair,
and you standing!  I beg your pardon.'

The lady laid her hand on her shoulder, and said:

'Sit down again, Irene.  Nothing pleases me better than to see anyone
sit in my chair.  I am only too glad to stand so long as anyone will
sit in it.'

'How kind of you!' said the princess, and sat down again.

'It makes me happy,' said the lady.

'But,' said Irene, still puzzled, 'won't the thread get in somebody's
way and be broken, if the one end is fast to my ring, and the other
laid in your cabinet?'

'You will find all that arrange itself.  I am afraid it is time for you
to go.'

'Mightn't I stay and sleep with you tonight, grandmother?' 'No, not
tonight.  If I had meant you to stay tonight, I should have given you a
bath; but you know everybody in the house is miserable about you, and
it would be cruel to keep them so all night.  You must go downstairs.'

'I'm so glad, grandmother, you didn't say "Go home," for this is my
home.  Mayn't I call this my home?'

'You may, my child.  And I trust you will always think it your home.
Now come.  I must take you back without anyone seeing you.'

'Please, I want to ask you one question more,' said Irene.  'Is it
because you have your crown on that you look so young?'

'No, child,' answered her grandmother; 'it is because I felt so young
this evening that I put my crown on.  And I thought you would like to
see your old grandmother in her best.'

'Why do you call yourself old?  You're not old, grandmother.'

'I am very old indeed.  It is so silly of people--I don't mean you, for
you are such a tiny, and couldn't know better--but it is so silly of
people to fancy that old age means crookedness and witheredness and
feebleness and sticks and spectacles and rheumatism and forgetfulness!
It is so silly! Old age has nothing whatever to do with all that.  The
right old age means strength and beauty and mirth and courage and clear
eyes and strong painless limbs.  I am older than you are able to think,
and--'

'And look at you, grandmother!' cried Irene, jumping up and flinging
her arms about her neck.  'I won't be so silly again, I promise you.
At least--I'm rather afraid to promise--but if I am, I promise to be
sorry for it--I do.  I wish I were as old as you, grandmother.  I don't
think you are ever afraid of anything.'

'Not for long, at least, my child.  Perhaps by the time I am two
thousand years of age, I shall, indeed, never be afraid of anything.
But I confess I have sometimes been afraid about my children--sometimes
about you, Irene.'

'Oh, I'm so sorry, grandmother!  Tonight, I suppose, you mean.'

'Yes--a little tonight; but a good deal when you had all but made up
your mind that I was a dream, and no real great-great-grandmother.  You
must not suppose I am blaming you for that.  I dare say you could not
help it.'

'I don't know, grandmother,' said the princess, beginning to cry. 'I
can't always do myself as I should like.  And I don't always try.  I'm
very sorry anyhow.'

The lady stooped, lifted her in her arms, and sat down with her in her
chair, holding her close to her bosom.  In a few minutes the princess
had sobbed herself to sleep.  How long she slept I do not know.  When
she came to herself she was sitting in her own high chair at the
nursery table, with her doll's house before her.



CHAPTER 16

The Ring

The same moment her nurse came into the room, sobbing.  When she saw
her sitting there she started back with a loud cry of amazement and
joy.  Then running to her, she caught her in her arms and covered her
with kisses.

'My precious darling princess! where have you been?  What has happened
to you?  We've all been crying our eyes out, and searching the house
from top to bottom for you.'

'Not quite from the top,' thought Irene to herself; and she might have
added, 'not quite to the bottom', perhaps, if she had known all.  But
the one she would not, and the other she could not say. 'Oh, Lootie!
I've had such a dreadful adventure!' she replied, and told her all
about the cat with the long legs, and how she ran out upon the
mountain, and came back again.  But she said nothing of her grandmother
or her lamp.

'And there we've been searching for you all over the house for more
than an hour and a half!' exclaimed the nurse.  'But that's no matter,
now we've got you!  Only, princess, I must say,' she added, her mood
changing, 'what you ought to have done was to call for your own Lootie
to come and help you, instead of running out of the house, and up the
mountain, in that wild, I must say, foolish fashion.'

'Well, Lootie,' said Irene quietly, 'perhaps if you had a big cat, all
legs, running at you, you might not exactly know what was the wisest
thing to do at the moment.'

'I wouldn't run up the mountain, anyhow,' returned Lootie.

'Not if you had time to think about it.  But when those creatures came
at you that night on the mountain, you were so frightened yourself that
you lost your way home.'

This put a stop to Lootie's reproaches.  She had been on the point of
saying that the long-legged cat must have been a twilight fancy of the
princess's, but the memory of the horrors of that night, and of the
talking-to which the king had given her in consequence, prevented her
from saying what after all she did not half believe--having a strong
suspicion that the cat was a goblin; for she knew nothing of the
difference between the goblins and their creatures: she counted them
all just goblins.

Without another word she went and got some fresh tea and bread and
butter for the princess.  Before she returned, the whole household,
headed by the housekeeper, burst into the nursery to exult over their
darling.  The gentlemen-at-arms followed, and were ready enough to
believe all she told them about the long-legged cat. Indeed, though
wise enough to say nothing about it, they remembered, with no little
horror, just such a creature amongst those they had surprised at their
gambols upon the princess's lawn.

In their own hearts they blamed themselves for not having kept better
watch.  And their captain gave orders that from this night the front
door and all the windows on the ground floor should be locked
immediately the sun set, and opened after upon no pretence whatever.
The men-at-arms redoubled their vigilance, and for some time there was
no further cause of alarm.

When the princess woke the next morning, her nurse was bending over
her.  'How your ring does glow this morning, princess!--just like a
fiery rose!' she said.

'Does it, Lootie?' returned Irene.  'Who gave me the ring, Lootie? I
know I've had it a long time, but where did I get it?  I don't
remember.'

'I think it must have been your mother gave it you, princess; but
really, for as long as you have worn it, I don't remember that ever I
heard,' answered her nurse.

'I will ask my king-papa the next time he comes,' said Irene.



CHAPTER 17

Springtime

The spring so dear to all creatures, young and old, came at last, and
before the first few days of it had gone, the king rode through its
budding valleys to see his little daughter.  He had been in a distant
part of his dominions all the winter, for he was not in the habit of
stopping in one great city, or of visiting only his favourite country
houses, but he moved from place to place, that all his people might
know him.  Wherever he journeyed, he kept a constant look-out for the
ablest and best men to put into office; and wherever he found himself
mistaken, and those he had appointed incapable or unjust, he removed
them at once.  Hence you see it was his care of the people that kept
him from seeing his princess so often as he would have liked.  You may
wonder why he did not take her about with him; but there were several
reasons against his doing so, and I suspect her great-great-grandmother
had had a principal hand in preventing it.  Once more Irene heard the
bugle-blast, and once more she was at the gate to meet her father as he
rode up on his great white horse.

After they had been alone for a little while, she thought of what she
had resolved to ask him.

'Please, king-papa,' she said, 'Will you tell me where I got this
pretty ring?  I can't remember.'

The king looked at it.  A strange beautiful smile spread like sunshine
over his face, and an answering smile, but at the same time a
questioning one, spread like moonlight over Irene's.  'It was your
queen-mamma's once,' he said.

'And why isn't it hers now?' asked Irene.

'She does not want it now,' said the king, looking grave.

'Why doesn't she want it now?'

'Because she's gone where all those rings are made.'

'And when shall I see her?' asked the princess.

'Not for some time yet,' answered the king, and the tears came into his
eyes.

Irene did not remember her mother and did not know why her father
looked so, and why the tears came in his eyes; but she put her arms
round his neck and kissed him, and asked no more questions.

The king was much disturbed on hearing the report of the
gentlemen-at-arms concerning the creatures they had seen; and I presume
would have taken Irene with him that very day, but for what the
presence of the ring on her finger assured him of.  About an hour
before he left, Irene saw him go up the old stair; and he did not come
down again till they were just ready to start; and she thought with
herself that he had been up to see the old lady.  When he went away he
left other six gentlemen behind him, that there might be six of them
always on guard.

And now, in the lovely spring weather, Irene was out on the mountain
the greater part of the day.  In the warmer hollows there were lovely
primroses, and not so many that she ever got tired of them.  As often
as she saw a new one opening an eye of light in the blind earth, she
would clap her hands with gladness, and unlike some children I know,
instead of pulling it, would touch it as tenderly as if it had been a
new baby, and, having made its acquaintance, would leave it as happy as
she found it.  She treated the plants on which they grew like birds'
nests; every fresh flower was like a new little bird to her.  She would
pay visits to all the flower-nests she knew, remembering each by
itself.  She would go down on her hands and knees beside one and say:
'Good morning!  Are you all smelling very sweet this morning?
Good-bye!' and then she would go to another nest, and say the same.  It
was a favourite amusement with her.  There were many flowers up and
down, and she loved them all, but the primroses were her favourites.

'They're not too shy, and they're not a bit forward,' she would say to
Lootie.

There were goats too about, over the mountain, and when the little kids
came she was as pleased with them as with the flowers.  The goats
belonged to the miners mostly-a few of them to Curdie's mother; but
there were a good many wild ones that seemed to belong to nobody.
These the goblins counted theirs, and it was upon them partly that they
lived.  They set snares and dug pits for them; and did not scruple to
take what tame ones happened to be caught; but they did not try to
steal them in any other manner, because they were afraid of the dogs
the hill-people kept to watch them, for the knowing dogs always tried
to bite their feet.  But the goblins had a kind of sheep of their
own--very queer creatures, which they drove out to feed at night, and
the other goblin creatures were wise enough to keep good watch over
them, for they knew they should have their bones by and by.



CHAPTER 18

Curdie's Clue

Curdie was as watchful as ever, but was almost getting tired of his ill
success.  Every other night or so he followed the goblins about, as
they went on digging and boring, and getting as near them as he could,
watched them from behind stones and rocks; but as yet he seemed no
nearer finding out what they had in view.  As at first, he always kept
hold of the end of his string, while his pickaxe, left just outside the
hole by which he entered the goblins' country from the mine, continued
to serve as an anchor and hold fast the other end.  The goblins,
hearing no more noise in that quarter, had ceased to apprehend an
immediate invasion, and kept no watch.

One night, after dodging about and listening till he was nearly falling
asleep with weariness, he began to roll up his ball, for he had
resolved to go home to bed.  It was not long, however, before he began
to feel bewildered.  One after another he passed goblin houses, caves,
that is, occupied by goblin families, and at length was sure they were
many more than he had passed as he came.  He had to use great caution
to pass unseen--they lay so close together. Could his string have led
him wrong?  He still followed winding it, and still it led him into
more thickly populated quarters, until he became quite uneasy, and
indeed apprehensive; for although he was not afraid of the cobs, he was
afraid of not finding his way out. But what could he do?  It was of no
use to sit down and wait for the morning--the morning made no
difference here.  It was dark, and always dark; and if his string
failed him he was helpless.  He might even arrive within a yard of the
mine and never know it. Seeing he could do nothing better he would at
least find where the end of his string was, and, if possible, how it
had come to play him such a trick.  He knew by the size of the ball
that he was getting pretty near the last of it, when he began to feel a
tugging and pulling at it.  What could it mean?  Turning a sharp
corner, he thought he heard strange sounds.  These grew, as he went on,
to a scuffling and growling and squeaking; and the noise increased,
until, turning a second sharp corner, he found himself in the midst of
it, and the same moment tumbled over a wallowing mass, which he knew
must be a knot of the cobs' creatures.  Before he could recover his
feet, he had caught some great scratches on his face and several severe
bites on his legs and arms.  But as he scrambled to get up, his hand
fell upon his pickaxe, and before the horrid beasts could do him any
serious harm, he was laying about with it right and left in the dark.
The hideous cries which followed gave him the satisfaction of knowing
that he had punished some of them pretty smartly for their rudeness,
and by their scampering and their retreating howls, he perceived that
he had routed them.  He stood for a little, weighing his battle-axe in
his hand as if it had been the most precious lump of metal--but indeed
no lump of gold itself could have been so precious at the time as that
common tool--then untied the end of the string from it, put the ball in
his pocket, and still stood thinking.  It was clear that the cobs'
creatures had found his axe, had between them carried it off, and had
so led him he knew not where.  But for all his thinking he could not
tell what he ought to do, until suddenly he became aware of a glimmer
of light in the distance.  Without a moment's hesitation he set out for
it, as fast as the unknown and rugged way would permit.  Yet again
turning a corner, led by the dim light, he spied something quite new in
his experience of the underground regions--a small irregular shape of
something shining.  Going up to it, he found it was a piece of mica, or
Muscovy glass, called sheep-silver in Scotland, and the light flickered
as if from a fire behind it.  After trying in vain for some time to
discover an entrance to the place where it was burning, he came at
length to a small chamber in which an opening, high in the wall,
revealed a glow beyond.  To this opening he managed to scramble up, and
then he saw a strange sight.

Below sat a little group of goblins around a fire, the smoke of which
vanished in the darkness far aloft.  The sides of the cave were full of
shining minerals like those of the palace hall; and the company was
evidently of a superior order, for every one wore stones about head, or
arms, or waist, shining dull gorgeous colours in the light of the fire.
Nor had Curdie looked long before he recognized the king himself, and
found that he had made his way into the inner apartment of the royal
family.  He had never had such a good chance of hearing something.  He
crept through the hole as softly as he could, scrambled a good way down
the wall towards them without attracting attention, and then sat down
and listened. The king, evidently the queen, and probably the crown
prince and the Prime Minister were talking together.  He was sure of
the queen by her shoes, for as she warmed her feet at the fire, he saw
them quite plainly.

'That will be fun!' said the one he took for the crown prince. It was
the first whole sentence he heard.

'I don't see why you should think it such a grand affair!' said his
stepmother, tossing her head backward.

'You must remember, my spouse,' interposed His Majesty, as if making
excuse for his son, 'he has got the same blood in him.  His mother--'

'Don't talk to me of his mother!  You positively encourage his
unnatural fancies.  Whatever belongs to that mother ought to be cut out
of him.'

'You forget yourself, my dear!' said the king.

'I don't,' said the queen, 'nor you either.  If you expect me to
approve of such coarse tastes, you will find yourself mistaken.  I
don't wear shoes for nothing.'

'You must acknowledge, however,' the king said, with a little groan,
'that this at least is no whim of Harelip's, but a matter of State
policy.  You are well aware that his gratification comes purely from
the pleasure of sacrificing himself to the public good.

Does it not, Harelip?'

'Yes, father; of course it does.  Only it will be nice to make her cry.
I'll have the skin taken off between her toes, and tie them up till
they grow together.  Then her feet will be like other people's, and
there will be no occasion for her to wear shoes.'

'Do you mean to insinuate I've got toes, you unnatural wretch?' cried
the queen; and she moved angrily towards Harelip.  The councillor,
however, who was betwixt them, leaned forward so as to prevent her
touching him, but only as if to address the prince.

'Your Royal Highness,' he said, 'possibly requires to be reminded that
you have got three toes yourself--one on one foot, two on the other.'

'Ha! ha! ha!' shouted the queen triumphantly.

The councillor, encouraged by this mark of favour, went on.

'It seems to me, Your Royal Highness, it would greatly endear you to
your future people, proving to them that you are not the less one of
themselves that you had the misfortune to be born of a sun-mother, if
you were to command upon yourself the comparatively slight operation
which, in a more extended form, you so wisely meditate with regard to
your future princess.'

'Ha! ha! ha!' laughed the queen louder than before, and the king and
the minister joined in the laugh.  Harelip growled, and for a few
moments the others continued to express their enjoyment of his
discomfiture.

The queen was the only one Curdie could see with any distinctness. She
sat sideways to him, and the light of the fire shone full upon her
face.  He could not consider her handsome.  Her nose was certainly
broader at the end than its extreme length, and her eyes, instead of
being horizontal, were set up like two perpendicular eggs, one on the
broad, the other on the small end.  Her mouth was no bigger than a
small buttonhole until she laughed, when it stretched from ear to
ear--only, to be sure, her ears were very nearly in the middle of her
cheeks.

Anxious to hear everything they might say, Curdie ventured to slide
down a smooth part of the rock just under him, to a projection below,
upon which he thought to rest.  But whether he was not careful enough,
or the projection gave way, down he came with a rush on the floor of
the cavern, bringing with him a great rumbling shower of stones.

The goblins jumped from their seats in more anger than consternation,
for they had never yet seen anything to be afraid of in the palace.
But when they saw Curdie with his pick in his hand their rage was
mingled with fear, for they took him for the first of an invasion of
miners.  The king notwithstanding drew himself up to his full height of
four feet, spread himself to his full breadth of three and a half, for
he was the handsomest and squarest of all the goblins, and strutting up
to Curdie, planted himself with outspread feet before him, and said
with dignity:

'Pray what right have you in my palace?'

'The right of necessity, Your Majesty,' answered Curdie.  'I lost my
way and did not know where I was wandering to.'

'How did you get in?'

'By a hole in the mountain.'

'But you are a miner!  Look at your pickaxe!'

Curdie did look at it, answering:

'I came upon it lying on the ground a little way from here.  I tumbled
over some wild beasts who were playing with it.  Look, Your Majesty.'
And Curdie showed him how he was scratched and bitten.

The king was pleased to find him behave more politely than he had
expected from what his people had told him concerning the miners, for
he attributed it to the power of his own presence; but he did not
therefore feel friendly to the intruder.

'You will oblige me by walking out of my dominions at once,' he said,
well knowing what a mockery lay in the words.

'With pleasure, if Your Majesty will give me a guide,' said Curdie.

'I will give you a thousand,' said the king with a scoffing air of
magnificent liberality.

'One will be quite sufficient,' said Curdie.

But the king uttered a strange shout, half halloo, half roar, and in
rushed goblins till the cave was swarming.  He said something to the
first of them which Curdie could not hear, and it was passed from one
to another till in a moment the farthest in the crowd had evidently
heard and understood it.  They began to gather about him in a way he
did not relish, and he retreated towards the wall. They pressed upon
him.

'Stand back,' said Curdie, grasping his pickaxe tighter by his knee.

They only grinned and pressed closer.  Curdie bethought himself and
began to rhyme.


  'Ten, twenty, thirty--
  You're all so very dirty!
  Twenty, thirty, forty--
  You're all so thick and snorty!
  'Thirty, forty, fifty--
  You're all so puff-and-snifty!
  Forty, fifty, sixty--
  Beast and man so mixty!

  'Fifty, sixty, seventy--
  Mixty, maxty, leaventy!
  Sixty, seventy, eighty--
  All your cheeks so slaty!

  'Seventy, eighty, ninety,
  All your hands so flinty!
  Eighty, ninety, hundred,
  Altogether dundred!'


The goblins fell back a little when he began, and made horrible
grimaces all through the rhyme, as if eating something so disagreeable
that it set their teeth on edge and gave them the creeps; but whether
it was that the rhyming words were most of them no words at all, for, a
new rhyme being considered the more efficacious, Curdie had made it on
the spur of the moment, or whether it was that the presence of the king
and queen gave them courage, I cannot tell; but the moment the rhyme
was over they crowded on him again, and out shot a hundred long arms,
with a multitude of thick nailless fingers at the ends of them, to lay
hold upon him.  Then Curdie heaved up his axe.  But being as gentle as
courageous and not wishing to kill any of them, he turned the end which
was square and blunt like a hammer, and with that came down a great
blow on the head of the goblin nearest him.  Hard as the heads of all
goblins are, he thought he must feel that.  And so he did, no doubt;
but he only gave a horrible cry, and sprung at Curdie's throat.
Curdie, however, drew back in time, and just at that critical moment
remembered the vulnerable part of the goblin body.  He made a sudden
rush at the king and stamped with all his might on His Majesty's feet.
The king gave a most unkingly howl and almost fell into the fire.
Curdie then rushed into the crowd, stamping right and left.  The
goblins drew back, howling on every side as he approached, but they
were so crowded that few of those he attacked could escape his tread;
and the shrieking and roaring that filled the cave would have appalled
Curdie but for the good hope it gave him.  They were tumbling over each
other in heaps in their eagerness to rush from the cave, when a new
assailant suddenly faced him--the queen, with flaming eyes and expanded
nostrils, her hair standing half up from her head, rushed at him. She
trusted in her shoes: they were of granite--hollowed like French
sabots.  Curdie would have endured much rather than hurt a woman, even
if she was a goblin; but here was an affair of life and death:
forgetting her shoes, he made a great stamp on one of her feet.  But
she instantly returned it with very different effect, causing him
frightful pain, and almost disabling him.  His only chance with her
would have been to attack the granite shoes with his pickaxe, but
before he could think of that she had caught him up in her arms and was
rushing with him across the cave.  She dashed him into a hole in the
wall, with a force that almost stunned him.  But although he could not
move, he was not too far gone to hear her great cry, and the rush of
multitudes of soft feet, followed by the sounds of something heaved up
against the rock; after which came a multitudinous patter of stones
falling near him.  The last had not ceased when he grew very faint, for
his head had been badly cut, and at last insensible.

When he came to himself there was perfect silence about him, and utter
darkness, but for the merest glimmer in one tiny spot.  He crawled to
it, and found that they had heaved a slab against the mouth of the
hole, past the edge of which a poor little gleam found its way from the
fire.  He could not move it a hairbreadth, for they had piled a great
heap of stones against it.  He crawled back to where he had been lying,
in the faint hope of finding his pickaxe, But after a vain search he
was at last compelled to acknowledge himself in an evil plight.  He sat
down and tried to think, but soon fell fast asleep.



CHAPTER 19

Goblin Counsels

He must have slept a long time, for when he awoke he felt wonderfully
restored--indeed almost well--and very hungry.  There were voices in
the outer cave.

Once more, then, it was night; for the goblins slept during the day and
went about their affairs during the night.

In the universal and constant darkness of their dwelling they had no
reason to prefer the one arrangement to the other; but from aversion to
the sun-people they chose to be busy when there was least chance of
their being met either by the miners below, when they were burrowing,
or by the people of the mountain above, when they were feeding their
sheep or catching their goats.  And indeed it was only when the sun was
away that the outside of the mountain was sufficiently like their own
dismal regions to be endurable to their mole eyes, so thoroughly had
they become unaccustomed to any light beyond that of their own fires
and torches.

Curdie listened, and soon found that they were talking of himself.

'How long will it take?' asked Harelip.

'Not many days, I should think,' answered the king.  'They are poor
feeble creatures, those sun-people, and want to be always eating. We
can go a week at a time without food, and be all the better for it; but
I've been told they eat two or three times every day!  Can you believe
it?  They must be quite hollow inside--not at all like us, nine-tenths
of whose bulk is solid flesh and bone.  Yes--I judge a week of
starvation will do for him.'

'If I may be allowed a word,' interposed the queen,--'and I think I
ought to have some voice in the matter--'

'The wretch is entirely at your disposal, my spouse,' interrupted the
king.  'He is your property.  You caught him yourself.  We should never
have done it.'

The queen laughed.  She seemed in far better humour than the night
before.

'I was about to say,' she resumed, 'that it does seem a pity to waste
so much fresh meat.'

'What are you thinking of, my love?' said the king.  'The very notion
of starving him implies that we are not going to give him any meat,
either salt or fresh.'

'I'm not such a stupid as that comes to,' returned Her Majesty. 'What I
mean is that by the time he is starved there will hardly be a picking
upon his bones.'

The king gave a great laugh.

'Well, my spouse, you may have him when you like,' he said.  'I don't
fancy him for my part.  I am pretty sure he is tough eating.'

'That would be to honour instead of punish his insolence,' returned the
queen.  'But why should our poor creatures be deprived of so much
nourishment?  Our little dogs and cats and pigs and small bears would
enjoy him very much.'

'You are the best of housekeepers, my lovely queen!' said her husband.
'Let it be so by all means.  Let us have our people in, and get him out
and kill him at once.  He deserves it.  The mischief he might have
brought upon us, now that he had penetrated so far as our most retired
citadel, is incalculable.  Or rather let us tie him hand and foot, and
have the pleasure of seeing him torn to pieces by full torchlight in
the great hall.'

'Better and better!' cried the queen and the prince together, both of
them clapping their hands.  And the prince made an ugly noise with his
hare-lip, just as if he had intended to be one at the feast.

'But,' added the queen, bethinking herself, 'he is so troublesome. For
poor creatures as they are, there is something about those sun-people
that is very troublesome.  I cannot imagine how it is that with such
superior strength and skill and understanding as ours, we permit them
to exist at all.  Why do we not destroy them entirely, and use their
cattle and grazing lands at our pleasure? Of course we don't want to
live in their horrid country!  It is far too glaring for our quieter
and more refined tastes.  But we might use it as a sort of outhouse,
you know.  Even our creatures' eyes might get used to it, and if they
did grow blind that would be of no consequence, provided they grew fat
as well.  But we might even keep their great cows and other creatures,
and then we should have a few more luxuries, such as cream and cheese,
which at present we only taste occasionally, when our brave men have
succeeded in carrying some off from their farms.'

'It is worth thinking of,' said the king; 'and I don't know why you
should be the first to suggest it, except that you have a positive
genius for conquest.  But still, as you say, there is something very
troublesome about them; and it would be better, as I understand you to
suggest, that we should starve him for a day or two first, so that he
may be a little less frisky when we take him out.'


  'Once there was a goblin
  Living in a hole;
  Busy he was cobblin'
  A shoe without a sole.

  'By came a birdie:
  "Goblin, what do you do?"
  "Cobble at a sturdie
  Upper leather shoe."

  '"What's the good o' that, Sir?"
  Said the little bird.
  "Why it's very Pat, Sir--
  Plain without a word.

  '"Where 'tis all a hole, Sir,
  Never can be holes:
  Why should their shoes have soles, Sir,
  When they've got no souls?"'


'What's that horrible noise?' cried the queen, shuddering from
pot-metal head to granite shoes.

'I declare,' said the king with solemn indignation, 'it's the
sun-creature in the hole!'

'Stop that disgusting noise!' cried the crown prince valiantly, getting
up and standing in front of the heap of stones, with his face towards
Curdie's prison.  'Do now, or I'll break your head.'

'Break away,' shouted Curdie, and began singing again:


  'Once there was a goblin,
  Living in a hole--'


'I really cannot bear it,' said the queen.  'If I could only get at his
horrid toes with my slippers again!'

'I think we had better go to bed,' said the king.

'It's not time to go to bed,' said the queen.

'I would if I was you,' said Curdie.

'Impertinent wretch!' said the queen, with the utmost scorn in her
voice.

'An impossible if,' said His Majesty with dignity.

'Quite,' returned Curdie, and began singing again:


  'Go to bed,
  Goblin, do.
  Help the queen
  Take off her shoe.

  'If you do,
  It will disclose
  A horrid set
  Of sprouting toes.'


'What a lie!' roared the queen in a rage.

'By the way, that reminds me,' said the king, 'that for as long as we
have been married, I have never seen your feet, queen.  I think you
might take off your shoes when you go to bed!  They positively hurt me
sometimes.'

'I will do as I like,' retorted the queen sulkily.

'You ought to do as your own hubby wishes you,' said the king.

'I will not,' said the queen.

'Then I insist upon it,' said the king.

Apparently His Majesty approached the queen for the purpose of
following the advice given by Curdie, for the latter heard a scuffle,
and then a great roar from the king.

'Will you be quiet, then?' said the queen wickedly.

'Yes, yes, queen.  I only meant to coax you.'

'Hands off!' cried the queen triumphantly.  'I'm going to bed.  You may
come when you like.  But as long as I am queen I will sleep in my
shoes.  It is my royal privilege.  Harelip, go to bed.'

'I'm going,' said Harelip sleepily.

'So am I,' said the king.

'Come along, then,' said the queen; 'and mind you are good, or I'll--'

'Oh, no, no, no!' screamed the king in the most supplicating of tones.

Curdie heard only a muttered reply in the distance; and then the cave
was quite still.

They had left the fire burning, and the light came through brighter
than before.  Curdie thought it was time to try again if anything could
be done.  But he found he could not get even a finger through the chink
between the slab and the rock.  He gave a great rush with his shoulder
against the slab, but it yielded no more than if it had been part of
the rock.  All he could do was to sit down and think again.

By and by he came to the resolution to pretend to be dying, in the hope
they might take him out before his strength was too much exhausted to
let him have a chance.  Then, for the creatures, if he could but find
his axe again, he would have no fear of them; and if it were not for
the queen's horrid shoes, he would have no fear at all.

Meantime, until they should come again at night, there was nothing for
him to do but forge new rhymes, now his only weapons.  He had no
intention of using them at present, of course; but it was well to have
a stock, for he might live to want them, and the manufacture of them
would help to while away the time.



CHAPTER 20

Irene's Clue

That same morning early, the princess woke in a terrible fright. There
was a hideous noise in her room--creatures snarling and hissing and
rocketing about as if they were fighting.  The moment she came to
herself, she remembered something she had never thought of again--what
her grandmother told her to do when she was frightened.  She
immediately took off her ring and put it under her pillow.  As she did
so she fancied she felt a finger and thumb take it gently from under
her palm.  'It must be my grandmother!' she said to herself, and the
thought gave her such courage that she stopped to put on her dainty
little slippers before running from the room.  While doing this she
caught sight of a long cloak of sky-blue, thrown over the back of a
chair by the bedside.  She had never seen it before but it was
evidently waiting for her.  She put it on, and then, feeling with the
forefinger of her right hand, soon found her grandmother's thread,
which she proceeded at once to follow, expecting it would lead her
straight up the old stair. When she reached the door she found it went
down and ran along the floor, so that she had almost to crawl in order
to keep a hold of it.  Then, to her surprise, and somewhat to her
dismay, she found that instead of leading her towards the stair it
turned in quite the opposite direction.  It led her through certain
narrow passages towards the kitchen, turning aside ere she reached it,
and guiding her to a door which communicated with a small back yard.
Some of the maids were already up, and this door was standing open.
Across the yard the thread still ran along the ground, until it brought
her to a door in the wall which opened upon the Mountainside.  When she
had passed through, the thread rose to about half her height, and she
could hold it with ease as she walked.  It led her straight up the
mountain.

The cause of her alarm was less frightful than she supposed.  The
cook's great black cat, pursued by the housekeeper's terrier, had
bounced against her bedroom door, which had not been properly fastened,
and the two had burst into the room together and commenced a battle
royal.  How the nurse came to sleep through it was a mystery, but I
suspect the old lady had something to do with it.

It was a clear warm morning.  The wind blew deliciously over the
Mountainside.  Here and there she saw a late primrose but she did not
stop to call upon them.  The sky was mottled with small clouds.

The sun was not yet up, but some of their fluffy edges had caught his
light, and hung out orange and gold-coloured fringes upon the air.  The
dew lay in round drops upon the leaves, and hung like tiny diamond
ear-rings from the blades of grass about her path.

'How lovely that bit of gossamer is!' thought the princess, looking at
a long undulating line that shone at some distance from her up the
hill.  It was not the time for gossamers though; and Irene soon
discovered that it was her own thread she saw shining on before her in
the light of the morning.  It was leading her she knew not whither; but
she had never in her life been out before sunrise, and everything was
so fresh and cool and lively and full of something coming, that she
felt too happy to be afraid of anything.

After leading her up a good distance, the thread turned to the left,
and down the path upon which she and Lootie had met Curdie. But she
never thought of that, for now in the morning light, with its far
outlook over the country, no path could have been more open and airy
and cheerful.  She could see the road almost to the horizon, along
which she had so often watched her king-papa and his troop come
shining, with the bugle-blast cleaving the air before them; and it was
like a companion to her.  Down and down the path went, then up, and
then down and then up again, getting rugged and more rugged as it went;
and still along the path went the silvery thread, and still along the
thread went Irene's little rosy-tipped forefinger.  By and by she came
to a little stream that jabbered and prattled down the hill, and up the
side of the stream went both path and thread.  And still the path grew
rougher and steeper, and the mountain grew wilder, till Irene began to
think she was going a very long way from home; and when she turned to
look back she saw that the level country had vanished and the rough
bare mountain had closed in about her.  But still on went the thread,
and on went the princess.  Everything around her was getting brighter
and brighter as the sun came nearer; till at length his first rays all
at once alighted on the top of a rock before her, like some golden
creature fresh from the sky.  Then she saw that the little stream ran
out of a hole in that rock, that the path did not go past the rock, and
that the thread was leading her straight up to it.  A shudder ran
through her from head to foot when she found that the thread was
actually taking her into the hole out of which the stream ran.  It ran
out babbling joyously, but she had to go in.

She did not hesitate.  Right into the hole she went, which was high
enough to let her walk without stooping.  For a little way there was a
brown glimmer, but at the first turn it all but ceased, and before she
had gone many paces she was in total darkness.  Then she began to be
frightened indeed.  Every moment she kept feeling the thread backwards
and forwards, and as she went farther and farther into the darkness of
the great hollow mountain, she kept thinking more and more about her
grandmother, and all that she had said to her, and how kind she had
been, and how beautiful she was, and all about her lovely room, and the
fire of roses, and the great lamp that sent its light through stone
walls.  And she became more and more sure that the thread could not
have gone there of itself, and that her grandmother must have sent it.
But it tried her dreadfully when the path went down very steep, and
especially When she came to places where she had to go down rough
stairs, and even sometimes a ladder.  Through one narrow passage after
another, over lumps of rock and sand and clay, the thread guided her,
until she came to a small hole through which she had to creep.  Finding
no change on the other side, 'Shall I ever get back?' she thought, over
and over again, wondering at herself that she was not ten times more
frightened, and often feeling as if she were only walking in the story
of a dream.  Sometimes she heard the noise of water, a dull gurgling
inside the rock.  By and by she heard the sounds of blows, which came
nearer and nearer; but again they grew duller, and almost died away.
In a hundred directions she turned, obedient to the guiding thread.

At last she spied a dull red shine, and came up to the mica window, and
thence away and round about, and right, into a cavern, where glowed the
red embers of a fire.  Here the thread began to rise. It rose as high
as her head and higher still.  What should she do if she lost her hold?
She was pulling it down: She might break it! She could see it far up,
glowing as red as her fire-opal in the light of the embers.

But presently she came to a huge heap of stones, piled in a slope
against the wall of the cavern.  On these she climbed, and soon
recovered the level of the thread only however to find, the next
moment, that it vanished through the heap of stones, and left her
standing on it, with her face to the solid rock.  For one terrible
moment she felt as if her grandmother had forsaken her.  The thread
which the spiders had spun far over the seas, which her grandmother had
sat in the moonlight and spun again for her, which she had tempered in
the rose-fire and tied to her opal ring, had left her--had gone where
she could no longer follow it--had brought her into a horrible cavern,
and there left her!  She was forsaken indeed!

'When shall I wake?' she said to herself in an agony, but the same
moment knew that it was no dream.  She threw herself upon the heap, and
began to cry.  It was well she did not know what creatures, one of them
with stone shoes on her feet, were lying in the next cave. But neither
did she know who was on the other side of the slab.

At length the thought struck her that at least she could follow the
thread backwards, and thus get out of the mountain, and home.  She rose
at once, and found the thread.  But the instant she tried to feel it
backwards, it vanished from her touch.  Forwards, it led her hand up to
the heap of stones--backwards it seemed nowhere. Neither could she see
it as before in the light of the fire.  She burst into a wailing cry,
and again threw herself down on the stones.



CHAPTER 21

The Escape

As the princess lay and sobbed she kept feeling the thread
mechanically, following it with her finger many times up to the stones
in which it disappeared.  By and by she began, still mechanically, to
poke her finger in after it between the stones as far as she could.
All at once it came into her head that she might remove some of the
stones and see where the thread went next. Almost laughing at herself
for never having thought of this before, she jumped to her feet.  Her
fear vanished; once more she was certain her grandmother's thread could
not have brought her there just to leave her there; and she began to
throw away the stones from the top as fast as she could, sometimes two
or three at a handful, sometimes taking both hands to lift one.  After
clearing them away a little, she found that the thread turned and went
straight downwards.  Hence, as the heap sloped a good deal, growing of
course wider towards its base, she had to throw away a multitude of
stones to follow the thread.  But this was not all, for she soon found
that the thread, after going straight down for a little way, turned
first sideways in one direction, then sideways in another, and then
shot, at various angles, hither and thither inside the heap, so that
she began to be afraid that to clear the thread she must remove the
whole huge gathering.  She was dismayed at the very idea, but, losing
no time, set to work with a will; and with aching back, and bleeding
fingers and hands, she worked on, sustained by the pleasure of seeing
the heap slowly diminish and begin to show itself on the opposite side
of the fire.  Another thing which helped to keep up her courage was
that, as often as she uncovered a turn of the thread, instead of lying
loose upon the stone, it tightened up; this made her sure that her
grandmother was at the end of it somewhere.

She had got about half-way down when she started, and nearly fell with
fright.  Close to her ears as it seemed, a voice broke out singing:

  'Jabber, bother, smash!
  You'll have it all in a crash.
  Jabber, smash, bother!
  You'll have the worst of the pother.
  Smash, bother, jabber!--'


Here Curdie stopped, either because he could not find a rhyme to
'jabber', or because he remembered what he had forgotten when he woke
up at the sound of Irene's labours, that his plan was to make the
goblins think he was getting weak.  But he had uttered enough to let
Irene know who he was.

'It's Curdie!' she cried joyfully.

'Hush! hush!' came Curdie's voice again from somewhere.  'Speak softly.'

'Why, you were singing loud!' said Irene.

'Yes.  But they know I am here, and they don't know you are.  Who are
you?'

'I'm Irene,' answered the princess.  'I know who you are quite well.
You're Curdie.'

'Why, how ever did you come here, Irene?'

'My great-great-grandmother sent me; and I think I've found out why.
You can't get out, I suppose?'

'No, I can't.  What are you doing?'

'Clearing away a huge heap of stones.'

'There's a princess!' exclaimed Curdie, in a tone of delight, but still
speaking in little more than a whisper.  'I can't think how you got
here, though.'

'My grandmother sent me after her thread.'

'I don't know what you mean,' said Curdie; 'but so you're there, it
doesn't much matter.'

'Oh, yes, it does!' returned Irene.  'I should never have been here but
for her.'

'You can tell me all about it when we get out, then.  There's no time
to lose now,'said Curdie.

And Irene went to work, as fresh as when she began.

'There's such a lot of stones!' she said.  'It will take me a long time
to get them all away.'

'How far on have you got?' asked Curdie.

'I've got about the half away, but the other half is ever so much
bigger.'

'I don't think you will have to move the lower half.  Do you see a slab
laid up against the wall?'

Irene looked, and felt about with her hands, and soon perceived the
outlines of the slab.

'Yes,' she answered, 'I do.'

'Then, I think,' rejoined Curdie, 'when you have cleared the slab about
half-way down, or a bit more, I shall be able to push it over.'

'I must follow my thread,' returned Irene, 'whatever I do.'

'What do you mean?' exclaimed Curdie. 'You will see when you get out,'
answered the princess, and went on harder than ever.

But she was soon satisfied that what Curdie wanted done and what the
thread wanted done were one and the same thing.  For she not only saw
that by following the turns of the thread she had been clearing the
face of the slab, but that, a little more than half-way down, the
thread went through the chink between the slab and the wall into the
place where Curdie was confined, so that she could not follow it any
farther until the slab was out of her way. As soon as she found this,
she said in a right joyous whisper:

'Now, Curdie, I think if you were to give a great push, the slab would
tumble over.'

'Stand quite clear of it, then,' said Curdie, 'and let me know when you
are ready.'

Irene got off the heap, and stood on one side of it.  'Now, Curdie!'
she cried.

Curdie gave a great rush with his shoulder against it.  Out tumbled the
slab on the heap, and out crept Curdie over the top of it.

'You've saved my life, Irene!' he whispered.

'Oh, Curdie! I'm so glad!  Let's get out of this horrid place as fast
as we can.'

'That's easier said than done,' returned he.

'Oh, no, it's quite easy,' said Irene.  'We have only to follow my
thread.  I am sure that it's going to take us out now.'

She had already begun to follow it over the fallen slab into the hole,
while Curdie was searching the floor of the cavern for his pickaxe.

'Here it is!' he cried.  'No, it is not,' he added, in a disappointed
tone.  'What can it be, then?  I declare it's a torch. That is jolly!
It's better almost than my pickaxe.  Much better if it weren't for
those stone shoes!' he went on, as he lighted the torch by blowing the
last embers of the expiring fire.

When he looked up, with the lighted torch casting a glare into the
great darkness of the huge cavern, he caught sight of Irene
disappearing in the hole out of which he had himself just come.

'Where are you going there?' he cried.  'That's not the way out. That's
where I couldn't get out.'

'I know that,' whispered Irene.  'But this is the way my thread goes,
and I must follow it.'

'What nonsense the child talks!' said Curdie to himself.  'I must
follow her, though, and see that she comes to no harm.  She will soon
find she can't get out that way, and then she will come with me.'

So he crept over the slab once more into the hole with his torch in his
hand.  But when he looked about in it, he could see her nowhere.  And
now he discovered that although the hole was narrow, it was much longer
than he had supposed; for in one direction the roof came down very low,
and the hole went off in a narrow passage, of which he could not see
the end.  The princess must have crept in there.  He got on his knees
and one hand, holding the torch with the other, and crept after her.
The hole twisted about, in some parts so low that he could hardly get
through, in others so high that he could not see the roof, but
everywhere it was narrow--far too narrow for a goblin to get through,
and so I presume they never thought that Curdie might.  He was
beginning to feel very uncomfortable lest something should have
befallen the princess, when he heard her voice almost close to his ear,
whispering:

'Aren't you coming, Curdie?'

And when he turned the next corner there she stood waiting for him.

'I knew you couldn't go wrong in that narrow hole, but now you must
keep by me, for here is a great wide place,' she said.

'I can't understand it,' said Curdie, half to himself, half to Irene.

'Never mind,' she returned.  'Wait till we get out.'

Curdie, utterly astonished that she had already got so far, and by a
path he had known nothing of, thought it better to let her do as she
pleased.  'At all events,' he said again to himself, 'I know nothing
about the way, miner as I am; and she seems to think she does know
something about it, though how she should passes my comprehension.  So
she's just as likely to find her way as I am, and as she insists on
taking the lead, I must follow.  We can't be much worse off than we
are, anyhow.'  Reasoning thus, he followed her a few steps, and came
out in another great cavern, across which Irene walked in a straight
line, as confidently as if she knew every step of the way.  Curdie went
on after her, flashing his torch about, and trying to see something of
what lay around them. Suddenly he started back a pace as the light fell
upon something close by which Irene was passing.  It was a platform of
rock raised a few feet from the floor and covered with sheepskins, upon
which lay two horrible figures asleep, at once recognized by Curdie as
the king and queen of the goblins.  He lowered his torch instantly lest
the light should awake them.  As he did so it flashed upon his pickaxe,
lying by the side of the queen, whose hand lay close by the handle of
it.

'Stop one moment,' he whispered.  'Hold my torch, and don't let the
light on their faces.'

Irene shuddered when she saw the frightful creatures, whom she had
passed without observing them, but she did as he requested, and turning
her back, held the torch low in front of her.  Curdie drew his pickaxe
carefully away, and as he did so spied one of her feet, projecting from
under the skins.  The great clumsy granite shoe, exposed thus to his
hand, was a temptation not to be resisted.  He laid hold of it, and,
with cautious efforts, drew it off.  The moment he succeeded, he saw to
his astonishment that what he had sung in ignorance, to annoy the
queen, was actually true: she had six horrible toes.  Overjoyed at his
success, and seeing by the huge bump in the sheepskins where the other
foot was, he proceeded to lift them gently, for, if he could only
succeed in carrying away the other shoe as well, he would be no more
afraid of the goblins than of so many flies.  But as he pulled at the
second shoe the queen gave a growl and sat up in bed.  The same instant
the king awoke also and sat up beside her.

'Run, Irene!' cried Curdie, for though he was not now in the least
afraid for himself, he was for the princess.

Irene looked once round, saw the fearful creatures awake, and like the
wise princess she was, dashed the torch on the ground and extinguished
it, crying out:

'Here, Curdie, take my hand.'

He darted to her side, forgetting neither the queen's shoe nor his
pickaxe, and caught hold of her hand, as she sped fearlessly where her
thread guided her.  They heard the queen give a great bellow; but they
had a good start, for it would be some time before they could get
torches lighted to pursue them.  Just as they thought they saw a gleam
behind them, the thread brought them to a very narrow opening, through
which Irene crept easily, and Curdie with difficulty.

'Now,'said Curdie; 'I think we shall be safe.'

'Of course we shall,' returned Irene.  'Why do you think so?'asked
Curdie.

'Because my grandmother is taking care of us.'

'That's all nonsense,' said Curdie.  'I don't know what you mean.'

'Then if you don't know what I mean, what right have you to call it
nonsense?' asked the princess, a little offended.

'I beg your pardon, Irene,' said Curdie; 'I did not mean to vex you.'

'Of course not,' returned the princess.  'But why do you think we shall
be safe?'

'Because the king and queen are far too stout to get through that hole.'

'There might be ways round,' said the princess.

'To be sure there might: we are not out of it yet,' acknowledged Curdie.

'But what do you mean by the king and queen?' asked the princess. 'I
should never call such creatures as those a king and a queen.'

'Their own people do, though,' answered Curdie.

The princess asked more questions, and Curdie, as they walked leisurely
along, gave her a full account, not only of the character and habits of
the goblins, so far as he knew them, but of his own adventures with
them, beginning from the very night after that in which he had met her
and Lootie upon the mountain.  When he had finished, he begged Irene to
tell him how it was that she had come to his rescue.  So Irene too had
to tell a long story, which she did in rather a roundabout manner,
interrupted by many questions concerning things she had not explained.
But her tale, as he did not believe more than half of it, left
everything as unaccountable to him as before, and he was nearly as much
perplexed as to what he must think of the princess.  He could not
believe that she was deliberately telling stories, and the only
conclusion he could come to was that Lootie had been playing the child
tricks, inventing no end of lies to frighten her for her own purposes.

'But how ever did Lootie come to let you go into the mountains
alone?'he asked.

'Lootie knows nothing about it.  I left her fast asleep--at least I
think so.  I hope my grandmother won't let her get into trouble, for it
wasn't her fault at all, as my grandmother very well knows.'

'But how did you find your way to me?' persisted Curdie.

'I told you already,' answered Irene; 'by keeping my finger upon my
grandmother's thread, as I am doing now.'

'You don't mean you've got the thread there?'

'Of course I do.  I have told you so ten times already.  I have
hardly--except when I was removing the stones--taken my finger off it.
There!' she added, guiding Curdie's hand to the thread, 'you feel it
yourself--don't you?'

'I feel nothing at all,' replied Curdie. 'Then what can be the matter
with your finger?  I feel it perfectly.  To be sure it is very thin,
and in the sunlight looks just like the thread of a spider, though
there are many of them twisted together to make it--but for all that I
can't think why you shouldn't feel it as well as I do.'

Curdie was too polite to say he did not believe there was any thread
there at all.  What he did say was:

'Well, I can make nothing of it.'

'I can, though, and you must be glad of that, for it will do for both
of us.'

'We're not out yet,' said Curdie.

'We soon shall be,' returned Irene confidently.  And now the thread
went downwards, and led Irene's hand to a hole in the floor of the
cavern, whence came a sound of running water which they had been
hearing for some time.

'It goes into the ground now, Curdie,' she said, stopping.

He had been listening to another sound, which his practised ear had
caught long ago, and which also had been growing louder.  It was the
noise the goblin-miners made at their work, and they seemed to be at no
great distance now.  Irene heard it the moment she stopped.

'What is that noise?' she asked.  'Do you know, Curdie?'

'Yes.  It is the goblins digging and burrowing,' he answered.

'And you don't know what they do it for?'

'No; I haven't the least idea.  Would you like to see them?' he asked,
wishing to have another try after their secret.

'If my thread took me there, I shouldn't much mind; but I don't want to
see them, and I can't leave my thread.  It leads me down into the hole,
and we had better go at once.'

'Very well.  Shall I go in first?' said Curdie.

'No; better not.  You can't feel the thread,' she answered, stepping
down through a narrow break in the floor of the cavern. 'Oh!' she
cried, 'I am in the water.  It is running strong--but it is not deep,
and there is just room to walk.  Make haste, Curdie.'

He tried, but the hole was too small for him to get in.

'Go on a little bit he said, shouldering his pickaxe.  In a few moments
he had cleared a larger opening and followed her.  They went on, down
and down with the running water, Curdie getting more and more afraid it
was leading them to some terrible gulf in the heart of the mountain.
In one or two places he had to break away the rock to make room before
even Irene could get through--at least without hurting herself.  But at
length they spied a glimmer of light, and in a minute more they were
almost blinded by the full sunlight, into which they emerged.  It was
some little time before the princess could see well enough to discover
that they stood in her own garden, close by the seat on which she and
her king-papa had sat that afternoon.  They had come out by the channel
of the little stream.  She danced and clapped her hands with delight.

'Now, Curdie!' she cried, 'won't you believe what I told you about my
grandmother and her thread?'

For she had felt all the time that Curdie was not believing what she
told him.

'There!--don't you see it shining on before us?' she added.

'I don't see anything,' persisted Curdie.

'Then you must believe without seeing,' said the princess; 'for you
can't deny it has brought us out of the mountain.'

'I can't deny we are out of the mountain, and I should be very
ungrateful indeed to deny that you had brought me out of it.'

'I couldn't have done it but for the thread,' persisted Irene.

'That's the part I don't understand.'

'Well, come along, and Lootie will get you something to eat.  I am sure
you must want it very much.'

'Indeed I do.  But my father and mother will be so anxious about me, I
must make haste--first up the mountain to tell my mother, and then down
into the mine again to let my father know.'

'Very well, Curdie; but you can't get out without coming this way, and
I will take you through the house, for that is nearest.'

They met no one by the way, for, indeed, as before, the people were
here and there and everywhere searching for the princess.  When they
got in Irene found that the thread, as she had half expected, went up
the old staircase, and a new thought struck her.  She turned to Curdie
and said:

'My grandmother wants me.  Do come up with me and see her.  Then you
will know that I have been telling you the truth.  Do come--to please
me, Curdie.  I can't bear you should think what I say is not true.'

'I never doubted you believed what you said,' returned Curdie.  'I only
thought you had some fancy in your head that was not correct.' 'But do
come, dear Curdie.'

The little miner could not withstand this appeal, and though he felt
shy in what seemed to him a huge grand house, he yielded, and followed
her up the stair.



CHAPTER 22

The Old Lady and Curdie

Up the stair then they went, and the next and the next, and through the
long rows of empty rooms, and up the little tower stair, Irene growing
happier and happier as she ascended.  There was no answer when she
knocked at length at the door of the workroom, nor could she hear any
sound of the spinning-wheel, and once more her heart sank within her,
but only for one moment, as she turned and knocked at the other door.

'Come in,' answered the sweet voice of her grandmother, and Irene
opened the door and entered, followed by Curdie.

'You darling!' cried the lady, who was seated by a fire of red roses
mingled with white.  'I've been waiting for you, and indeed getting a
little anxious about you, and beginning to think whether I had not
better go and fetch you myself.'

As she spoke she took the little princess in her arms and placed her
upon her lap.  She was dressed in white now, and looking if possible
more lovely than ever.

'I've brought Curdie, grandmother.  He wouldn't believe what I told him
and so I've brought him.'

'Yes--I see him.  He is a good boy, Curdie, and a brave boy. Aren't you
glad you've got him out?'

'Yes, grandmother.  But it wasn't very good of him not to believe me
when I was telling him the truth.'

'People must believe what they can, and those who believe more must not
be hard upon those who believe less.  I doubt if you would have
believed it all yourself if you hadn't seen some of it.'

'Ah! yes, grandmother, I dare say.  I'm sure you are right.  But he'll
believe now.'

'I don't know that,' replied her grandmother.

'Won't you, Curdie?' said Irene, looking round at him as she asked the
question.  He was standing in the middle of the floor, staring, and
looking strangely bewildered.  This she thought came of his
astonishment at the beauty of the lady.

'Make a bow to my grandmother, Curdie,' she said.

'I don't see any grandmother,' answered Curdie rather gruffly.

'Don't see my grandmother, when I'm sitting in her lap?' exclaimed the
princess.

'No, I don't,' reiterated Curdie, in an offended tone.

'Don't you see the lovely fire of roses--white ones amongst them this
time?' asked Irene, almost as bewildered as he.

'No, I don't,' answered Curdie, almost sulkily.

'Nor the blue bed?  Nor the rose-coloured counterpane?--Nor the
beautiful light, like the moon, hanging from the roof?'

'You're making game of me, Your Royal Highness; and after what we have
come through together this day, I don't think it is kind of you,' said
Curdie, feeling very much hurt.

'Then what do you see?' asked Irene, who perceived at once that for her
not to believe him was at least as bad as for him not to believe her.

'I see a big, bare, garret-room--like the one in mother's cottage, only
big enough to take the cottage itself in, and leave a good margin all
round,' answered Curdie.

'And what more do you see?'

'I see a tub, and a heap of musty straw, and a withered apple, and a
ray of sunlight coming through a hole in the middle of the roof and
shining on your head, and making all the place look a curious dusky
brown.  I think you had better drop it, princess, and go down to the
nursery, like a good girl.'

'But don't you hear my grandmother talking to me?' asked Irene, almost
crying.

'No.  I hear the cooing of a lot of pigeons.  If you won't come down, I
will go without you.  I think that will be better anyhow, for I'm sure
nobody who met us would believe a word we said to them.  They would
think we made it all up.  I don't expect anybody but my own father and
mother to believe me.  They know I wouldn't tell a story.'

'And yet you won't believe me, Curdie?' expostulated the princess, now
fairly crying with vexation and sorrow at the gulf between her and
Curdie.

'No.  I can't, and I can't help it,' said Curdie, turning to leave the
room.

'What SHALL I do, grandmother?' sobbed the princess, turning her face
round upon the lady's bosom, and shaking with suppressed sobs.

'You must give him time,' said her grandmother; 'and you must be
content not to be believed for a while.  It is very hard to bear; but I
have had to bear it, and shall have to bear it many a time yet.  I will
take care of what Curdie thinks of you in the end. You must let him go
now.'

'You're not coming, are you?' asked Curdie.

'No, Curdie; my grandmother says I must let you go.  Turn to the right
when you get to the bottom of all the stairs, and that will take you to
the hall where the great door is.'

'Oh! I don't doubt I can find my way--without you, princess, or your
old grannie's thread either,' said Curdie quite rudely.

'Oh, Curdie!  Curdie!'

'I wish I had gone home at once.  I'm very much obliged to you, Irene,
for getting me out of that hole, but I wish you hadn't made a fool of
me afterwards.'

He said this as he opened the door, which he left open, and, without
another word, went down the stair.  Irene listened with dismay to his
departing footsteps.  Then turning again to the lady:

'What does it all mean, grandmother?' she sobbed, and burst into fresh
tears.

'It means, my love, that I did not mean to show myself.  Curdie is not
yet able to believe some things.  Seeing is not believing--it is only
seeing.  You remember I told you that if Lootie were to see me, she
would rub her eyes, forget the half she saw, and call the other half
nonsense.'

'Yes; but I should have thought Curdie--'

'You are right.  Curdie is much farther on than Lootie, and you will
see what will come of it.  But in the meantime you must be content, I
say, to be misunderstood for a while.  We are all very anxious to be
understood, and it is very hard not to be.  But there is one thing much
more necessary.'

'What is that, grandmother?'

'To understand other people.'

'Yes, grandmother.  I must be fair--for if I'm not fair to other
people, I'm not worth being understood myself.  I see.  So as Curdie
can't help it, I will not be vexed with him, but just wait.'

'There's my own dear child,' said her grandmother, and pressed her
close to her bosom.

'Why weren't you in your workroom when we came up, grandmother?' asked
Irene, after a few moments' silence.

'If I had been there, Curdie would have seen me well enough.  But why
should I be there rather than in this beautiful room?'

'I thought you would be spinning.'

'I've nobody to spin for just at present.  I never spin without knowing
for whom I am spinning.'

'That reminds me--there is one thing that puzzles me,' said the
princess: 'how are you to get the thread out of the mountain again?
Surely you won't have to make another for me?  That would be such a
trouble!'

The lady set her down and rose and went to the fire.  Putting in her
hand, she drew it out again and held up the shining ball between her
finger and thumb.

'I've got it now, you see,' she said, coming back to the princess, 'all
ready for you when you want it.'

Going to her cabinet, she laid it in the same drawer as before.

'And here is your ring,' she added, taking it from the little finger of
her left hand and putting it on the forefinger of Irene's right hand.

'Oh, thank you, grandmother! I feel so safe now!'

'You are very tired, my child,' the lady went on.  'Your hands are hurt
with the stones, and I have counted nine bruises on you.  Just look
what you are like.'

And she held up to her a little mirror which she had brought from the
cabinet.  The princess burst into a merry laugh at the sight. She was
so draggled with the stream and dirty with creeping through narrow
places, that if she had seen the reflection without knowing it was a
reflection, she would have taken herself for some gipsy child whose
face was washed and hair combed about once in a month. The lady laughed
too, and lifting her again upon her knee, took off her cloak and
night-gown.  Then she carried her to the side of the room.  Irene
wondered what she was going to do with her, but asked no
questions--only starting a little when she found that she was going to
lay her in the large silver bath; for as she looked into it, again she
saw no bottom, but the stars shining miles away, as it seemed, in a
great blue gulf.  Her hands closed involuntarily on the beautiful arms
that held her, and that was all.

The lady pressed her once more to her bosom, saying:

'Do not be afraid, my child.'

'No, grandmother,' answered the princess, with a little gasp; and the
next instant she sank in the clear cool water.

When she opened her eyes, she saw nothing but a strange lovely blue
over and beneath and all about her.  The lady, and the beautiful room,
had vanished from her sight, and she seemed utterly alone. But instead
of being afraid, she felt more than happy--perfectly blissful.  And
from somewhere came the voice of the lady, singing a strange sweet
song, of which she could distinguish every word; but of the sense she
had only a feeling--no understanding.  Nor could she remember a single
line after it was gone.  It vanished, like the poetry in a dream, as
fast as it came.  In after years, however, she would sometimes fancy
that snatches of melody suddenly rising in her brain must be little
phrases and fragments of the air of that song; and the very fancy would
make her happier, and abler to do her duty.

How long she lay in the water she did not know.  It seemed a long
time--not from weariness but from pleasure.  But at last she felt the
beautiful hands lay hold of her, and through the gurgling water she was
lifted out into the lovely room.  The lady carried her to the fire, and
sat down with her in her lap, and dried her tenderly with the softest
towel.  It was so different from Lootie's drying. When the lady had
done, she stooped to the fire, and drew from it her night-gown, as
white as snow.

'How delicious!' exclaimed the princess.  'It smells of all the roses
in the world, I think.'

When she stood up on the floor she felt as if she had been made over
again.  Every bruise and all weariness were gone, and her hands were
soft and whole as ever.

'Now I am going to put you to bed for a good sleep,' said her
grandmother.

'But what will Lootie be thinking?  And what am I to say to her when
she asks me where I have been?'

'Don't trouble yourself about it.  You will find it all come right,'
said her grandmother, and laid her into the blue bed, under the rosy
counterpane.

'There is just one thing more,' said Irene.  'I am a little anxious
about Curdie.  As I brought him into the house, I ought to have seen
him safe on his way home.'

'I took care of all that,' answered the lady.  'I told you to let him
go, and therefore I was bound to look after him.  Nobody saw him, and
he is now eating a good dinner in his mother's cottage far up in the
mountain.'

'Then I will go to sleep,' said Irene, and in a few minutes she was
fast asleep.



CHAPTER 23

Curdie and His Mother

Curdie went up the mountain neither whistling nor singing, for he was
vexed with Irene for taking him in, as he called it; and he was vexed
with himself for having spoken to her so angrily.  His mother gave a
cry of joy when she saw him, and at once set about getting him
something to eat, asking him questions all the time, which he did not
answer so cheerfully as usual.  When his meal was ready, she left him
to eat it, and hurried to the mine to let his father know he was safe.
When she came back, she found him fast asleep upon her bed; nor did he
wake until his father came home in the evening.

'Now, Curdie,' his mother said, as they sat at supper, 'tell us the
whole story from beginning to end, just as it all happened.'

Curdie obeyed, and told everything to the point where they came out
upon the lawn in the garden of the king's house.

'And what happened after that?' asked his mother.  'You haven't told us
all.  You ought to be very happy at having got away from those demons,
and instead of that I never saw you so gloomy.  There must be something
more.  Besides, you do not speak of that lovely child as I should like
to hear you.  She saved your life at the risk of her own, and yet
somehow you don't seem to think much of it.'

'She talked such nonsense' answered Curdie, 'and told me a pack of
things that weren't a bit true; and I can't get over it.'

'What were they?' asked his father.  'Your mother may be able to throw
some light upon them.'

Then Curdie made a clean breast of it, and told them everything.

They all sat silent for some time, pondering the strange tale.  At last
Curdie's mother spoke.

'You confess, my boy,' she said, 'there is something about the whole
affair you do not understand?'

'Yes, of course, mother,' he answered.  'I cannot understand how a
child knowing nothing about the mountain, or even that I was shut up in
it, should come all that way alone, straight to where I was; and then,
after getting me out of the hole, lead me out of the mountain too,
where I should not have known a step of the way if it had been as light
as in the open air.'

'Then you have no right to say what she told you was not true.  She did
take you out, and she must have had something to guide her: why not a
thread as well as a rope, or anything else?  There is something you
cannot explain, and her explanation may be the right one.'

'It's no explanation at all, mother; and I can't believe it.'

'That may be only because you do not understand it.  If you did, you
would probably find it was an explanation, and believe it thoroughly.
I don't blame you for not being able to believe it, but I do blame you
for fancying such a child would try to deceive you.  Why should she?
Depend upon it, she told you all she knew. Until you had found a better
way of accounting for it all, you might at least have been more sparing
of your judgement.'

'That is what something inside me has been saying all the time,' said
Curdie, hanging down his head.  'But what do you make of the
grandmother?  That is what I can't get over.  To take me up to an old
garret, and try to persuade me against the sight of my own eyes that it
was a beautiful room, with blue walls and silver stars, and no end of
things in it, when there was nothing there but an old tub and a
withered apple and a heap of straw and a sunbeam!  It was too bad!  She
might have had some old woman there at least to pass for her precious
grandmother!'

'Didn't she speak as if she saw those other things herself, Curdie?'

'Yes.  That's what bothers me.  You would have thought she really meant
and believed that she saw every one of the things she talked about.
And not one of them there!  It was too bad, I say.'

'Perhaps some people can see things other people can't see, Curdie,'
said his mother very gravely.  'I think I will tell you something I saw
myself once--only Perhaps You won't believe me either!'

'Oh, mother, mother!' cried Curdie, bursting into tears; 'I don't
deserve that, surely!'

'But what I am going to tell you is very strange,' persisted his
mother; 'and if having heard it you were to say I must have been
dreaming, I don't know that I should have any right to be vexed with
you, though I know at least that I was not asleep.'

'Do tell me, mother.  Perhaps it will help me to think better of the
princess.'

'That's why I am tempted to tell you,' replied his mother.  'But first,
I may as well mention that, according to old whispers, there is
something more than common about the king's family; and the queen was
of the same blood, for they were cousins of some degree. There were
strange stories told concerning them--all good stories--but strange,
very strange.  What they were I cannot tell, for I only remember the
faces of my grandmother and my mother as they talked together about
them.  There was wonder and awe--not fear--in their eyes, and they
whispered, and never spoke aloud.  But what I saw myself was this: Your
father was going to work in the mine one night, and I had been down
with his supper.  It was soon after we were married, and not very long
before you were born.  He came with me to the mouth of the mine, and
left me to go home alone, for I knew the way almost as well as the
floor of our own cottage.  It was pretty dark, and in some parts of the
road where the rocks overhung nearly quite dark.  But I got along
perfectly well, never thinking of being afraid, until I reached a spot
you know well enough, Curdie, where the path has to make a sharp turn
out of the way of a great rock on the left-hand side.  When I got
there, I was suddenly surrounded by about half a dozen of the cobs, the
first I had ever seen, although I had heard tell of them often enough.
One of them blocked up the path, and they all began tormenting and
teasing me in a way it makes me shudder to think of even now.'

'If I had only been with you!' cried father and son in a breath.

The mother gave a funny little smile, and went on.

'They had some of their horrible creatures with them too, and I must
confess I was dreadfully frightened.  They had torn my clothes very
much, and I was afraid they were going to tear myself to pieces, when
suddenly a great white soft light shone upon me.  I looked up.  A broad
ray, like a shining road, came down from a large globe of silvery
light, not very high up, indeed not quite so high as the horizon--so it
could not have been a new star or another moon or anything of that
sort.  The cobs dropped persecuting me, and looked dazed, and I thought
they were going to run away, but presently they began again.  The same
moment, however, down the path from the globe of light came a bird,
shining like silver in the sun.  It gave a few rapid flaps first, and
then, with its wings straight out, shot, sliding down the slope of the
light.  It looked to me just like a white pigeon.  But whatever it was,
when the cobs caught sight of it coming straight down upon them, they
took to their heels and scampered away across the mountain, leaving me
safe, only much frightened.  As soon as it had sent them off, the bird
went gliding again up the light, and the moment it reached the globe
the light disappeared, just as if a shutter had been closed over a
window, and I saw it no More.  But I had no more trouble with the cobs
that night or ever after.'

'How strange!' exclaimed Curdie.

'Yes, it was strange; but I can't help believing it, whether you do or
not,' said his mother.

'It's exactly as your mother told it to me the very next morning,' said
his father.

'You don't think I'm doubting my own mother?' cried Curdie. 'There are
other people in the world quite as well worth believing as your own
mother,' said his mother.  'I don't know that she's so much the fitter
to be believed that she happens to be your mother, Mr. Curdie.  There
are mothers far more likely to tell lies than the little girl I saw
talking to the primroses a few weeks ago.  If she were to lie I should
begin to doubt my own word.'

'But princesses have told lies as well as other people,' said Curdie.

'Yes, but not princesses like that child.  She's a good girl, I am
certain, and that's more than being a princess.  Depend upon it you
will have to be sorry for behaving so to her, Curdie.  You ought at
least to have held your tongue.'

'I am sorry now,' answered Curdie.

'You ought to go and tell her so, then.'

'I don't see how I could manage that.  They wouldn't let a miner boy
like me have a word with her alone; and I couldn't tell her before that
nurse of hers.  She'd be asking ever so many questions, and I don't
know how many the little princess would like me to answer.  She told me
that Lootie didn't know anything about her coming to get me out of the
mountain.  I am certain she would have prevented her somehow if she had
known it.  But I may have a chance before long, and meantime I must try
to do something for her.  I think, father, I have got on the track at
last.'

'Have you, indeed, my boy?' said Peter.  'I am sure you deserve some
success; you have worked very hard for it.  What have you found out?'

'It's difficult, you know, father, inside the mountain, especially in
the dark, and not knowing what turns you have taken, to tell the lie of
things outside.'

'Impossible, my boy, without a chart, or at least a compass,' returned
his father.

'Well, I think I have nearly discovered in what direction the cobs are
mining.  If I am right, I know something else that I can put to it, and
then one and one will make three.'

'They very often do, Curdie, as we miners ought to be very well aware.
Now tell us, my boy, what the two things are, and see whether we can
guess at the same third as you.'

'I don't see what that has to do with the princess,' interposed his
mother.

'I will soon let you see that, mother.  Perhaps you may think me
foolish, but until I am sure there, is nothing in my present fancy, I
am more determined than ever to go on with my observations.  Just as we
came to the channel by which we got out, I heard the miners at work
somewhere near--I think down below us.  Now since I began to watch
them, they have mined a good half-mile, in a straight line; and so far
as I am aware, they are working in no other part of the mountain.  But
I never could tell in what direction they were going.  When we came out
in the king's garden, however, I thought at once whether it was
possible they were working towards the king's house; and what I want to
do tonight is to make sure whether they are or not.  I will take a
light with me--'

'Oh, Curdie,' cried his mother, 'then they will see you.'

'I'm no more afraid of them now than I was before,' rejoined Curdie,
'now that I've got this precious shoe.  They can't make another such in
a hurry, and one bare foot will do for my purpose. Woman as she may be,
I won't spare her next time.  But I shall be careful with my light, for
I don't want them to see me.  I won't stick it in my hat.'

'Go on, then, and tell us what you mean to do.'

'I mean to take a bit of paper with me and a pencil, and go in at the
mouth of the stream by which we came out.  I shall mark on the paper as
near as I can the angle of every turning I take until I find the cobs
at work, and so get a good idea in what direction they are going.  If
it should prove to be nearly parallel with the stream, I shall know it
is towards the king's house they are working.'

'And what if you should?  How much wiser will you be then?'

'Wait a minute, mother dear.  I told you that when I came upon the
royal family in the cave, they were talking of their prince--Harelip,
they called him--marrying a sun-woman--that means one of us--one with
toes to her feet.  Now in the speech one of them made that night at
their great gathering, of which I heard only a part, he said that peace
would be secured for a generation at least by the pledge the prince
would hold for the good behaviour of her relatives: that's what he
said, and he must have meant the sun-woman the prince was to marry.  I
am quite sure the king is much too proud to wish his son to marry any
but a princess, and much too knowing to fancy that his having a peasant
woman for a wife would be of any great advantage to them.'

'I see what you are driving at now,' said his mother.

'But,' said his father, 'our king would dig the mountain to the plain
before he would have his princess the wife of a cob, if he were ten
times a prince.'

'Yes; but they think so much of themselves!' said his mother. 'Small
creatures always do.  The bantam is the proudest cock in my little
yard.'

'And I fancy,' said Curdie, 'if they once got her, they would tell the
king they would kill her except he consented to the marriage.'

'They might say so,' said his father, 'but they wouldn't kill her; they
would keep her alive for the sake of the hold it gave them over our
king.  Whatever he did to them, they would threaten to do the same to
the princess.'

'And they are bad enough to torment her just for their own amusement--I
know that,' said his mother.

'Anyhow, I will keep a watch on them, and see what they are up to,'
said Curdie.  'It's too horrible to think of.  I daren't let myself do
it.  But they shan't have her--at least if I can help it.  So, mother
dear--my clue is all right--will you get me a bit of paper and a pencil
and a lump of pease pudding, and I will set out at once.  I saw a place
where I can climb over the wall of the garden quite easily.'

'You must mind and keep out of the way of the men on the watch,' said
his mother.

'That I will.  I don't want them to know anything about it.  They would
spoil it all.  The cobs would only try some other plan--they are such
obstinate creatures!  I shall take good care, mother. They won't kill
and eat me either, if they should come upon me.  So you needn't mind
them.'

His mother got him what he had asked for, and Curdie set out. Close
beside the door by which the princess left the garden for the mountain
stood a great rock, and by climbing it Curdie got over the wall.  He
tied his clue to a stone just inside the channel of the stream, and
took his pickaxe with him.  He had not gone far before he encountered a
horrid creature coming towards the mouth.  The spot was too narrow for
two of almost any size or shape, and besides Curdie had no wish to let
the creature pass.  Not being able to use his pickaxe, however, he had
a severe struggle with him, and it was only after receiving many bites,
some of them bad, that he succeeded in killing him with his
pocket-knife.  Having dragged him out, he made haste to get in again
before another should stop up the way.

I need not follow him farther in this night's adventures.  He returned
to his breakfast, satisfied that the goblins were mining in the
direction of the palace--on so low a level that their intention must,
he thought, be to burrow under the walls of the king's house, and rise
up inside it--in order, he fully believed, to lay hands on the little
princess, and carry her off for a wife to their horrid Harelip.



CHAPTER 24

Irene Behaves Like a Princess

When the princess awoke from the sweetest of sleeps, she found her
nurse bending over her, the housekeeper looking over the nurse's
shoulder, and the laundry-maid looking over the housekeeper's. The room
was full of women-servants; and the gentlemen-at-arms, with a long
column of servants behind them, were peeping, or trying to peep in at
the door of the nursery.

'Are those horrid creatures gone?' asked the princess, remembering
first what had terrified her in the morning.

'You naughty, naughty little princess!' cried Lootie.

Her face was very pale, with red streaks in it, and she looked as if
she were going to shake her; but Irene said nothing--only waited to
hear what should come next.

'How could you get under the clothes like that, and make us all fancy
you were lost!  And keep it up all day too!  You are the most obstinate
child!  It's anything but fun to us, I can tell you!'

It was the only way the nurse could account for her disappearance.

'I didn't do that, Lootie,' said Irene, very quietly.

'Don't tell stories!' cried her nurse quite rudely.

'I shall tell you nothing at all,' said Irene.

'That's just as bad,' said the nurse.

'Just as bad to say nothing at all as to tell stories?' exclaimed the
princess.  'I will ask my papa about that.  He won't say so. And I
don't think he will like you to say so.'

'Tell me directly what you mean by it!' screamed the nurse, half wild
with anger at the princess and fright at the possible consequences to
herself.

'When I tell you the truth, Lootie,' said the princess, who somehow did
not feel at all angry, 'you say to me "Don't tell stories": it seems I
must tell stories before you will believe me.'

'You are very rude, princess,' said the nurse.

'You are so rude, Lootie, that I will not speak to you again till you
are sorry.  Why should I, when I know you will not believe me?'
returned the princess.  For she did know perfectly well that if she
were to tell Lootie what she had been about, the more she went on to
tell her, the less would she believe her.

'You are the most provoking child!' cried her nurse.  'You deserve to
be well punished for your wicked behaviour.'

'Please, Mrs Housekeeper,' said the princess, 'will you take me to your
room, and keep me till my king-papa comes?  I will ask him to come as
soon as he can.'

Every one stared at these words.  Up to this moment they had all
regarded her as little more than a baby.

But the housekeeper was afraid of the nurse, and sought to patch
matters up, saying:

'I am sure, princess, nursie did not mean to be rude to you.'

'I do not think my papa would wish me to have a nurse who spoke to me
as Lootie does.  If she thinks I tell lies, she had better either say
so to my papa, or go away.  Sir Walter, will you take charge of me?'

'With the greatest of pleasure, princess,' answered the captain of the
gentlemen-at-arms, walking with his great stride into the room.

The crowd of servants made eager way for him, and he bowed low before
the little princess's bed.  'I shall send my servant at once, on the
fastest horse in the stable, to tell your king-papa that Your Royal
Highness desires his presence.  When you have chosen one of these
under-servants to wait upon you, I shall order the room to be cleared.'

'Thank you very much, Sir Walter,' said the princess, and her eye
glanced towards a rosy-cheeked girl who had lately come to the house as
a scullery-maid.

But when Lootie saw the eyes of her dear princess going in search of
another instead of her, she fell upon her knees by the bedside, and
burst into a great cry of distress.

'I think, Sir Walter,' said the princess, 'I will keep Lootie.  But I
put myself under your care; and you need not trouble my king-papa until
I speak to you again.  Will you all please to go away?  I am quite safe
and well, and I did not hide myself for the sake either of amusing
myself, or of troubling my people.  Lootie, will you please to dress
me.'



CHAPTER 25

Curdie Comes to Grief

Everything was for some time quiet above ground.  The king was still
away in a distant part of his dominions.  The men-at-arms kept watching
about the house.  They had been considerably astonished by finding at
the foot of the rock in the garden the hideous body of the goblin
creature killed by Curdie; but they came to the conclusion that it had
been slain in the mines, and had crept out there to die; and except an
occasional glimpse of a live one they saw nothing to cause alarm.
Curdie kept watching in the mountain, and the goblins kept burrowing
deeper into the earth.  As long as they went deeper there was, Curdie
judged, no immediate danger.

To Irene the summer was as full of pleasure as ever, and for a long
time, although she often thought of her grandmother during the day, and
often dreamed about her at night, she did not see her.  The kids and
the flowers were as much her delight as ever, and she made as much
friendship with the miners' children she met on the mountain as Lootie
would permit; but Lootie had very foolish notions concerning the
dignity of a princess, not understanding that the truest princess is
just the one who loves all her brothers and sisters best, and who is
most able to do them good by being humble towards them.  At the same
time she was considerably altered for the better in her behaviour to
the princess.  She could not help seeing that she was no longer a mere
child, but wiser than her age would account for.  She kept foolishly
whispering to the servants, however--sometimes that the princess was
not right in her mind, sometimes that she was too good to live, and
other nonsense of the same sort.

All this time Curdie had to be sorry, without a chance of confessing,
that he had behaved so unkindly to the princess.  This perhaps made him
the more diligent in his endeavours to serve her. His mother and he
often talked on the subject, and she comforted him, and told him she
was sure he would some day have the opportunity he so much desired.

Here I should like to remark, for the sake of princes and princesses in
general, that it is a low and contemptible thing to refuse to confess a
fault, or even an error.  If a true princess has done wrong, she is
always uneasy until she has had an opportunity of throwing the
wrongness away from her by saying: 'I did it; and I wish I had not; and
I am sorry for having done it.' So you see there is some ground for
supposing that Curdie was not a miner only, but a prince as well.  Many
such instances have been known in the world's history.

At length, however, he began to see signs of a change in the
proceedings of the goblin excavators: they were going no deeper, but
had commenced running on a level; and he watched them, therefore, more
closely than ever.  All at once, one night, coming to a slope of very
hard rock, they began to ascend along the inclined plane of its
surface.  Having reached its top, they went again on a level for a
night or two, after which they began to ascend once more, and kept on
at a pretty steep angle.  At length Curdie judged it time to transfer
his observation to another quarter, and the next night he did not go to
the mine at all; but, leaving his pickaxe and clue at home, and taking
only his usual lumps of bread and pease pudding, went down the mountain
to the king's house.  He climbed over the wall, and remained in the
garden the whole night, creeping on hands and knees from one spot to
the other, and lying at full length with his ear to the ground,
listening.  But he heard nothing except the tread of the men-at-arms as
they marched about, whose observation, as the night was cloudy and
there was no moon, he had little difficulty in avoiding.  For several
following nights he continued to haunt the garden and listen, but with
no success.

At length, early one evening, whether it was that he had got careless
of his own safety, or that the growing moon had become strong enough to
expose him, his watching came to a sudden end.  He was creeping from
behind the rock where the stream ran out, for he had been listening all
round it in the hope it might convey to his ear some indication of the
whereabouts of the goblin miners, when just as he came into the
moonlight on the lawn, a whizz in his ear and a blow upon his leg
startled him.  He instantly squatted in the hope of eluding further
notice.  But when he heard the sound of running feet, he jumped up to
take the chance of escape by flight. He fell, however, with a keen
shoot of pain, for the bolt of a crossbow had wounded his leg, and the
blood was now streaming from it.  He was instantly laid Hold of by two
or three of the men-at-arms.  It was useless to struggle, and he
submitted in silence.

'It's a boy!' cried several of them together, in a tone of amazement.
'I thought it was one of those demons.  What are you about here?'

'Going to have a little rough usage, apparently,' said Curdie,
laughing, as the men shook him.

'Impertinence will do you no good.  You have no business here in the
king's grounds, and if you don't give a true account of yourself, you
shall fare as a thief.'

'Why, what else could he be?' said one.

'He might have been after a lost kid, you know,' suggested another.

'I see no good in trying to excuse him.  He has no business here,
anyhow.'

'Let me go away, then, if you please,' said Curdie.

'But we don't please--not except you give a good account of yourself.'

'I don't feel quite sure whether I can trust you,' said Curdie.

'We are the king's own men-at-arms,' said the captain courteously, for
he was taken with Curdie's appearance and courage.

'Well, I will tell you all about it--if you will promise to listen to
me and not do anything rash.'

'I call that cool!' said one of the party, laughing.  'He will tell us
what mischief he was about, if we promise to do as pleases him.'

'I was about no mischief,' said Curdie.

But ere he could say more he turned faint, and fell senseless on the
grass.  Then first they discovered that the bolt they had shot, taking
him for one of the goblin creatures, had wounded him.

They carried him into the house and laid him down in the hall.  The
report spread that they had caught a robber, and the servants crowded
in to see the villain.  Amongst the rest came the nurse. The moment she
saw him she exclaimed with indignation:

'I declare it's the same young rascal of a miner that was rude to me
and the princess on the mountain.  He actually wanted to kiss the
princess.  I took good care of that--the wretch!  And he was prowling
about, was he?  Just like his impudence!' The princess being fast
asleep, she could misrepresent at her pleasure.

When he heard this, the captain, although he had considerable doubt of
its truth, resolved to keep Curdie a prisoner until they could search
into the affair.  So, after they had brought him round a little, and
attended to his wound, which was rather a bad one, they laid him, still
exhausted from the loss of blood, upon a mattress in a disused
room--one of those already so often mentioned--and locked the door, and
left him.  He passed a troubled night, and in the morning they found
him talking wildly.  In the evening he came to himself, but felt very
weak, and his leg was exceedingly painful.  Wondering where he was, and
seeing one of the men-at-arms in the room, he began to question him and
soon recalled the events of the preceding night.  As he was himself
unable to watch any more, he told the soldier all he knew about the
goblins, and begged him to tell his companions, and stir them up to
watch with tenfold vigilance; but whether it was that he did not talk
quite coherently, or that the whole thing appeared incredible,
certainly the man concluded that Curdie was only raving still, and
tried to coax him into holding his tongue.  This, of course, annoyed
Curdie dreadfully, who now felt in his turn what it was not to be
believed, and the consequence was that his fever returned, and by the
time when, at his persistent entreaties, the captain was called, there
could be no doubt that he was raving.  They did for him what they
could, and promised everything he wanted, but with no intention of
fulfilment.  At last he went to sleep, and when at length his sleep
grew profound and peaceful, they left him, locked the door again, and
withdrew, intending to revisit him early in the morning.



CHAPTER 26

The Goblin-Miners

That same night several of the servants were having a chat together
before going to bed.

'What can that noise be?' said one of the housemaids, who had been
listening for a moment or two.

'I've heard it the last two nights,' said the cook.  'If there were any
about the place, I should have taken it for rats, but my Tom keeps them
far enough.'

'I've heard, though,' said the scullery-maid, 'that rats move about in
great companies sometimes.  There may be an army of them invading us.
I've heard the noises yesterday and today too.'

'It'll be grand fun, then, for my Tom and Mrs Housekeeper's Bob,' said
the cook.  'They'll be friends for once in their lives, and fight on
the same side.  I'll engage Tom and Bob together will put to flight any
number of rats.'

'It seems to me,' said the nurse, 'that the noises are much too loud
for that.  I have heard them all day, and my princess has asked me
several times what they could be.  Sometimes they sound like distant
thunder, and sometimes like the noises you hear in the mountain from
those horrid miners underneath.'

'I shouldn't wonder,' said the cook, 'if it was the miners after all.
They may have come on some hole in the mountain through which the
noises reach to us.  They are always boring and blasting and breaking,
you know.'

As he spoke, there came a great rolling rumble beneath them, and the
house quivered.  They all started up in affright, and rushing to the
hall found the gentlemen-at-arms in consternation also. They had sent
to wake their captain, who said from their description that it must
have been an earthquake, an occurrence which, although very rare in
that country, had taken place almost within the century; and then went
to bed again, strange to say, and fell fast asleep without once
thinking of Curdie, or associating the noises they had heard with what
he had told them.  He had not believed Curdie.  If he had, he would at
once have thought of what he had said, and would have taken
precautions.  As they heard nothing more, they concluded that Sir
Walter was right, and that the danger was over for perhaps another
hundred years.  The fact, as discovered afterwards, was that the
goblins had, in working up a second sloping face of stone, arrived at a
huge block which lay under the cellars of the house, within the line of
the foundations.

It was so round that when they succeeded, after hard work, in
dislodging it without blasting, it rolled thundering down the slope
with a bounding, jarring roll, which shook the foundations of the
house.  The goblins were themselves dismayed at the noise, for they
knew, by careful spying and measuring, that they must now be very near,
if not under the king's house, and they feared giving an alarm.  They,
therefore, remained quiet for a while, and when they began to work
again, they no doubt thought themselves very fortunate in coming upon a
vein of sand which filled a winding fissure in the rock on which the
house was built.  By scooping this away they came out in the king's
wine cellar.

No sooner did they find where they were, than they scurried back again,
like rats into their holes, and running at full speed to the goblin
palace, announced their success to the king and queen with shouts of
triumph.

In a moment the goblin royal family and the whole goblin people were on
their way in hot haste to the king's house, each eager to have a share
in the glory of carrying off that same night the Princess Irene.

The queen went stumping along in one shoe of stone and one of skin.

This could not have been pleasant, and my readers may wonder that, with
such skilful workmen about her, she had not yet replaced the shoe
carried off by Curdie.  As the king, however, had more than one ground
of objection to her stone shoes, he no doubt took advantage of the
discovery of her toes, and threatened to expose her deformity if she
had another made.  I presume he insisted on her being content with skin
shoes, and allowed her to wear the remaining granite one on the present
occasion only because she was going out to war.

They soon arrived in the king's wine cellar, and regardless of its huge
vessels, of which they did not know the use, proceeded at once, but as
quietly as they could, to force the door that led upwards.



CHAPTER 27

The Goblins in the King's House

When Curdie fell asleep he began at once to dream.  He thought he was
ascending the Mountainside from the mouth of the mine, whistling and
singing 'Ring, dod, bang!' when he came upon a woman and child who had
lost their way; and from that point he went on dreaming everything that
had happened to him since he thus met the princess and Lootie; how he
had watched the goblins, how he had been taken by them, how he had been
rescued by the princess; everything, indeed, until he was wounded,
captured, and imprisoned by the men-at-arms.  And now he thought he was
lying wide awake where they had laid him, when suddenly he heard a
great thundering sound.

'The cobs are coming!' he said.  'They didn't believe a word I told
them!  The cobs'll be carrying off the princess from under their stupid
noses!  But they shan't! that they shan't!'

He jumped up, as he thought, and began to dress, but, to his dismay,
found that he was still lying in bed.

'Now then, I will!' he said.  'Here goes!  I am up now!'

But yet again he found himself snug in bed.  Twenty times he tried, and
twenty times he failed; for in fact he was not awake, only dreaming
that he was.  At length in an agony of despair, fancying he heard the
goblins all over the house, he gave a great cry.  Then there came, as
he thought, a hand upon the lock of his door.  It opened, and, looking
up, he saw a lady with white hair, carrying a silver box in her hand,
enter the room.  She came to his bed, he thought, stroked his head and
face with cool, soft hands, took the dressing from his leg, rubbed it
with something that smelt like roses, and then waved her hands over him
three times.  At the last wave of her hands everything vanished, he
felt himself sinking into the profoundest slumber, and remembered
nothing more until he awoke in earnest.

The setting moon was throwing a feeble light through the casement, and
the house was full of uproar.  There was soft heavy multitudinous
stamping, a clashing and clanging of weapons, the voices of men and the
cries of women, mixed with a hideous bellowing, which sounded
victorious.  The cobs were in the house! He sprang from his bed,
hurried on some of his clothes, not forgetting his shoes, which were
armed with nails; then spying an old hunting-knife, or short sword,
hanging on the wall, he caught it, and rushed down the stairs, guided
by the sounds of strife, which grew louder and louder.

When he reached the ground floor he found the whole place swarming.

All the goblins of the mountain seemed gathered there.  He rushed
amongst them, shouting:

  'One, two,
  Hit and hew!
  Three, four,
  Blast and bore!'

and with every rhyme he came down a great stamp upon a foot, cutting at
the same time their faces--executing, indeed, a sword dance of the
wildest description.  Away scattered the goblins in every
direction--into closets, up stairs, into chimneys, up on rafters, and
down to the cellars.  Curdie went on stamping and slashing and singing,
but saw nothing of the people of the house until he came to the great
hall, in which, the moment he entered it, arose a great goblin shout.
The last of the men-at-arms, the captain himself, was on the floor,
buried beneath a wallowing crowd of goblins.  For, while each knight
was busy defending himself as well as he could, by stabs in the thick
bodies of the goblins, for he had soon found their heads all but
invulnerable, the queen had attacked his legs and feet with her
horrible granite shoe, and he was soon down; but the captain had got
his back to the wall and stood out longer.  The goblins would have torn
them all to pieces, but the king had given orders to carry them away
alive, and over each of them, in twelve groups, was standing a knot of
goblins, while as many as could find room were sitting upon their
prostrate bodies.

Curdie burst in dancing and gyrating and stamping and singing like a
small incarnate whirlwind.

  'Where 'tis all a hole, sir,
  Never can be holes:
  Why should their shoes have soles, sir,
  When they've got no souls?

  'But she upon her foot, sir,
  Has a granite shoe:
  The strongest leather boot, sir,
  Six would soon be through.'


The queen gave a howl of rage and dismay; and before she recovered her
presence of mind, Curdie, having begun with the group nearest him, had
eleven of the knights on their legs again.

'Stamp on their feet!' he cried as each man rose, and in a few minutes
the hall was nearly empty, the goblins running from it as fast as they
could, howling and shrieking and limping, and cowering every now and
then as they ran to cuddle their wounded feet in their hard hands, or
to protect them from the frightful stamp-stamp of the armed men.

And now Curdie approached the group which, in trusting in the queen and
her shoe, kept their guard over the prostrate captain.  The king sat on
the captain's head, but the queen stood in front, like an infuriated
cat, with her perpendicular eyes gleaming green, and her hair standing
half up from her horrid head.  Her heart was quaking, however, and she
kept moving about her skin-shod foot with nervous apprehension.  When
Curdie was within a few paces, she rushed at him, made one tremendous
stamp at his opposing foot, which happily he withdrew in time, and
caught him round the waist, to dash him on the marble floor.  But just
as she caught him, he came down with all the weight of his iron-shod
shoe upon her skin-shod foot, and with a hideous howl she dropped him,
squatted on the floor, and took her foot in both her hands.  Meanwhile
the rest rushed on the king and the bodyguard, sent them flying, and
lifted the prostrate captain, who was all but pressed to death.  It was
some moments before he recovered breath and consciousness.

'Where's the princess?' cried Curdie, again and again.

No one knew, and off they all rushed in search of her.

Through every room in the house they went, but nowhere was she to be
found.  Neither was one of the servants to be seen.  But Curdie, who
had kept to the lower part of the house, which was now quiet enough,
began to hear a confused sound as of a distant hubbub, and set out to
find where it came from.  The noise grew as his sharp ears guided him
to a stair and so to the wine cellar.  It was full of goblins, whom the
butler was supplying with wine as fast as he could draw it.

While the queen and her party had encountered the men-at-arms, Harelip
with another company had gone off to search the house. They captured
every one they met, and when they could find no more, they hurried away
to carry them safe to the caverns below.  But when the butler, who was
amongst them, found that their path lay through the wine cellar, he
bethought himself of persuading them to taste the wine, and, as he had
hoped, they no sooner tasted than they wanted more.  The routed
goblins, on their way below, joined them, and when Curdie entered they
were all, with outstretched hands, in which were vessels of every
description from sauce pan to silver cup, pressing around the butler,
who sat at the tap of a huge cask, filling and filling.  Curdie cast
one glance around the place before commencing his attack, and saw in
the farthest corner a terrified group of the domestics unwatched, but
cowering without courage to attempt their escape.  Amongst them was the
terror-stricken face of Lootie; but nowhere could he see the princess.
Seized with the horrible conviction that Harelip had already carried
her off, he rushed amongst them, unable for wrath to sing any more, but
stamping and cutting with greater fury than ever.

'Stamp on their feet; stamp on their feet!' he shouted, and in a moment
the goblins were disappearing through the hole in the floor like rats
and mice.

They could not vanish so fast, however, but that many more goblin feet
had to go limping back over the underground ways of the mountain that
morning.

Presently, however, they were reinforced from above by the king and his
party, with the redoubtable queen at their head.  Finding Curdie again
busy amongst her unfortunate subjects, she rushed at him once more with
the rage of despair, and this time gave him a bad bruise on the foot.
Then a regular stamping fight got up between them, Curdie, with the
point of his hunting-knife, keeping her from clasping her mighty arms
about him, as he watched his opportunity of getting once more a good
stamp at her skin-shod foot.  But the queen was more wary as well as
more agile than hitherto.

The rest meantime, finding their adversary thus matched for the moment,
paused in their headlong hurry, and turned to the shivering group of
women in the corner.  As if determined to emulate his father and have a
sun-woman of some sort to share his future throne, Harelip rushed at
them, caught up Lootie, and sped with her to the hole.  She gave a
great shriek, and Curdie heard her, and saw the plight she was in.
Gathering all his strength, he gave the queen a sudden cut across the
face with his weapon, came down, as she started back, with all his
weight on the proper foot, and sprung to Lootie's rescue.  The prince
had two defenceless feet, and on both of them Curdie stamped just as he
reached the hole.  He dropped his burden and rolled shrieking into the
earth.  Curdie made one stab at him as he disappeared, caught hold of
the senseless Lootie, and having dragged her back to the corner, there
mounted guard over her, preparing once more to encounter the queen.

Her face streaming with blood, and her eyes flashing green lightning
through it, she came on with her mouth open and her teeth grinning like
a tiger's, followed by the king and her bodyguard of the thickest
goblins.  But the same moment in rushed the captain and his men, and
ran at them stamping furiously.  They dared not encounter such an
onset.  Away they scurried, the queen foremost. Of course, the right
thing would have been to take the king and queen prisoners, and hold
them hostages for the princess, but they were so anxious to find her
that no one thought of detaining them until it was too late.

Having thus rescued the servants, they set about searching the house
once more.  None of them could give the least information concerning
the princess.  Lootie was almost silly with terror, and, although
scarcely able to walk would not leave Curdie's side for a single
moment.  Again he allowed the others to search the rest of the
house--where, except a dismayed goblin lurking here and there, they
found no one--while he requested Lootie to take him to the princess's
room.  She was as submissive and obedient as if he had been the king.

He found the bedclothes tossed about, and most of them on the floor,
while the princess's garments were scattered all over the room, which
was in the greatest confusion.  It was only too evident that the
goblins had been there, and Curdie had no longer any doubt that she had
been carried off at the very first of the inroad. With a pang of
despair he saw how wrong they had been in not securing the king and
queen and prince; but he determined to find and rescue the princess as
she had found and rescued him, or meet the worst fate to which the
goblins could doom him.



CHAPTER 28

Curdie's Guide

Just as the consolation of this resolve dawned upon his mind and he was
turning away for the cellar to follow the goblins into their hole,
something touched his hand.  It was the slightest touch, and when he
looked he could see nothing.  Feeling and peering about in the grey of
the dawn, his fingers came upon a tight thread.  He looked again, and
narrowly, but still could see nothing.  It flashed upon him that this
must be the princess's thread.  Without saying a word, for he knew no
one would believe him any more than he had believed the princess, he
followed the thread with his finger, contrived to give Lootie the slip,
and was soon out of the house and on the mountainside--surprised that,
if the thread were indeed the grandmother's messenger, it should have
led the princess, as he supposed it must, into the mountain, where she
would be certain to meet the goblins rushing back enraged from their
defeat.  But he hurried on in the hope of overtaking her first.  When
he arrived, however, at the place where the path turned off for the
mine, he found that the thread did not turn with it, but went straight
up the mountain.  Could it be that the thread was leading him home to
his mother's cottage?  Could the princess be there?  He bounded up the
mountain like one of its own goats, and before the sun was up the
thread had brought him indeed to his mother's door.  There it vanished
from his fingers, and he could not find it, search as he might.

The door was on the latch, and he entered.  There sat his mother by the
fire, and in her arms lay the princess, fast asleep.

'Hush, Curdie!' said his mother.  'Do not wake her.  I'm so glad you're
come!  I thought the cobs must have got you again!'

With a heart full of delight, Curdie sat down at a corner of the
hearth, on a stool opposite his mother's chair, and gazed at the
princess, who slept as peacefully as if she had been in her own bed.
All at once she opened her eyes and fixed them on him.

'Oh, Curdie! you're come!' she said quietly.  'I thought you would!'

Curdie rose and stood before her with downcast eyes.

'Irene,' he said, 'I am very sorry I did not believe you.'

'Oh, never mind, Curdie!' answered the princess.  'You couldn't, you
know.  You do believe me now, don't you?'

'I can't help it now.  I ought to have helped it before.'

'Why can't you help it now?'

'Because, just as I was going into the mountain to look for you, I got
hold of your thread, and it brought me here.'

'Then you've come from my house, have you?'

'Yes, I have.'

'I didn't know you were there.'

'I've been there two or three days, I believe.'

'And I never knew it!  Then perhaps you can tell me why my grandmother
has brought me here?  I can't think.  Something woke me--I didn't know
what, but I was frightened, and I felt for the thread, and there it
was!  I was more frightened still when it brought me out on the
mountain, for I thought it was going to take me into it again, and I
like the outside of it best.  I supposed you were in trouble again, and
I had to get you out.  But it brought me here instead; and, oh, Curdie!
your mother has been so kind to me--just like my own grandmother!'

Here Curdie's mother gave the princess a hug, and the princess turned
and gave her a sweet smile, and held up her mouth to kiss her.

'Then you didn't see the cobs?'asked Curdie.

'No; I haven't been into the mountain, I told you, Curdie.'

'But the cobs have been into your house--all over it--and into your
bedroom, making such a row!'

'What did they want there?  It was very rude of them.'

'They wanted you--to carry you off into the mountain with them, for a
wife to their prince Harelip.'

'Oh, how dreadful' cried the princess, shuddering.

'But you needn't be afraid, you know.  Your grandmother takes care of
you.'

'Ah! you do believe in my grandmother, then?  I'm so glad!  She made me
think you would some day.'

All at once Curdie remembered his dream, and was silent, thinking.

'But how did you come to be in my house, and me not know it?' asked the
princess.

Then Curdie had to explain everything--how he had watched for her sake,
how he had been wounded and shut up by the soldiers, how he heard the
noises and could not rise, and how the beautiful old lady had come to
him, and all that followed.

'Poor Curdie! to lie there hurt and ill, and me never to know it!'
exclaimed the princess, stroking his rough hand.  'I would have come
and nursed you, if they had told me.'

'I didn't see you were lame,' said his mother.

'Am I, mother?  Oh--yes--I suppose I ought to be! I declare I've never
thought of it since I got up to go down amongst the cobs!'

'Let me see the wound,' said his mother.

He pulled down his stocking--when behold, except a great scar, his leg
was perfectly sound!

Curdie and his mother gazed in each other's eyes, full of wonder, but
Irene called out:

'I thought so, Curdie!  I was sure it wasn't a dream.  I was sure my
grandmother had been to see you.  Don't you smell the roses?  It was my
grandmother healed your leg, and sent you to help me.'

'No, Princess Irene,' said Curdie; 'I wasn't good enough to be allowed
to help you: I didn't believe you.  Your grandmother took care of you
without me.'

'She sent you to help my people, anyhow.  I wish my king-papa would
come.  I do want so to tell him how good you have been!'

'But,' said the mother, 'we are forgetting how frightened your people
must be.  You must take the princess home at once, Curdie--or at least
go and tell them where she is.'

'Yes, mother.  Only I'm dreadfully hungry.  Do let me have some
breakfast first.  They ought to have listened to me, and then they
wouldn't have been taken by surprise as they were.'

'That is true, Curdie; but it is not for you to blame them much. You
remember?'

'Yes, mother, I do.  Only I must really have something to eat.'

'You shall, my boy--as fast as I can get it,' said his mother, rising
and setting the princess on her chair.

But before his breakfast was ready, Curdie jumped up so suddenly as to
startle both his companions.

'Mother, mother!' he cried, 'I was forgetting.  You must take the
princess home yourself.  I must go and wake my father.'

Without a word of explanation, he rushed to the place where his father
was sleeping.  Having thoroughly roused him with what he told him he
darted out of the cottage.



CHAPTER 29

Masonwork

He had all at once remembered the resolution of the goblins to carry
out their second plan upon the failure of the first.  No doubt they
were already busy, and the mine was therefore in the greatest danger of
being flooded and rendered useless--not to speak of the lives of the
miners.

When he reached the mouth of the mine, after rousing all the miners
within reach, he found his father and a good many more just entering.
They all hurried to the gang by which he had found a way into the
goblin country.  There the foresight of Peter had already collected a
great many blocks of stone, with cement, ready for building up the weak
place--well enough known to the goblins. Although there was not room
for more than two to be actually building at once, they managed, by
setting all the rest to work in preparing the cement and passing the
stones, to finish in the course of the day a huge buttress filling the
whole gang, and supported everywhere by the live rock.  Before the hour
when they usually dropped work, they were satisfied the mine was secure.

They had heard goblin hammers and pickaxes busy all the time, and at
length fancied they heard sounds of water they had never heard before.
But that was otherwise accounted for when they left the mine, for they
stepped out into a tremendous storm which was raging all over the
mountain.  The thunder was bellowing, and the lightning lancing out of
a huge black cloud which lay above it and hung down  its edges of thick
mist over its sides.  The lightning was breaking out of the mountain,
too, and flashing up into the cloud.  From the state of the brooks, now
swollen into raging torrents, it was evident that the storm had been
storming all day.

The wind was blowing as if it would blow him off the mountain, but,
anxious about his mother and the princess, Curdie darted up through the
thick of the tempest.  Even if they had not set out before the storm
came on, he did not judge them safe, for in such a storm even their
poor little house was in danger.  Indeed he soon found that but for a
huge rock against which it was built, and which protected it both from
the blasts and the waters, it must have been swept if it was not blown
away; for the two torrents into which this rock parted the rush of
water behind it united again in front of the cottage--two roaring and
dangerous streams, which his mother and the princess could not possibly
have passed.  It was with great difficulty that he forced his way
through one of them, and up to the door.

The moment his hand fell on the latch, through all the uproar of winds
and Waters came the joyous cry of the princess:

'There's Curdie!  Curdie!  Curdie!'

She was sitting wrapped in blankets on the bed, his mother trying for
the hundredth time to light the fire which had been drowned by the rain
that came down the chimney.  The clay floor was one mass of mud, and
the whole place looked wretched.  But the faces of the mother and the
princess shone as if their troubles only made them the merrier.  Curdie
burst out laughing at the sight of them.

'I never had such fun!' said the princess, her eyes twinkling and her
pretty teeth shining.  'How nice it must be to live in a cottage on the
mountain!'

'It all depends on what kind your inside house is,' said the mother.

'I know what you mean,' said Irene.  'That's the kind of thing my
grandmother says.'

By the time Peter returned the storm was nearly over, but the streams
were so fierce and so swollen that it was not only out of the question
for the princess to go down the mountain, but most dangerous for Peter
even or Curdie to make the attempt in the gathering darkness.

'They will be dreadfully frightened about you,' said Peter to the
princess, 'but we cannot help it.  We must wait till the morning.'

With Curdie's help, the fire was lighted at last, and the mother set
about making their supper; and after supper they all told the princess
stories till she grew sleepy.  Then Curdie's mother laid her in
Curdie's bed, which was in a tiny little garret-room.  As soon as she
was in bed, through a little window low down in the roof she caught
sight of her grandmother's lamp shining far away beneath, and she gazed
at the beautiful silvery globe until she fell asleep.



CHAPTER 30

The King and the Kiss

The next morning the sun rose so bright that Irene said the rain had
washed his face and let the light out clean.  The torrents were still
roaring down the side of the mountain, but they were so much smaller as
not to be dangerous in the daylight.  After an early breakfast, Peter
went to his work and Curdie and his mother set out to take the princess
home.  They had difficulty in getting her dry across the streams, and
Curdie had again and again to carry her, but at last they got safe on
the broader part of the road, and walked gently down towards the king's
house.  And what should they see as they turned the last corner but the
last of the king's troop riding through the gate!

'Oh, Curdie!' cried Irene, clapping her hands right joyfully,'my
king-papa is come.'

The moment Curdie heard that, he caught her up in his arms, and set off
at full speed, crying:

'Come on, mother dear!  The king may break his heart before he knows
that she is safe.'

Irene clung round his neck and he ran with her like a deer.  When he
entered the gate into the court, there sat the king on his horse, with
all the people of the house about him, weeping and hanging their heads.
The king was not weeping, but his face was white as a dead man's, and
he looked as if the life had gone out of him.  The men-at-arms he had
brought with him sat with horror-stricken faces, but eyes flashing with
rage, waiting only for the word of the king to do something--they did
not know what, and nobody knew what.

The day before, the men-at-arms belonging to the house, as soon as they
were satisfied the princess had been carried away, rushed after the
goblins into the hole, but found that they had already so skilfully
blockaded the narrowest part, not many feet below the cellar, that
without miners and their tools they could do nothing. Not one of them
knew where the mouth of the mine lay, and some of those who had set out
to find it had been overtaken by the storm and had not even yet
returned.  Poor Sir Walter was especially filled with shame, and almost
hoped the king would order his head to be cut off, for to think of that
sweet little face down amongst the goblins was unendurable.

When Curdie ran in at the gate with the princess in his arms, they were
all so absorbed in their own misery and awed by the king's presence and
grief, that no one observed his arrival.  He went straight up to the
king, where he sat on his horse.

'Papa! papa!' the princess cried, stretching out her arms to him; 'here
I am!'

The king started.  The colour rushed to his face.  He gave an
inarticulate cry.  Curdie held up the princess, and the king bent down
and took her from his arms.  As he clasped her to his bosom, the big
tears went dropping down his cheeks and his beard.  And such a shout
arose from all the bystanders that the startled horses pranced and
capered, and the armour rang and clattered, and the rocks of the
mountain echoed back the noises.  The princess greeted them all as she
nestled in her father's bosom, and the king did not set her down until
she had told them all the story.  But she had more to tell about Curdie
than about herself, and what she did tell about herself none of them
could understand--except the king and Curdie, who stood by the king's
knee stroking the neck of the great white horse.  And still as she told
what Curdie had done, Sir Walter and others added to what she told,
even Lootie joining in the praises of his courage and energy.

Curdie held his peace, looking quietly up in the king's face.  And his
mother stood on the outskirts of the crowd listening with delight, for
her son's deeds were pleasant in her ears, until the princess caught
sight of her.

'And there is his mother, king-papa!' she said.  'See--there.  She is
such a nice mother, and has been so kind to me!'

They all parted asunder as the king made a sign to her to come forward.
She obeyed, and he gave her his hand, but could not speak.

'And now, king-papa,' the princess went on, 'I must tell you another
thing.  One night long ago Curdie drove the goblins away and brought
Lootie and me safe from the mountain.  And I promised him a kiss when
we got home, but Lootie wouldn't let me give it him.  I don't want you
to scold Lootie, but I want you to tell her that a princess must do as
she promises.'

'Indeed she must, my child--except it be wrong,' said the king. 'There,
give Curdie a kiss.'

And as he spoke he held her towards him.

The princess reached down, threw her arms round Curdie's neck, and
kissed him on the mouth, saying: 'There, Curdie!  There's the kiss I
promised you!'

Then they all went into the house, and the cook rushed to the kitchen
and the servants to their work.  Lootie dressed Irene in her shiningest
clothes, and the king put off his armour, and put on purple and gold;
and a messenger was sent for Peter and all the miners, and there was a
great and a grand feast, which continued long after the princess was
put to bed.



CHAPTER 31

The Subterranean Waters

The king's harper, who always formed a part of his escort, was chanting
a ballad which he made as he went on playing on his instrument--about
the princess and the goblins, and the prowess of Curdie, when all at
once he ceased, with his eyes on one of the doors of the hall.
Thereupon the eyes of the king and his guests turned thitherward also.
The next moment, through the open doorway came the princess Irene.  She
went straight up to her father, with her right hand stretched out a
little sideways, and her forefinger, as her father and Curdie
understood, feeling its way along the invisible thread.  The king took
her on his knee, and she said in his ear:

'King-papa, do you hear that noise?'

'I hear nothing,' said the king.

'Listen,' she said, holding up her forefinger.

The king listened, and a great stillness fell upon the company. Each
man, seeing that the king listened, listened also, and the harper sat
with his harp between his arms, and his finger silent upon the strings.

'I do hear a noise,' said the king at length--'a noise as of distant
thunder.  It is coming nearer and nearer.  What can it be?'

They all heard it now, and each seemed ready to start to his feet as he
listened.  Yet all sat perfectly still.  The noise came rapidly nearer.

'What can it be?' said the king again.

'I think it must be another storm coming over the mountain,' said Sir
Walter.

Then Curdie, who at the first word of the king had slipped from his
seat, and laid his ear to the ground, rose up quickly, and approaching
the king said, speaking very fast:

'Please, Your Majesty, I think I know what it is.  I have no time to
explain, for that might make it too late for some of us.  Will Your
Majesty give orders that everybody leave the house as quickly as
possible and get up the mountain?'

The king, who was the wisest man in the kingdom, knew well there was a
time when things must be done and questions left till afterwards.  He
had faith in Curdie, and rose instantly, with Irene in his arms.
'Every man and woman follow me,' he said, and strode out into the
darkness.

Before he had reached the gate, the noise had grown to a great
thundering roar, and the ground trembled beneath their feet, and before
the last of them had crossed the court, out after them from the great
hall door came a huge rush of turbid water, and almost swept them away.
But they got safe out of the gate and up the mountain, while the
torrent went roaring down the road into the valley beneath.

Curdie had left the king and the princess to look after his mother,
whom he and his father, one on each side, caught up when the stream
overtook them and carried safe and dry.

When the king had got out of the way of the water, a little up the
mountain, he stood with the princess in his arms, looking back with
amazement on the issuing torrent, which glimmered fierce and foamy
through the night.  There Curdie rejoined them.

'Now, Curdie,' said the king, 'what does it mean?  Is this what you
expected?'

'It is, Your Majesty,' said Curdie; and proceeded to tell him about the
second scheme of the goblins, who, fancying the miners of more
importance to the upper world than they were, had resolved, if they
should fail in carrying off the king's daughter, to flood the mine and
drown the miners.  Then he explained what the miners had done to
prevent it.  The goblins had, in pursuance of their design, let loose
all the underground reservoirs and streams, expecting the water to run
down into the mine, which was lower than their part of the mountain,
for they had, as they supposed, not knowing of the solid wall close
behind, broken a passage through into it.  But the readiest outlet the
water could find had turned out to be the tunnel they had made to the
king's house, the possibility of which catastrophe had not occurred to
the young miner until he had laid his ear to the floor of the hall.

What was then to be done?  The house appeared in danger of falling, and
every moment the torrent was increasing.

'We must set out at once,' said the king.  'But how to get at the
horses!'

'Shall I see if we can manage that?' said Curdie.

'Do,' said the king.

Curdie gathered the men-at-arms, and took them over the garden wall,
and so to the stables.  They found their horses in terror; the water
was rising fast around them, and it was quite time they were got out.
But there was no way to get them out, except by riding them through the
stream, which was now pouring from the lower windows as well as the
door.  As one horse was quite enough for any man to manage through such
a torrent, Curdie got on the king's white charger and, leading the way,
brought them all in safety to the rising ground.

'Look, look, Curdie!' cried Irene, the moment that, having dismounted,
he led the horse up to the king.

Curdie did look, and saw, high in the air, somewhere about the top of
the king's house, a great globe of light shining like the purest silver.

'Oh!' he cried in some consternation, 'that is your grandmother's lamp!
We must get her out.  I will go an find her.  The house may fall, you
know.'

'My grandmother is in no danger,' said Irene, smiling.

'Here, Curdie, take the princess while I get on my horse,' said the
king.

Curdie took the princess again, and both turned their eyes to the globe
of light.  The same moment there shot from it a white bird, which,
descending with outstretched wings, made one circle round the king an
Curdie and the princess, and then glided up again.  The light and the
pigeon vanished together.

'Now, Curdie!' said the princess, as he lifted her to her father's
arms, 'you see my grandmother knows all about it, and isn't frightened.
I believe she could walk through that water and it wouldn't wet her a
bit.'

'But, my child,' said the king, 'you will be cold if you haven't
Something more on.  Run, Curdie, my boy, and fetch anything you can lay
your hands on, to keep the princess warm.  We have a long ride before
us.'

Curdie was gone in a moment, and soon returned with a great rich fur,
and the news that dead goblins were tossing about in the current
through the house.  They had been caught in their own snare; instead of
the mine they had flooded their own country, whence they were now swept
up drowned.  Irene shuddered, but the king held her close to his bosom.
Then he turned to Sir Walter, and said:

'Bring Curdie's father and mother here.'

'I wish,' said the king, when they stood before him, 'to take your son
with me.  He shall enter my bodyguard at once, and wait further
promotion.'

Peter and his wife, overcome, only murmured almost inaudible thanks.
But Curdie spoke aloud.

'Please, Your Majesty,' he said, 'I cannot leave my father and mother.'

'That's right, Curdie!' cried the princess.  'I wouldn't if I was you.'

The king looked at the princess and then at Curdie with a glow of
satisfaction on his countenance.

'I too think you are right, Curdie,' he said, 'and I will not ask you
again.  But I shall have a chance of doing something for you some time.'

'Your Majesty has already allowed me to serve you,' said Curdie.

'But, Curdie,' said his mother, 'why shouldn't you go with the king?
We can get on very well without you.'

'But I can't get on very well without you,' said Curdie.  'The king is
very kind, but I could not be half the use to him that I am to you.
Please, Your Majesty, if you wouldn't mind giving my mother a red
petticoat!  I should have got her one long ago, but for the goblins.'

'As soon as we get home,' said the king, 'Irene and I will search out
the warmest one to be found, and send it by one of the gentlemen.'

'Yes, that we will, Curdie!' said the princess.  'And next summer we'll
come back and see you wear it, Curdie's mother,' she added. 'Shan't we,
king-papa?'

'Yes, my love; I hope so,' said the king.

Then turning to the miners, he said:

'Will you do the best you can for my servants tonight?  I hope they
will be able to return to the house tomorrow.'

The miners with one voice promised their hospitality. Then the king
commanded his servants to mind whatever Curdie should say to them, and
after shaking hands with him and his father and mother, the king and
the princess and all their company rode away down the side of the new
stream, which had already devoured half the road, into the starry night.



CHAPTER 32

The Last Chapter

All the rest went up the mountain, and separated in groups to the homes
of the miners.  Curdie and his father and mother took Lootie with them.
And the whole way a light, of which all but Lootie understood the
origin, shone upon their path.  But when they looked round they could
see nothing of the silvery globe.

For days and days the water continued to rush from the doors and
windows of the king's house, and a few goblin bodies were swept out
into the road.

Curdie saw that something must be done.  He spoke to his father and the
rest of the miners, and they at once proceeded to make another outlet
for the waters.  By setting all hands to the work, tunnelling here and
building there, they soon succeeded; and having also made a little
tunnel to drain the water away from under the king's house, they were
soon able to get into the wine cellar, where they found a multitude of
dead goblins--among the rest the queen, with the skin-shoe gone, and
the stone one fast to her ankle--for the water had swept away the
barricade, which prevented the men-at-arms from following the goblins,
and had greatly widened the passage.  They built it securely up, and
then went back to their labours in the mine.

A good many of the goblins with their creatures escaped from the
inundation out upon the mountain.  But most of them soon left that part
of the country, and most of those who remained grew milder in
character, and indeed became very much like the Scotch brownies. Their
skulls became softer as well as their hearts, and their feet grew
harder, and by degrees they became friendly with the inhabitants of the
mountain and even with the miners.  But the latter were merciless to
any of the cobs' creatures that came in their way, until at length they
all but disappeared.

The rest of the history of The Princess and Curdie must be kept for
another volume.



﻿
CHAPTER I

                       “A spirit  .  .  .
                    .  .  .  .  .  .
    The undulating and silent well,
    And rippling rivulet, and evening gloom,
    Now deepening the dark shades, for speech assuming,
    Held commune with him; as if he and it
    Were all that was.”
                             SHELLEY’S Alastor.


I awoke one morning with the usual perplexity of mind which accompanies
the return of consciousness. As I lay and looked through the eastern
window of my room, a faint streak of peach-colour, dividing a cloud that
just rose above the low swell of the horizon, announced the approach of
the sun. As my thoughts, which a deep and apparently dreamless sleep had
dissolved, began again to assume crystalline forms, the strange events
of the foregoing night presented themselves anew to my wondering
consciousness. The day before had been my one-and-twentieth birthday.
Among other ceremonies investing me with my legal rights, the keys of an
old secretary, in which my father had kept his private papers, had been
delivered up to me. As soon as I was left alone, I ordered lights in the
chamber where the secretary stood, the first lights that had been there
for many a year; for, since my father’s death, the room had been left
undisturbed. But, as if the darkness had been too long an inmate to
be easily expelled, and had dyed with blackness the walls to which,
bat-like, it had clung, these tapers served but ill to light up the
gloomy hangings, and seemed to throw yet darker shadows into the hollows
of the deep-wrought cornice. All the further portions of the room lay
shrouded in a mystery whose deepest folds were gathered around the dark
oak cabinet which I now approached with a strange mingling of reverence
and curiosity. Perhaps, like a geologist, I was about to turn up to
the light some of the buried strata of the human world, with its fossil
remains charred by passion and petrified by tears. Perhaps I was to
learn how my father, whose personal history was unknown to me, had woven
his web of story; how he had found the world, and how the world had left
him. Perhaps I was to find only the records of lands and moneys, how
gotten and how secured; coming down from strange men, and through
troublous times, to me, who knew little or nothing of them all. To solve
my speculations, and to dispel the awe which was fast gathering around
me as if the dead were drawing near, I approached the secretary; and
having found the key that fitted the upper portion, I opened it with
some difficulty, drew near it a heavy high-backed chair, and sat down
before a multitude of little drawers and slides and pigeon-holes. But
the door of a little cupboard in the centre especially attracted my
interest, as if there lay the secret of this long-hidden world. Its key
I found.

One of the rusty hinges cracked and broke as I opened the door: it
revealed a number of small pigeon-holes. These, however, being but
shallow compared with the depth of those around the little cupboard, the
outer ones reaching to the back of the desk, I concluded that there
must be some accessible space behind; and found, indeed, that they were
formed in a separate framework, which admitted of the whole being pulled
out in one piece. Behind, I found a sort of flexible portcullis of small
bars of wood laid close together horizontally. After long search, and
trying many ways to move it, I discovered at last a scarcely projecting
point of steel on one side. I pressed this repeatedly and hard with
the point of an old tool that was lying near, till at length it
yielded inwards; and the little slide, flying up suddenly, disclosed a
chamber--empty, except that in one corner lay a little heap of withered
rose-leaves, whose long-lived scent had long since departed; and, in
another, a small packet of papers, tied with a bit of ribbon, whose
colour had gone with the rose-scent. Almost fearing to touch them, they
witnessed so mutely to the law of oblivion, I leaned back in my chair,
and regarded them for a moment; when suddenly there stood on the
threshold of the little chamber, as though she had just emerged from its
depth, a tiny woman-form, as perfect in shape as if she had been a small
Greek statuette roused to life and motion. Her dress was of a kind that
could never grow old-fashioned, because it was simply natural: a robe
plaited in a band around the neck, and confined by a belt about the
waist, descended to her feet. It was only afterwards, however, that I
took notice of her dress, although my surprise was by no means of so
overpowering a degree as such an apparition might naturally be expected
to excite. Seeing, however, as I suppose, some astonishment in my
countenance, she came forward within a yard of me, and said, in a voice
that strangely recalled a sensation of twilight, and reedy river banks,
and a low wind, even in this deathly room:--

“Anodos, you never saw such a little creature before, did you?”

“No,” said I; “and indeed I hardly believe I do now.”

“Ah! that is always the way with you men; you believe nothing the first
time; and it is foolish enough to let mere repetition convince you of
what you consider in itself unbelievable. I am not going to argue with
you, however, but to grant you a wish.”

 Here I could not help interrupting her with the foolish speech,
of which, however, I had no cause to repent--

“How can such a very little creature as you grant or refuse anything?”

“Is that all the philosophy you have gained in one-and-twenty years?”
 said she. “Form is much, but size is nothing. It is a mere matter of
relation. I suppose your six-foot lordship does not feel altogether
insignificant, though to others you do look small beside your old Uncle
Ralph, who rises above you a great half-foot at least. But size is of so
little consequence with old me, that I may as well accommodate myself to
your foolish prejudices.”

So saying, she leapt from the desk upon the floor, where she stood a
tall, gracious lady, with pale face and large blue eyes. Her dark hair
flowed behind, wavy but uncurled, down to her waist, and against it her
form stood clear in its robe of white.

“Now,” said she, “you will believe me.”

Overcome with the presence of a beauty which I could now perceive, and
drawn towards her by an attraction irresistible as incomprehensible, I
suppose I stretched out my arms towards her, for she drew back a step or
two, and said--

“Foolish boy, if you could touch me, I should hurt you. Besides, I was
two hundred and thirty-seven years old, last Midsummer eve; and a man
must not fall in love with his grandmother, you know.”

“But you are not my grandmother,” said I.

“How do you know that?” she retorted. “I dare say you know something of
your great-grandfathers a good deal further back than that; but you know
very little about your great-grandmothers on either side. Now, to the
point. Your little sister was reading a fairy-tale to you last night.”

“She was.”

“When she had finished, she said, as she closed the book, ‘Is there a
fairy-country, brother?’ You replied with a sigh, ‘I suppose there is,
if one could find the way into it.’”

“I did; but I meant something quite different from what you seem to
think.”

“Never mind what I seem to think. You shall find the way into Fairy Land
to-morrow. Now look in my eyes.”

Eagerly I did so. They filled me with an unknown longing. I remembered
somehow that my mother died when I was a baby. I looked deeper and
deeper, till they spread around me like seas, and I sank in their
waters. I forgot all the rest, till I found myself at the window, whose
gloomy curtains were withdrawn, and where I stood gazing on a whole
heaven of stars, small and sparkling in the moonlight. Below lay a sea,
still as death and hoary in the moon, sweeping into bays and around
capes and islands, away, away, I knew not whither. Alas! it was no
sea, but a low bog burnished by the moon. “Surely there is such a sea
somewhere!” said I to myself. A low sweet voice beside me replied--

“In Fairy Land, Anodos.”

I turned, but saw no one. I closed the secretary, and went to my own
room, and to bed.

All this I recalled as I lay with half-closed eyes. I was soon to find
the truth of the lady’s promise, that this day I should discover the
road into Fairy Land.





CHAPTER II

     “‘Where is the stream?’ cried he, with tears. ‘Seest thou
     its not in blue waves above us?’ He looked up, and lo! the
     blue stream was flowing gently over their heads.”
      --NOVALIS, Heinrich von Ofterdingen.

While these strange events were passing through my mind, I suddenly, as
one awakes to the consciousness that the sea has been moaning by him for
hours, or that the storm has been howling about his window all night,
became aware of the sound of running water near me; and, looking out of
bed, I saw that a large green marble basin, in which I was wont to wash,
and which stood on a low pedestal of the same material in a corner of
my room, was overflowing like a spring; and that a stream of clear water
was running over the carpet, all the length of the room, finding its
outlet I knew not where. And, stranger still, where this carpet, which
I had myself designed to imitate a field of grass and daisies, bordered
the course of the little stream, the grass-blades and daisies seemed to
wave in a tiny breeze that followed the water’s flow; while under the
rivulet they bent and swayed with every motion of the changeful current,
as if they were about to dissolve with it, and, forsaking their fixed
form, become fluent as the waters.

My dressing-table was an old-fashioned piece of furniture of black
oak, with drawers all down the front. These were elaborately carved
in foliage, of which ivy formed the chief part. The nearer end of this
table remained just as it had been, but on the further end a singular
change had commenced. I happened to fix my eye on a little cluster of
ivy-leaves. The first of these was evidently the work of the carver; the
next looked curious; the third was unmistakable ivy; and just beyond it
a tendril of clematis had twined itself about the gilt handle of one of
the drawers. Hearing next a slight motion above me, I looked up, and saw
that the branches and leaves designed upon the curtains of my bed were
slightly in motion. Not knowing what change might follow next, I thought
it high time to get up; and, springing from the bed, my bare feet
alighted upon a cool green sward; and although I dressed in all haste,
I found myself completing my toilet under the boughs of a great
tree, whose top waved in the golden stream of the sunrise with many
interchanging lights, and with shadows of leaf and branch gliding over
leaf and branch, as the cool morning wind swung it to and fro, like a
sinking sea-wave.

After washing as well as I could in the clear stream, I rose and looked
around me. The tree under which I seemed to have lain all night was one
of the advanced guard of a dense forest, towards which the rivulet ran.
Faint traces of a footpath, much overgrown with grass and moss, and with
here and there a pimpernel even, were discernible along the right bank.
“This,” thought I, “must surely be the path into Fairy Land, which
the lady of last night promised I should so soon find.” I crossed the
rivulet, and accompanied it, keeping the footpath on its right bank,
until it led me, as I expected, into the wood. Here I left it, without
any good reason: and with a vague feeling that I ought to have followed
its course, I took a more southerly direction.





CHAPTER III

            “Man doth usurp all space,
             Stares thee, in rock, bush, river, in
                    the face.
             Never thine eyes behold a tree;
             ‘Tis no sea thou seest in the sea,
             ‘Tis but a disguised humanity.
             To avoid thy fellow, vain thy plan;
             All that interests a man, is man.”
                                         HENRY SUTTON.

The trees, which were far apart where I entered, giving free passage
to the level rays of the sun, closed rapidly as I advanced, so that ere
long their crowded stems barred the sunlight out, forming as it were a
thick grating between me and the East. I seemed to be advancing towards
a second midnight. In the midst of the intervening twilight, however,
before I entered what appeared to be the darkest portion of the forest,
I saw a country maiden coming towards me from its very depths. She did
not seem to observe me, for she was apparently intent upon a bunch of
wild flowers which she carried in her hand. I could hardly see her face;
for, though she came direct towards me, she never looked up. But when we
met, instead of passing, she turned and walked alongside of me for a few
yards, still keeping her face downwards, and busied with her flowers.
She spoke rapidly, however, all the time, in a low tone, as if talking
to herself, but evidently addressing the purport of her words to me.

She seemed afraid of being observed by some lurking foe. “Trust the
Oak,” said she; “trust the Oak, and the Elm, and the great Beech. Take
care of the Birch, for though she is honest, she is too young not to be
changeable. But shun the Ash and the Alder; for the Ash is an ogre,--you
will know him by his thick fingers; and the Alder will smother you with
her web of hair, if you let her near you at night.” All this was uttered
without pause or alteration of tone. Then she turned suddenly and left
me, walking still with the same unchanging gait. I could not conjecture
what she meant, but satisfied myself with thinking that it would be time
enough to find out her meaning when there was need to make use of her
warning, and that the occasion would reveal the admonition. I concluded
from the flowers that she carried, that the forest could not be
everywhere so dense as it appeared from where I was now walking; and I
was right in this conclusion. For soon I came to a more open part, and
by-and-by crossed a wide grassy glade, on which were several circles of
brighter green. But even here I was struck with the utter stillness. No
bird sang. No insect hummed. Not a living creature crossed my way. Yet
somehow the whole environment seemed only asleep, and to wear even in
sleep an air of expectation. The trees seemed all to have an expression
of conscious mystery, as if they said to themselves, “we could, an’ if
we would.” They had all a meaning look about them. Then I remembered
that night is the fairies’ day, and the moon their sun; and I
thought--Everything sleeps and dreams now: when the night comes, it will
be different. At the same time I, being a man and a child of the day,
felt some anxiety as to how I should fare among the elves and other
children of the night who wake when mortals dream, and find their common
life in those wondrous hours that flow noiselessly over the moveless
death-like forms of men and women and children, lying strewn and parted
beneath the weight of the heavy waves of night, which flow on and beat
them down, and hold them drowned and senseless, until the ebbtide comes,
and the waves sink away, back into the ocean of the dark. But I took
courage and went on. Soon, however, I became again anxious, though from
another cause. I had eaten nothing that day, and for an hour past had
been feeling the want of food. So I grew afraid lest I should find
nothing to meet my human necessities in this strange place; but once
more I comforted myself with hope and went on.

Before noon, I fancied I saw a thin blue smoke rising amongst the stems
of larger trees in front of me; and soon I came to an open spot of
ground in which stood a little cottage, so built that the stems of four
great trees formed its corners, while their branches met and intertwined
over its roof, heaping a great cloud of leaves over it, up towards the
heavens. I wondered at finding a human dwelling in this neighbourhood;
and yet it did not look altogether human, though sufficiently so to
encourage me to expect to find some sort of food. Seeing no door, I went
round to the other side, and there I found one, wide open. A woman sat
beside it, preparing some vegetables for dinner. This was homely and
comforting. As I came near, she looked up, and seeing me, showed no
surprise, but bent her head again over her work, and said in a low tone:

“Did you see my daughter?”

“I believe I did,” said I. “Can you give me something to eat, for I am
very hungry?” “With pleasure,” she replied, in the same tone; “but do
not say anything more, till you come into the house, for the Ash is
watching us.”

Having said this, she rose and led the way into the cottage; which, I
now saw, was built of the stems of small trees set closely together, and
was furnished with rough chairs and tables, from which even the bark had
not been removed. As soon as she had shut the door and set a chair--

“You have fairy blood in you,” said she, looking hard at me.

“How do you know that?”

“You could not have got so far into this wood if it were not so; and I
am trying to find out some trace of it in your countenance. I think I
see it.”

“What do you see?”

“Oh, never mind: I may be mistaken in that.”

“But how then do you come to live here?”

“Because I too have fairy blood in me.”

Here I, in my turn, looked hard at her, and thought I could perceive,
notwithstanding the coarseness of her features, and especially the
heaviness of her eyebrows, a something unusual--I could hardly call it
grace, and yet it was an expression that strangely contrasted with
the form of her features. I noticed too that her hands were delicately
formed, though brown with work and exposure.

“I should be ill,” she continued, “if I did not live on the borders of
the fairies’ country, and now and then eat of their food. And I see by
your eyes that you are not quite free of the same need; though, from
your education and the activity of your mind, you have felt it less than
I. You may be further removed too from the fairy race.”

I remembered what the lady had said about my grandmothers.

Here she placed some bread and some milk before me, with a kindly
apology for the homeliness of the fare, with which, however, I was in no
humour to quarrel. I now thought it time to try to get some explanation
of the strange words both of her daughter and herself.

“What did you mean by speaking so about the Ash?”

She rose and looked out of the little window. My eyes followed her; but
as the window was too small to allow anything to be seen from where I
was sitting, I rose and looked over her shoulder. I had just time to
see, across the open space, on the edge of the denser forest, a single
large ash-tree, whose foliage showed bluish, amidst the truer green of
the other trees around it; when she pushed me back with an expression
of impatience and terror, and then almost shut out the light from the
window by setting up a large old book in it.

“In general,” said she, recovering her composure, “there is no danger in
the daytime, for then he is sound asleep; but there is something unusual
going on in the woods; there must be some solemnity among the fairies
to-night, for all the trees are restless, and although they cannot come
awake, they see and hear in their sleep.”

“But what danger is to be dreaded from him?”

Instead of answering the question, she went again to the window and
looked out, saying she feared the fairies would be interrupted by foul
weather, for a storm was brewing in the west.

“And the sooner it grows dark, the sooner the Ash will be awake,” added
she.

I asked her how she knew that there was any unusual excitement in the
woods. She replied--

“Besides the look of the trees, the dog there is unhappy; and the eyes
and ears of the white rabbit are redder than usual, and he frisks about
as if he expected some fun. If the cat were at home, she would have
her back up; for the young fairies pull the sparks out of her tail with
bramble thorns, and she knows when they are coming. So do I, in another
way.”

 At this instant, a grey cat rushed in like a demon, and
disappeared in a hole in the wall.

“There, I told you!” said the woman.

 “But what of the ash-tree?” said I, returning once more to the
subject. Here, however, the young woman, whom I had met in the morning,
entered. A smile passed between the mother and daughter; and then the
latter began to help her mother in little household duties.

“I should like to stay here till the evening,” I said; “and then go on
my journey, if you will allow me.”

“You are welcome to do as you please; only it might be better to stay
all night, than risk the dangers of the wood then. Where are you going?”

“Nay, that I do not know,” I replied, “but I wish to see all that is to
be seen, and therefore I should like to start just at sundown.” “You are
a bold youth, if you have any idea of what you are daring; but a rash
one, if you know nothing about it; and, excuse me, you do not seem very
well informed about the country and its manners. However, no one comes
here but for some reason, either known to himself or to those who have
charge of him; so you shall do just as you wish.”

Accordingly I sat down, and feeling rather tired, and disinclined for
further talk, I asked leave to look at the old book which still screened
the window. The woman brought it to me directly, but not before taking
another look towards the forest, and then drawing a white blind over
the window. I sat down opposite to it by the table, on which I laid the
great old volume, and read. It contained many wondrous tales of Fairy
Land, and olden times, and the Knights of King Arthur’s table. I read
on and on, till the shades of the afternoon began to deepen; for in
the midst of the forest it gloomed earlier than in the open country. At
length I came to this passage--

“Here it chanced, that upon their quest, Sir Galahad and Sir Percivale
rencountered in the depths of a great forest. Now, Sir Galahad was dight
all in harness of silver, clear and shining; the which is a delight
to look upon, but full hasty to tarnish, and withouten the labour of a
ready squire, uneath to be kept fair and clean. And yet withouten squire
or page, Sir Galahad’s armour shone like the moon. And he rode a great
white mare, whose bases and other housings were black, but all besprent
with fair lilys of silver sheen. Whereas Sir Percivale bestrode a red
horse, with a tawny mane and tail; whose trappings were all to-smirched
with mud and mire; and his armour was wondrous rosty to behold, ne could
he by any art furbish it again; so that as the sun in his going down
shone twixt the bare trunks of the trees, full upon the knights twain,
the one did seem all shining with light, and the other all to glow with
ruddy fire. Now it came about in this wise. For Sir Percivale, after his
escape from the demon lady, whenas the cross on the handle of his sword
smote him to the heart, and he rove himself through the thigh, and
escaped away, he came to a great wood; and, in nowise cured of his
fault, yet bemoaning the same, the damosel of the alder tree encountered
him, right fair to see; and with her fair words and false countenance
she comforted him and beguiled him, until he followed her where she led
him to a---”

Here a low hurried cry from my hostess caused me to look up from the
book, and I read no more.

“Look there!” she said; “look at his fingers!”

Just as I had been reading in the book, the setting sun was shining
through a cleft in the clouds piled up in the west; and a shadow as of a
large distorted hand, with thick knobs and humps on the fingers, so that
it was much wider across the fingers than across the undivided part
of the hand, passed slowly over the little blind, and then as slowly
returned in the opposite direction.

“He is almost awake, mother; and greedier than usual to-night.”

“Hush, child; you need not make him more angry with us than he is; for
you do not know how soon something may happen to oblige us to be in the
forest after nightfall.”

“But you are in the forest,” said I; “how is it that you are safe here?”

“He dares not come nearer than he is now,” she replied; “for any of
those four oaks, at the corners of our cottage, would tear him to
pieces; they are our friends. But he stands there and makes awful faces
at us sometimes, and stretches out his long arms and fingers, and tries
to kill us with fright; for, indeed, that is his favourite way of doing.
Pray, keep out of his way to-night.”

“Shall I be able to see these things?” said I.

“That I cannot tell yet, not knowing how much of the fairy nature there
is in you. But we shall soon see whether you can discern the fairies in
my little garden, and that will be some guide to us.”

“Are the trees fairies too, as well as the flowers?” I asked.

“They are of the same race,” she replied; “though those you call fairies
in your country are chiefly the young children of the flower fairies.
They are very fond of having fun with the thick people, as they call
you; for, like most children, they like fun better than anything else.”

“Why do you have flowers so near you then? Do they not annoy you?”

“Oh, no, they are very amusing, with their mimicries of grown people,
and mock solemnities. Sometimes they will act a whole play through
before my eyes, with perfect composure and assurance, for they are not
afraid of me. Only, as soon as they have done, they burst into peals
of tiny laughter, as if it was such a joke to have been serious over
anything. These I speak of, however, are the fairies of the garden.
They are more staid and educated than those of the fields and woods.
Of course they have near relations amongst the wild flowers, but they
patronise them, and treat them as country cousins, who know nothing
of life, and very little of manners. Now and then, however, they are
compelled to envy the grace and simplicity of the natural flowers.”

“Do they live IN the flowers?” I said.

“I cannot tell,” she replied. “There is something in it I do not
understand. Sometimes they disappear altogether, even from me, though
I know they are near. They seem to die always with the flowers they
resemble, and by whose names they are called; but whether they return to
life with the fresh flowers, or, whether it be new flowers, new fairies,
I cannot tell. They have as many sorts of dispositions as men and women,
while their moods are yet more variable; twenty different expressions
will cross their little faces in half a minute. I often amuse myself
with watching them, but I have never been able to make personal
acquaintance with any of them. If I speak to one, he or she looks up in
my face, as if I were not worth heeding, gives a little laugh, and runs
away.” Here the woman started, as if suddenly recollecting herself, and
said in a low voice to her daughter, “Make haste--go and watch him, and
see in what direction he goes.”

I may as well mention here, that the conclusion I arrived at from the
observations I was afterwards able to make, was, that the flowers die
because the fairies go away; not that the fairies disappear because
the flowers die. The flowers seem a sort of houses for them, or outer
bodies, which they can put on or off when they please. Just as you could
form some idea of the nature of a man from the kind of house he built,
if he followed his own taste, so you could, without seeing the fairies,
tell what any one of them is like, by looking at the flower till you
feel that you understand it. For just what the flower says to you, would
the face and form of the fairy say; only so much more plainly as a face
and human figure can express more than a flower. For the house or the
clothes, though like the inhabitant or the wearer, cannot be wrought
into an equal power of utterance. Yet you would see a strange
resemblance, almost oneness, between the flower and the fairy, which you
could not describe, but which described itself to you. Whether all the
flowers have fairies, I cannot determine, any more than I can be sure
whether all men and women have souls.

The woman and I continued the conversation for a few minutes longer. I
was much interested by the information she gave me, and astonished
at the language in which she was able to convey it. It seemed that
intercourse with the fairies was no bad education in itself. But now the
daughter returned with the news, that the Ash had just gone away in a
south-westerly direction; and, as my course seemed to lie eastward, she
hoped I should be in no danger of meeting him if I departed at once.
I looked out of the little window, and there stood the ash-tree, to my
eyes the same as before; but I believed that they knew better than I
did, and prepared to go. I pulled out my purse, but to my dismay there
was nothing in it. The woman with a smile begged me not to trouble
myself, for money was not of the slightest use there; and as I might
meet with people in my journeys whom I could not recognise to be
fairies, it was well I had no money to offer, for nothing offended them
so much.

“They would think,” she added, “that you were making game of them; and
that is their peculiar privilege with regard to us.” So we went together
into the little garden which sloped down towards a lower part of the
wood.

Here, to my great pleasure, all was life and bustle. There was still
light enough from the day to see a little; and the pale half-moon,
halfway to the zenith, was reviving every moment. The whole garden
was like a carnival, with tiny, gaily decorated forms, in groups,
assemblies, processions, pairs or trios, moving stately on, running
about wildly, or sauntering hither or thither. From the cups or bells of
tall flowers, as from balconies, some looked down on the masses below,
now bursting with laughter, now grave as owls; but even in their deepest
solemnity, seeming only to be waiting for the arrival of the next laugh.
Some were launched on a little marshy stream at the bottom, in boats
chosen from the heaps of last year’s leaves that lay about, curled and
withered. These soon sank with them; whereupon they swam ashore and got
others. Those who took fresh rose-leaves for their boats floated the
longest; but for these they had to fight; for the fairy of the rose-tree
complained bitterly that they were stealing her clothes, and defended
her property bravely.

“You can’t wear half you’ve got,” said some.

“Never you mind; I don’t choose you to have them: they are my property.”

“All for the good of the community!” said one, and ran off with a great
hollow leaf. But the rose-fairy sprang after him (what a beauty she was!
only too like a drawing-room young lady), knocked him heels-over-head as
he ran, and recovered her great red leaf. But in the meantime twenty had
hurried off in different directions with others just as good; and the
little creature sat down and cried, and then, in a pet, sent a perfect
pink snowstorm of petals from her tree, leaping from branch to branch,
and stamping and shaking and pulling. At last, after another good cry,
she chose the biggest she could find, and ran away laughing, to launch
her boat amongst the rest.

But my attention was first and chiefly attracted by a group of fairies
near the cottage, who were talking together around what seemed a
last dying primrose. They talked singing, and their talk made a song,
something like this:



    “Sister Snowdrop died
        Before we were born.”
     “She came like a bride
        In a snowy morn.”
     “What’s a bride?”
         “What is snow?
    “Never tried.”
         “Do not know.”
     “Who told you about her?”
         “Little Primrose there
    Cannot do without her.”
         “Oh, so sweetly fair!”
     “Never fear,
        She will come,
    Primrose dear.”
         “Is she dumb?”

    “She’ll come by-and-by.”
         “You will never see her.”
     “She went home to dies,
        “Till the new year.”
     “Snowdrop!”  “‘Tis no good
        To invite her.”
     “Primrose is very rude,
        “I will bite her.”

    “Oh, you naughty Pocket!
        “Look, she drops her head.”
     “She deserved it, Rocket,
        “And she was nearly dead.”
     “To your hammock--off with you!”
         “And swing alone.”
     “No one will laugh with you.”
         “No, not one.”

    “Now let us moan.”
         “And cover her o’er.”
     “Primrose is gone.”
         “All but the flower.”
     “Here is a leaf.”
         “Lay her upon it.”
     “Follow in grief.”
         “Pocket has done it.”

    “Deeper, poor creature!
        Winter may come.”
     “He cannot reach her--
        That is a hum.”
     “She is buried, the beauty!”
         “Now she is done.”
     “That was the duty.”
         “Now for the fun.”


And with a wild laugh they sprang away, most of them towards the
cottage. During the latter part of the song-talk, they had formed
themselves into a funeral procession, two of them bearing poor Primrose,
whose death Pocket had hastened by biting her stalk, upon one of her
own great leaves. They bore her solemnly along some distance, and
then buried her under a tree. Although I say HER I saw nothing but
the withered primrose-flower on its long stalk. Pocket, who had been
expelled from the company by common consent, went sulkily away towards
her hammock, for she was the fairy of the calceolaria, and looked rather
wicked. When she reached its stem, she stopped and looked round. I could
not help speaking to her, for I stood near her. I said, “Pocket, how
could you be so naughty?”

“I am never naughty,” she said, half-crossly, half-defiantly; “only if
you come near my hammock, I will bite you, and then you will go away.”

“Why did you bite poor Primrose?”

“Because she said we should never see Snowdrop; as if we were not good
enough to look at her, and she was, the proud thing!--served her right!”

“Oh, Pocket, Pocket,” said I; but by this time the party which had
gone towards the house, rushed out again, shouting and screaming with
laughter. Half of them were on the cat’s back, and half held on by her
fur and tail, or ran beside her; till, more coming to their help, the
furious cat was held fast; and they proceeded to pick the sparks out
of her with thorns and pins, which they handled like harpoons. Indeed,
there were more instruments at work about her than there could have
been sparks in her. One little fellow who held on hard by the tip of
the tail, with his feet planted on the ground at an angle of forty-five
degrees, helping to keep her fast, administered a continuous flow of
admonitions to Pussy.

“Now, Pussy, be patient. You know quite well it is all for your good.
You cannot be comfortable with all those sparks in you; and, indeed, I
am charitably disposed to believe” (here he became very pompous) “that
they are the cause of all your bad temper; so we must have them all out,
every one; else we shall be reduced to the painful necessity of cutting
your claws, and pulling out your eye-teeth. Quiet! Pussy, quiet!”

But with a perfect hurricane of feline curses, the poor animal broke
loose, and dashed across the garden and through the hedge, faster than
even the fairies could follow. “Never mind, never mind, we shall find
her again; and by that time she will have laid in a fresh stock of
sparks. Hooray!” And off they set, after some new mischief.

But I will not linger to enlarge on the amusing display of these
frolicsome creatures. Their manners and habits are now so well known to
the world, having been so often described by eyewitnesses, that it would
be only indulging self-conceit, to add my account in full to the rest.
I cannot help wishing, however, that my readers could see them for
themselves. Especially do I desire that they should see the fairy of the
daisy; a little, chubby, round-eyed child, with such innocent trust in
his look! Even the most mischievous of the fairies would not tease him,
although he did not belong to their set at all, but was quite a little
country bumpkin. He wandered about alone, and looked at everything, with
his hands in his little pockets, and a white night-cap on, the darling!
He was not so beautiful as many other wild flowers I saw afterwards, but
so dear and loving in his looks and little confident ways.





CHAPTER IV

        “When bale is att hyest, boote is nyest.”
                                 Ballad of Sir Aldingar.

By this time, my hostess was quite anxious that I should be gone. So,
with warm thanks for their hospitality, I took my leave, and went my way
through the little garden towards the forest. Some of the garden flowers
had wandered into the wood, and were growing here and there along
the path, but the trees soon became too thick and shadowy for them. I
particularly noticed some tall lilies, which grew on both sides of
the way, with large dazzlingly white flowers, set off by the universal
green. It was now dark enough for me to see that every flower was
shining with a light of its own. Indeed it was by this light that I
saw them, an internal, peculiar light, proceeding from each, and not
reflected from a common source of light as in the daytime. This light
sufficed only for the plant itself, and was not strong enough to cast
any but the faintest shadows around it, or to illuminate any of the
neighbouring objects with other than the faintest tinge of its own
individual hue. From the lilies above mentioned, from the campanulas,
from the foxgloves, and every bell-shaped flower, curious little figures
shot up their heads, peeped at me, and drew back. They seemed to inhabit
them, as snails their shells but I was sure some of them were intruders,
and belonged to the gnomes or goblin-fairies, who inhabit the ground
and earthy creeping plants. From the cups of Arum lilies, creatures with
great heads and grotesque faces shot up like Jack-in-the-box, and made
grimaces at me; or rose slowly and slily over the edge of the cup,
and spouted water at me, slipping suddenly back, like those little
soldier-crabs that inhabit the shells of sea-snails. Passing a row of
tall thistles, I saw them crowded with little faces, which peeped every
one from behind its flower, and drew back as quickly; and I heard them
saying to each other, evidently intending me to hear, but the speaker
always hiding behind his tuft, when I looked in his direction, “Look at
him! Look at him! He has begun a story without a beginning, and it will
never have any end. He! he! he! Look at him!”

But as I went further into the wood, these sights and sounds became
fewer, giving way to others of a different character. A little forest
of wild hyacinths was alive with exquisite creatures, who stood nearly
motionless, with drooping necks, holding each by the stem of her flower,
and swaying gently with it, whenever a low breath of wind swung the
crowded floral belfry. In like manner, though differing of course
in form and meaning, stood a group of harebells, like little angels
waiting, ready, till they were wanted to go on some yet unknown message.
In darker nooks, by the mossy roots of the trees, or in little tufts
of grass, each dwelling in a globe of its own green light, weaving a
network of grass and its shadows, glowed the glowworms.

They were just like the glowworms of our own land, for they are fairies
everywhere; worms in the day, and glowworms at night, when their own can
appear, and they can be themselves to others as well as themselves.
But they had their enemies here. For I saw great strong-armed beetles,
hurrying about with most unwieldy haste, awkward as elephant-calves,
looking apparently for glowworms; for the moment a beetle espied one,
through what to it was a forest of grass, or an underwood of moss, it
pounced upon it, and bore it away, in spite of its feeble resistance.
Wondering what their object could be, I watched one of the beetles,
and then I discovered a thing I could not account for. But it is no use
trying to account for things in Fairy Land; and one who travels there
soon learns to forget the very idea of doing so, and takes everything as
it comes; like a child, who, being in a chronic condition of wonder, is
surprised at nothing. What I saw was this. Everywhere, here and there
over the ground, lay little, dark-looking lumps of something more like
earth than anything else, and about the size of a chestnut. The beetles
hunted in couples for these; and having found one, one of them stayed
to watch it, while the other hurried to find a glowworm. By signals, I
presume, between them, the latter soon found his companion again: they
then took the glowworm and held its luminous tail to the dark earthly
pellet; when lo, it shot up into the air like a sky-rocket, seldom,
however, reaching the height of the highest tree. Just like a rocket
too, it burst in the air, and fell in a shower of the most gorgeously
coloured sparks of every variety of hue; golden and red, and purple and
green, and blue and rosy fires crossed and inter-crossed each other,
beneath the shadowy heads, and between the columnar stems of the forest
trees. They never used the same glowworm twice, I observed; but let him
go, apparently uninjured by the use they had made of him.

In other parts, the whole of the immediately surrounding foliage was
illuminated by the interwoven dances in the air of splendidly coloured
fire-flies, which sped hither and thither, turned, twisted, crossed, and
recrossed, entwining every complexity of intervolved motion. Here and
there, whole mighty trees glowed with an emitted phosphorescent light.
You could trace the very course of the great roots in the earth by the
faint light that came through; and every twig, and every vein on every
leaf was a streak of pale fire.

All this time, as I went through the wood, I was haunted with the
feeling that other shapes, more like my own size and mien, were moving
about at a little distance on all sides of me. But as yet I could
discern none of them, although the moon was high enough to send a great
many of her rays down between the trees, and these rays were unusually
bright, and sight-giving, notwithstanding she was only a half-moon. I
constantly imagined, however, that forms were visible in all directions
except that to which my gaze was turned; and that they only became
invisible, or resolved themselves into other woodland shapes, the moment
my looks were directed towards them. However this may have been, except
for this feeling of presence, the woods seemed utterly bare of anything
like human companionship, although my glance often fell on some object
which I fancied to be a human form; for I soon found that I was quite
deceived; as, the moment I fixed my regard on it, it showed plainly that
it was a bush, or a tree, or a rock.

Soon a vague sense of discomfort possessed me. With variations of
relief, this gradually increased; as if some evil thing were wandering
about in my neighbourhood, sometimes nearer and sometimes further off,
but still approaching. The feeling continued and deepened, until all my
pleasure in the shows of various kinds that everywhere betokened the
presence of the merry fairies vanished by degrees, and left me full
of anxiety and fear, which I was unable to associate with any definite
object whatever. At length the thought crossed my mind with horror: “Can
it be possible that the Ash is looking for me? or that, in his nightly
wanderings, his path is gradually verging towards mine?” I comforted
myself, however, by remembering that he had started quite in another
direction; one that would lead him, if he kept it, far apart from me;
especially as, for the last two or three hours, I had been diligently
journeying eastward. I kept on my way, therefore, striving by direct
effort of the will against the encroaching fear; and to this end
occupying my mind, as much as I could, with other thoughts. I was so far
successful that, although I was conscious, if I yielded for a moment, I
should be almost overwhelmed with horror, I was yet able to walk right
on for an hour or more. What I feared I could not tell. Indeed, I was
left in a state of the vaguest uncertainty as regarded the nature of my
enemy, and knew not the mode or object of his attacks; for, somehow or
other, none of my questions had succeeded in drawing a definite answer
from the dame in the cottage. How then to defend myself I knew not; nor
even by what sign I might with certainty recognise the presence of my
foe; for as yet this vague though powerful fear was all the indication
of danger I had. To add to my distress, the clouds in the west had risen
nearly to the top of the skies, and they and the moon were travelling
slowly towards each other. Indeed, some of their advanced guard had
already met her, and she had begun to wade through a filmy vapour that
gradually deepened.

At length she was for a moment almost entirely obscured. When she shone
out again, with a brilliancy increased by the contrast, I saw plainly
on the path before me--from around which at this spot the trees receded,
leaving a small space of green sward--the shadow of a large hand, with
knotty joints and protuberances here and there. Especially I remarked,
even in the midst of my fear, the bulbous points of the fingers. I
looked hurriedly all around, but could see nothing from which such
a shadow should fall. Now, however, that I had a direction, however
undetermined, in which to project my apprehension, the very sense of
danger and need of action overcame that stifling which is the worst
property of fear. I reflected in a moment, that if this were indeed a
shadow, it was useless to look for the object that cast it in any other
direction than between the shadow and the moon. I looked, and peered,
and intensified my vision, all to no purpose. I could see nothing of
that kind, not even an ash-tree in the neighbourhood. Still the shadow
remained; not steady, but moving to and fro, and once I saw the fingers
close, and grind themselves close, like the claws of a wild animal, as
if in uncontrollable longing for some anticipated prey. There seemed
but one mode left of discovering the substance of this shadow. I went
forward boldly, though with an inward shudder which I would not heed, to
the spot where the shadow lay, threw myself on the ground, laid my head
within the form of the hand, and turned my eyes towards the moon Good
heavens! what did I see? I wonder that ever I arose, and that the very
shadow of the hand did not hold me where I lay until fear had frozen my
brain. I saw the strangest figure; vague, shadowy, almost transparent,
in the central parts, and gradually deepening in substance towards the
outside, until it ended in extremities capable of casting such a shadow
as fell from the hand, through the awful fingers of which I now saw the
moon. The hand was uplifted in the attitude of a paw about to strike
its prey. But the face, which throbbed with fluctuating and pulsatory
visibility--not from changes in the light it reflected, but from changes
in its own conditions of reflecting power, the alterations being from
within, not from without--it was horrible. I do not know how to describe
it. It caused a new sensation. Just as one cannot translate a horrible
odour, or a ghastly pain, or a fearful sound, into words, so I cannot
describe this new form of awful hideousness. I can only try to describe
something that is not it, but seems somewhat parallel to it; or at least
is suggested by it. It reminded me of what I had heard of vampires; for
the face resembled that of a corpse more than anything else I can
think of; especially when I can conceive such a face in motion, but
not suggesting any life as the source of the motion. The features were
rather handsome than otherwise, except the mouth, which had scarcely a
curve in it. The lips were of equal thickness; but the thickness was
not at all remarkable, even although they looked slightly swollen. They
seemed fixedly open, but were not wide apart. Of course I did not REMARK
these lineaments at the time: I was too horrified for that. I noted them
afterwards, when the form returned on my inward sight with a vividness
too intense to admit of my doubting the accuracy of the reflex. But the
most awful of the features were the eyes. These were alive, yet not with
life.

They seemed lighted up with an infinite greed. A gnawing voracity, which
devoured the devourer, seemed to be the indwelling and propelling power
of the whole ghostly apparition. I lay for a few moments simply imbruted
with terror; when another cloud, obscuring the moon, delivered me from
the immediately paralysing effects of the presence to the vision of the
object of horror, while it added the force of imagination to the power
of fear within me; inasmuch as, knowing far worse cause for apprehension
than before, I remained equally ignorant from what I had to defend
myself, or how to take any precautions: he might be upon me in the
darkness any moment. I sprang to my feet, and sped I knew not whither,
only away from the spectre. I thought no longer of the path, and often
narrowly escaped dashing myself against a tree, in my headlong flight of
fear.

Great drops of rain began to patter on the leaves. Thunder began to
mutter, then growl in the distance. I ran on. The rain fell heavier. At
length the thick leaves could hold it up no longer; and, like a second
firmament, they poured their torrents on the earth. I was soon drenched,
but that was nothing. I came to a small swollen stream that rushed
through the woods. I had a vague hope that if I crossed this stream, I
should be in safety from my pursuer; but I soon found that my hope was
as false as it was vague. I dashed across the stream, ascended a rising
ground, and reached a more open space, where stood only great trees.
Through them I directed my way, holding eastward as nearly as I could
guess, but not at all certain that I was not moving in an opposite
direction. My mind was just reviving a little from its extreme terror,
when, suddenly, a flash of lightning, or rather a cataract of successive
flashes, behind me, seemed to throw on the ground in front of me, but
far more faintly than before, from the extent of the source of the
light, the shadow of the same horrible hand. I sprang forward, stung
to yet wilder speed; but had not run many steps before my foot slipped,
and, vainly attempting to recover myself, I fell at the foot of one
of the large trees. Half-stunned, I yet raised myself, and almost
involuntarily looked back. All I saw was the hand within three feet
of my face. But, at the same moment, I felt two large soft arms thrown
round me from behind; and a voice like a woman’s said: “Do not fear the
goblin; he dares not hurt you now.” With that, the hand was suddenly
withdrawn as from a fire, and disappeared in the darkness and the rain.
Overcome with the mingling of terror and joy, I lay for some time almost
insensible. The first thing I remember is the sound of a voice above me,
full and low, and strangely reminding me of the sound of a gentle wind
amidst the leaves of a great tree. It murmured over and over again:
“I may love him, I may love him; for he is a man, and I am only a
beech-tree.” I found I was seated on the ground, leaning against a human
form, and supported still by the arms around me, which I knew to be
those of a woman who must be rather above the human size, and largely
proportioned. I turned my head, but without moving otherwise, for I
feared lest the arms should untwine themselves; and clear, somewhat
mournful eyes met mine. At least that is how they impressed me; but I
could see very little of colour or outline as we sat in the dark and
rainy shadow of the tree. The face seemed very lovely, and solemn from
its stillness; with the aspect of one who is quite content, but waiting
for something. I saw my conjecture from her arms was correct: she was
above the human scale throughout, but not greatly.

“Why do you call yourself a beech-tree?” I said.

“Because I am one,” she replied, in the same low, musical, murmuring
voice.

“You are a woman,” I returned.

“Do you think so? Am I very like a woman then?”

“You are a very beautiful woman. Is it possible you should not know it?”

“I am very glad you think so. I fancy I feel like a woman sometimes. I
do so to-night--and always when the rain drips from my hair. For there
is an old prophecy in our woods that one day we shall all be men and
women like you. Do you know anything about it in your region? Shall I
be very happy when I am a woman? I fear not, for it is always in nights
like these that I feel like one. But I long to be a woman for all that.”

I had let her talk on, for her voice was like a solution of all musical
sounds. I now told her that I could hardly say whether women were happy
or not. I knew one who had not been happy; and for my part, I had often
longed for Fairy Land, as she now longed for the world of men. But then
neither of us had lived long, and perhaps people grew happier as they
grew older. Only I doubted it.

I could not help sighing. She felt the sigh, for her arms were still
round me. She asked me how old I was.

“Twenty-one,” said I.

“Why, you baby!” said she, and kissed me with the sweetest kiss of winds
and odours. There was a cool faithfulness in the kiss that revived my
heart wonderfully. I felt that I feared the dreadful Ash no more.

“What did the horrible Ash want with me?” I said.

“I am not quite sure, but I think he wants to bury you at the foot of
his tree. But he shall not touch you, my child.”

“Are all the ash-trees as dreadful as he?”

“Oh, no. They are all disagreeable selfish creatures--(what horrid men
they will make, if it be true!)--but this one has a hole in his heart
that nobody knows of but one or two; and he is always trying to fill it
up, but he cannot. That must be what he wanted you for. I wonder if he
will ever be a man. If he is, I hope they will kill him.”

“How kind of you to save me from him!”

“I will take care that he shall not come near you again. But there are
some in the wood more like me, from whom, alas! I cannot protect you.
Only if you see any of them very beautiful, try to walk round them.”

“What then?”

“I cannot tell you more. But now I must tie some of my hair about you,
and then the Ash will not touch you. Here, cut some off. You men have
strange cutting things about you.”

She shook her long hair loose over me, never moving her arms.

“I cannot cut your beautiful hair. It would be a shame.”

“Not cut my hair! It will have grown long enough before any is wanted
again in this wild forest. Perhaps it may never be of any use again--not
till I am a woman.” And she sighed.

As gently as I could, I cut with a knife a long tress of flowing, dark
hair, she hanging her beautiful head over me. When I had finished, she
shuddered and breathed deep, as one does when an acute pain, steadfastly
endured without sign of suffering, is at length relaxed. She then took
the hair and tied it round me, singing a strange, sweet song, which I
could not understand, but which left in me a feeling like this--

            “I saw thee ne’er before;
             I see thee never more;
             But love, and help, and pain, beautiful one,
             Have made thee mine, till all my years are done.”

I cannot put more of it into words. She closed her arms about me again,
and went on singing. The rain in the leaves, and a light wind that had
arisen, kept her song company. I was wrapt in a trance of still delight.
It told me the secret of the woods, and the flowers, and the birds. At
one time I felt as if I was wandering in childhood through sunny spring
forests, over carpets of primroses, anemones, and little white starry
things--I had almost said creatures, and finding new wonderful flowers
at every turn. At another, I lay half dreaming in the hot summer noon,
with a book of old tales beside me, beneath a great beech; or, in
autumn, grew sad because I trod on the leaves that had sheltered me,
and received their last blessing in the sweet odours of decay; or, in
a winter evening, frozen still, looked up, as I went home to a warm
fireside, through the netted boughs and twigs to the cold, snowy moon,
with her opal zone around her. At last I had fallen asleep; for I
know nothing more that passed till I found myself lying under a superb
beech-tree, in the clear light of the morning, just before sunrise.
Around me was a girdle of fresh beech-leaves. Alas! I brought nothing
with me out of Fairy Land, but memories--memories. The great boughs of
the beech hung drooping around me. At my head rose its smooth stem, with
its great sweeps of curving surface that swelled like undeveloped limbs.
The leaves and branches above kept on the song which had sung me asleep;
only now, to my mind, it sounded like a farewell and a speedwell. I sat
a long time, unwilling to go; but my unfinished story urged me on. I
must act and wander. With the sun well risen, I rose, and put my arms as
far as they would reach around the beech-tree, and kissed it, and said
good-bye. A trembling went through the leaves; a few of the last drops
of the night’s rain fell from off them at my feet; and as I walked
slowly away, I seemed to hear in a whisper once more the words: “I may
love him, I may love him; for he is a man, and I am only a beech-tree.”





CHAPTER V

        “And she was smooth and full, as if one gush
         Of life had washed her, or as if a sleep
         Lay on her eyelid, easier to sweep
         Than bee from daisy.”
                                 BEDDOIS’ Pygmalion.

        “Sche was as whyt as lylye yn May,
         Or snow that sneweth yn wynterys day.”
                              Romance of Sir Launfal.


I walked on, in the fresh morning air, as if new-born. The only thing
that damped my pleasure was a cloud of something between sorrow and
delight that crossed my mind with the frequently returning thought of my
last night’s hostess. “But then,” thought I, “if she is sorry, I could
not help it; and she has all the pleasures she ever had. Such a day as
this is surely a joy to her, as much at least as to me. And her life
will perhaps be the richer, for holding now within it the memory of what
came, but could not stay. And if ever she is a woman, who knows but
we may meet somewhere? there is plenty of room for meeting in the
universe.” Comforting myself thus, yet with a vague compunction, as if
I ought not to have left her, I went on. There was little to distinguish
the woods to-day from those of my own land; except that all the wild
things, rabbits, birds, squirrels, mice, and the numberless other
inhabitants, were very tame; that is, they did not run away from me, but
gazed at me as I passed, frequently coming nearer, as if to examine
me more closely. Whether this came from utter ignorance, or from
familiarity with the human appearance of beings who never hurt them, I
could not tell. As I stood once, looking up to the splendid flower of
a parasite, which hung from the branch of a tree over my head, a large
white rabbit cantered slowly up, put one of its little feet on one of
mine, and looked up at me with its red eyes, just as I had been
looking up at the flower above me. I stooped and stroked it; but when
I attempted to lift it, it banged the ground with its hind feet and
scampered off at a great rate, turning, however, to look at me several
times before I lost sight of it. Now and then, too, a dim human figure
would appear and disappear, at some distance, amongst the trees, moving
like a sleep-walker. But no one ever came near me.

This day I found plenty of food in the forest--strange nuts and fruits
I had never seen before. I hesitated to eat them; but argued that, if
I could live on the air of Fairy Land, I could live on its food also. I
found my reasoning correct, and the result was better than I had hoped;
for it not only satisfied my hunger, but operated in such a way upon my
senses that I was brought into far more complete relationship with the
things around me. The human forms appeared much more dense and defined;
more tangibly visible, if I may say so. I seemed to know better which
direction to choose when any doubt arose. I began to feel in some degree
what the birds meant in their songs, though I could not express it in
words, any more than you can some landscapes. At times, to my surprise,
I found myself listening attentively, and as if it were no unusual
thing with me, to a conversation between two squirrels or monkeys.
The subjects were not very interesting, except as associated with the
individual life and necessities of the little creatures: where the best
nuts were to be found in the neighbourhood, and who could crack them
best, or who had most laid up for the winter, and such like; only they
never said where the store was. There was no great difference in kind
between their talk and our ordinary human conversation. Some of the
creatures I never heard speak at all, and believe they never do so,
except under the impulse of some great excitement. The mice talked; but
the hedgehogs seemed very phlegmatic; and though I met a couple of moles
above ground several times, they never said a word to each other in my
hearing. There were no wild beasts in the forest; at least, I did not
see one larger than a wild cat. There were plenty of snakes, however,
and I do not think they were all harmless; but none ever bit me.

Soon after mid-day I arrived at a bare rocky hill, of no great size, but
very steep; and having no trees--scarcely even a bush--upon it, entirely
exposed to the heat of the sun. Over this my way seemed to lie, and
I immediately began the ascent. On reaching the top, hot and weary, I
looked around me, and saw that the forest still stretched as far as the
sight could reach on every side of me. I observed that the trees, in the
direction in which I was about to descend, did not come so near the
foot of the hill as on the other side, and was especially regretting the
unexpected postponement of shelter, because this side of the hill seemed
more difficult to descend than the other had been to climb, when my eye
caught the appearance of a natural path, winding down through broken
rocks and along the course of a tiny stream, which I hoped would lead
me more easily to the foot. I tried it, and found the descent not at all
laborious; nevertheless, when I reached the bottom, I was very tired and
exhausted with the heat. But just where the path seemed to end, rose
a great rock, quite overgrown with shrubs and creeping plants, some of
them in full and splendid blossom: these almost concealed an opening in
the rock, into which the path appeared to lead. I entered, thirsting for
the shade which it promised. What was my delight to find a rocky
cell, all the angles rounded away with rich moss, and every ledge and
projection crowded with lovely ferns, the variety of whose forms, and
groupings, and shades wrought in me like a poem; for such a harmony
could not exist, except they all consented to some one end! A little
well of the clearest water filled a mossy hollow in one corner. I drank,
and felt as if I knew what the elixir of life must be; then threw myself
on a mossy mound that lay like a couch along the inner end. Here I lay
in a delicious reverie for some time; during which all lovely forms, and
colours, and sounds seemed to use my brain as a common hall, where they
could come and go, unbidden and unexcused. I had never imagined that
such capacity for simple happiness lay in me, as was now awakened by
this assembly of forms and spiritual sensations, which yet were far too
vague to admit of being translated into any shape common to my own and
another mind. I had lain for an hour, I should suppose, though it may
have been far longer, when, the harmonious tumult in my mind having
somewhat relaxed, I became aware that my eyes were fixed on a strange,
time-worn bas-relief on the rock opposite to me. This, after some
pondering, I concluded to represent Pygmalion, as he awaited the
quickening of his statue. The sculptor sat more rigid than the figure to
which his eyes were turned. That seemed about to step from its pedestal
and embrace the man, who waited rather than expected.

“A lovely story,” I said to myself. “This cave, now, with the bushes cut
away from the entrance to let the light in, might be such a place as he
would choose, withdrawn from the notice of men, to set up his block of
marble, and mould into a visible body the thought already clothed with
form in the unseen hall of the sculptor’s brain. And, indeed, if I
mistake not,” I said, starting up, as a sudden ray of light arrived
at that moment through a crevice in the roof, and lighted up a small
portion of the rock, bare of vegetation, “this very rock is marble,
white enough and delicate enough for any statue, even if destined to
become an ideal woman in the arms of the sculptor.”

I took my knife and removed the moss from a part of the block on which
I had been lying; when, to my surprise, I found it more like alabaster
than ordinary marble, and soft to the edge of the knife. In fact, it
was alabaster. By an inexplicable, though by no means unusual kind of
impulse, I went on removing the moss from the surface of the stone;
and soon saw that it was polished, or at least smooth, throughout. I
continued my labour; and after clearing a space of about a couple of
square feet, I observed what caused me to prosecute the work with more
interest and care than before. For the ray of sunlight had now reached
the spot I had cleared, and under its lustre the alabaster revealed
its usual slight transparency when polished, except where my knife had
scratched the surface; and I observed that the transparency seemed to
have a definite limit, and to end upon an opaque body like the more
solid, white marble. I was careful to scratch no more. And first, a
vague anticipation gave way to a startling sense of possibility; then,
as I proceeded, one revelation after another produced the entrancing
conviction, that under the crust of alabaster lay a dimly visible form
in marble, but whether of man or woman I could not yet tell. I worked on
as rapidly as the necessary care would permit; and when I had uncovered
the whole mass, and rising from my knees, had retreated a little way,
so that the effect of the whole might fall on me, I saw before me
with sufficient plainness--though at the same time with considerable
indistinctness, arising from the limited amount of light the place
admitted, as well as from the nature of the object itself--a block of
pure alabaster enclosing the form, apparently in marble, of a reposing
woman. She lay on one side, with her hand under her cheek, and her face
towards me; but her hair had fallen partly over her face, so that I
could not see the expression of the whole. What I did see appeared to
me perfectly lovely; more near the face that had been born with me in
my soul, than anything I had seen before in nature or art. The actual
outlines of the rest of the form were so indistinct, that the more than
semi-opacity of the alabaster seemed insufficient to account for
the fact; and I conjectured that a light robe added its obscurity.
Numberless histories passed through my mind of change of substance from
enchantment and other causes, and of imprisonments such as this before
me. I thought of the Prince of the Enchanted City, half marble and half
a man; of Ariel; of Niobe; of the Sleeping Beauty in the Wood; of the
bleeding trees; and many other histories. Even my adventure of the
preceding evening with the lady of the beech-tree contributed to arouse
the wild hope, that by some means life might be given to this form also,
and that, breaking from her alabaster tomb, she might glorify my eyes
with her presence. “For,” I argued, “who can tell but this cave may be
the home of Marble, and this, essential Marble--that spirit of marble
which, present throughout, makes it capable of being moulded into any
form? Then if she should awake! But how to awake her? A kiss awoke
the Sleeping Beauty! a kiss cannot reach her through the incrusting
alabaster.” I kneeled, however, and kissed the pale coffin; but she
slept on. I bethought me of Orpheus, and the following stones--that
trees should follow his music seemed nothing surprising now. Might not a
song awake this form, that the glory of motion might for a time displace
the loveliness of rest? Sweet sounds can go where kisses may not enter.
I sat and thought. Now, although always delighting in music, I had never
been gifted with the power of song, until I entered the fairy forest. I
had a voice, and I had a true sense of sound; but when I tried to sing,
the one would not content the other, and so I remained silent. This
morning, however, I had found myself, ere I was aware, rejoicing in a
song; but whether it was before or after I had eaten of the fruits
of the forest, I could not satisfy myself. I concluded it was after,
however; and that the increased impulse to sing I now felt, was in part
owing to having drunk of the little well, which shone like a brilliant
eye in a corner of the cave. I sat down on the ground by the “antenatal
tomb,” leaned upon it with my face towards the head of the figure
within, and sang--the words and tones coming together, and inseparably
connected, as if word and tone formed one thing; or, as if each word
could be uttered only in that tone, and was incapable of distinction
from it, except in idea, by an acute analysis. I sang something like
this: but the words are only a dull representation of a state whose
very elevation precluded the possibility of remembrance; and in which I
presume the words really employed were as far above these, as that state
transcended this wherein I recall it:

            “Marble woman, vainly sleeping
             In the very death of dreams!
             Wilt thou--slumber from thee sweeping,
             All but what with vision teems--
             Hear my voice come through the golden
             Mist of memory and hope;
             And with shadowy smile embolden
             Me with primal Death to cope?

            “Thee the sculptors all pursuing,
             Have embodied but their own;
             Round their visions, form enduring,
             Marble vestments thou hast thrown;
             But thyself, in silence winding,
             Thou hast kept eternally;
             Thee they found not, many finding--
             I have found thee: wake for me.”


As I sang, I looked earnestly at the face so vaguely revealed before me.
I fancied, yet believed it to be but fancy, that through the dim veil
of the alabaster, I saw a motion of the head as if caused by a sinking
sigh. I gazed more earnestly, and concluded that it was but fancy.
Neverthless I could not help singing again--

            “Rest is now filled full of beauty,
             And can give thee up, I ween;
             Come thou forth, for other duty
             Motion pineth for her queen.

            “Or, if needing years to wake thee
             From thy slumbrous solitudes,
             Come, sleep-walking, and betake thee
             To the friendly, sleeping woods.

             Sweeter dreams are in the forest,
             Round thee storms would never rave;
             And when need of rest is sorest,
             Glide thou then into thy cave.

            “Or, if still thou choosest rather
             Marble, be its spell on me;
             Let thy slumber round me gather,
             Let another dream with thee!”


Again I paused, and gazed through the stony shroud, as if, by very force
of penetrative sight, I would clear every lineament of the lovely face.
And now I thought the hand that had lain under the cheek, had slipped
a little downward. But then I could not be sure that I had at first
observed its position accurately. So I sang again; for the longing had
grown into a passionate need of seeing her alive--

            “Or art thou Death, O woman? for since I
                Have set me singing by thy side,
             Life hath forsook the upper sky,
                And all the outer world hath died.

            “Yea, I am dead; for thou hast drawn
                My life all downward unto thee.
             Dead moon of love! let twilight dawn:
                Awake! and let the darkness flee.

            “Cold lady of the lovely stone!
                Awake! or I shall perish here;
             And thou be never more alone,
                My form and I for ages near.

            “But words are vain; reject them all--
                They utter but a feeble part:
             Hear thou the depths from which they call,
                The voiceless longing of my heart.”


There arose a slightly crashing sound. Like a sudden apparition that
comes and is gone, a white form, veiled in a light robe of whiteness,
burst upwards from the stone, stood, glided forth, and gleamed away
towards the woods. For I followed to the mouth of the cave, as soon
as the amazement and concentration of delight permitted the nerves of
motion again to act; and saw the white form amidst the trees, as it
crossed a little glade on the edge of the forest where the sunlight fell
full, seeming to gather with intenser radiance on the one object that
floated rather than flitted through its lake of beams. I gazed after her
in a kind of despair; found, freed, lost! It seemed useless to follow,
yet follow I must. I marked the direction she took; and without once
looking round to the forsaken cave, I hastened towards the forest.




CHAPTER VI

     “Ah, let a man beware, when his wishes, fulfilled, rain down
     upon him, and his happiness is unbounded.”

     “Thy red lips, like worms,
         Travel over my cheek.”
                    --MOTHERWELL.

But as I crossed the space between the foot of the hill and the forest,
a vision of another kind delayed my steps. Through an opening to
the westward flowed, like a stream, the rays of the setting sun, and
overflowed with a ruddy splendour the open space where I was. And riding
as it were down this stream towards me, came a horseman in what appeared
red armour. From frontlet to tail, the horse likewise shone red in the
sunset. I felt as if I must have seen the knight before; but as he drew
near, I could recall no feature of his countenance. Ere he came up
to me, however, I remembered the legend of Sir Percival in the rusty
armour, which I had left unfinished in the old book in the cottage: it
was of Sir Percival that he reminded me. And no wonder; for when he came
close up to me, I saw that, from crest to heel, the whole surface of his
armour was covered with a light rust. The golden spurs shone, but the
iron greaves glowed in the sunlight. The MORNING STAR, which hung from
his wrist, glittered and glowed with its silver and bronze. His whole
appearance was terrible; but his face did not answer to this appearance.
It was sad, even to gloominess; and something of shame seemed to cover
it. Yet it was noble and high, though thus beclouded; and the form
looked lofty, although the head drooped, and the whole frame was bowed
as with an inward grief. The horse seemed to share in his master’s
dejection, and walked spiritless and slow. I noticed, too, that the
white plume on his helmet was discoloured and drooping. “He has fallen
in a joust with spears,” I said to myself; “yet it becomes not a noble
knight to be conquered in spirit because his body hath fallen.” He
appeared not to observe me, for he was riding past without looking up,
and started into a warlike attitude the moment the first sound of my
voice reached him. Then a flush, as of shame, covered all of his face
that the lifted beaver disclosed. He returned my greeting with distant
courtesy, and passed on. But suddenly, he reined up, sat a moment still,
and then turning his horse, rode back to where I stood looking after
him.

“I am ashamed,” he said, “to appear a knight, and in such a guise; but
it behoves me to tell you to take warning from me, lest the same evil,
in his kind, overtake the singer that has befallen the knight. Hast thou
ever read the story of Sir Percival and the”--(here he shuddered, that
his armour rang)--“Maiden of the Alder-tree?”

“In part, I have,” said I; “for yesterday, at the entrance of this
forest, I found in a cottage the volume wherein it is recorded.” “Then
take heed,” he rejoined; “for, see my armour--I put it off; and as it
befell to him, so has it befallen to me. I that was proud am humble now.
Yet is she terribly beautiful--beware. Never,” he added, raising his
head, “shall this armour be furbished, but by the blows of knightly
encounter, until the last speck has disappeared from every spot where
the battle-axe and sword of evil-doers, or noble foes, might fall; when
I shall again lift my head, and say to my squire, ‘Do thy duty once
more, and make this armour shine.’”

Before I could inquire further, he had struck spurs into his horse and
galloped away, shrouded from my voice in the noise of his armour. For I
called after him, anxious to know more about this fearful enchantress;
but in vain--he heard me not. “Yet,” I said to myself, “I have now
been often warned; surely I shall be well on my guard; and I am fully
resolved I shall not be ensnared by any beauty, however beautiful.
Doubtless, some one man may escape, and I shall be he.” So I went on
into the wood, still hoping to find, in some one of its mysterious
recesses, my lost lady of the marble. The sunny afternoon died into
the loveliest twilight. Great bats began to flit about with their own
noiseless flight, seemingly purposeless, because its objects are unseen.
The monotonous music of the owl issued from all unexpected quarters in
the half-darkness around me. The glow-worm was alight here and there,
burning out into the great universe. The night-hawk heightened all the
harmony and stillness with his oft-recurring, discordant jar.
Numberless unknown sounds came out of the unknown dusk; but all were of
twilight-kind, oppressing the heart as with a condensed atmosphere of
dreamy undefined love and longing. The odours of night arose, and bathed
me in that luxurious mournfulness peculiar to them, as if the plants
whence they floated had been watered with bygone tears. Earth drew me
towards her bosom; I felt as if I could fall down and kiss her. I forgot
I was in Fairy Land, and seemed to be walking in a perfect night of
our own old nursing earth. Great stems rose about me, uplifting a thick
multitudinous roof above me of branches, and twigs, and leaves--the bird
and insect world uplifted over mine, with its own landscapes, its own
thickets, and paths, and glades, and dwellings; its own bird-ways and
insect-delights. Great boughs crossed my path; great roots based the
tree-columns, and mightily clasped the earth, strong to lift and strong
to uphold. It seemed an old, old forest, perfect in forest ways and
pleasures. And when, in the midst of this ecstacy, I remembered that
under some close canopy of leaves, by some giant stem, or in some mossy
cave, or beside some leafy well, sat the lady of the marble, whom my
songs had called forth into the outer world, waiting (might it not
be?) to meet and thank her deliverer in a twilight which would veil her
confusion, the whole night became one dream-realm of joy, the central
form of which was everywhere present, although unbeheld. Then,
remembering how my songs seemed to have called her from the marble,
piercing through the pearly shroud of alabaster--“Why,” thought I,
“should not my voice reach her now, through the ebon night that
inwraps her.” My voice burst into song so spontaneously that it seemed
involuntarily.

            “Not a sound
             But, echoing in me,
             Vibrates all around
             With a blind delight,
             Till it breaks on Thee,
             Queen of Night!

             Every tree,
             O’ershadowing with gloom,
             Seems to cover thee
             Secret, dark, love-still’d,
             In a holy room
             Silence-filled.

            “Let no moon
             Creep up the heaven to-night;
             I in darksome noon
             Walking hopefully,
             Seek my shrouded light--
             Grope for thee!

            “Darker grow
             The borders of the dark!
             Through the branches glow,
             From the roof above,
             Star and diamond-sparks
             Light for love.”


Scarcely had the last sounds floated away from the hearing of my own
ears, when I heard instead a low delicious laugh near me. It was not the
laugh of one who would not be heard, but the laugh of one who has just
received something long and patiently desired--a laugh that ends in
a low musical moan. I started, and, turning sideways, saw a dim white
figure seated beside an intertwining thicket of smaller trees and
underwood.

“It is my white lady!” I said, and flung myself on the ground beside
her; striving, through the gathering darkness, to get a glimpse of the
form which had broken its marble prison at my call.

“It is your white lady!” said the sweetest voice, in reply, sending a
thrill of speechless delight through a heart which all the love-charms
of the preceding day and evening had been tempering for this culminating
hour. Yet, if I would have confessed it, there was something either in
the sound of the voice, although it seemed sweetness itself, or else in
this yielding which awaited no gradation of gentle approaches, that did
not vibrate harmoniously with the beat of my inward music. And likewise,
when, taking her hand in mine, I drew closer to her, looking for the
beauty of her face, which, indeed, I found too plenteously, a cold
shiver ran through me; but “it is the marble,” I said to myself, and
heeded it not.

She withdrew her hand from mine, and after that would scarce allow me to
touch her. It seemed strange, after the fulness of her first greeting,
that she could not trust me to come close to her. Though her words
were those of a lover, she kept herself withdrawn as if a mile of space
interposed between us.

“Why did you run away from me when you woke in the cave?” I said.

“Did I?” she returned. “That was very unkind of me; but I did not know
better.”

“I wish I could see you. The night is very dark.”

“So it is. Come to my grotto. There is light there.”

“Have you another cave, then?”

“Come and see.”

But she did not move until I rose first, and then she was on her feet
before I could offer my hand to help her. She came close to my side, and
conducted me through the wood. But once or twice, when, involuntarily
almost, I was about to put my arm around her as we walked on through the
warm gloom, she sprang away several paces, always keeping her face full
towards me, and then stood looking at me, slightly stooping, in the
attitude of one who fears some half-seen enemy. It was too dark to
discern the expression of her face. Then she would return and walk close
beside me again, as if nothing had happened. I thought this strange;
but, besides that I had almost, as I said before, given up the attempt
to account for appearances in Fairy Land, I judged that it would be very
unfair to expect from one who had slept so long and had been so suddenly
awakened, a behaviour correspondent to what I might unreflectingly look
for. I knew not what she might have been dreaming about. Besides, it was
possible that, while her words were free, her sense of touch might be
exquisitely delicate.

At length, after walking a long way in the woods, we arrived at another
thicket, through the intertexture of which was glimmering a pale rosy
light.

 “Push aside the branches,” she said, “and make room for us to
enter.”

I did as she told me.

“Go in,” she said; “I will follow you.”

I did as she desired, and found myself in a little cave, not very unlike
the marble cave. It was festooned and draperied with all kinds of
green that cling to shady rocks. In the furthest corner, half-hidden in
leaves, through which it glowed, mingling lovely shadows between them,
burned a bright rosy flame on a little earthen lamp. The lady glided
round by the wall from behind me, still keeping her face towards me, and
seated herself in the furthest corner, with her back to the lamp, which
she hid completely from my view. I then saw indeed a form of perfect
loveliness before me. Almost it seemed as if the light of the rose-lamp
shone through her (for it could not be reflected from her); such a
delicate shade of pink seemed to shadow what in itself must be a marbly
whiteness of hue. I discovered afterwards, however, that there was one
thing in it I did not like; which was, that the white part of the eye
was tinged with the same slight roseate hue as the rest of the form. It
is strange that I cannot recall her features; but they, as well as her
somewhat girlish figure, left on me simply and only the impression of
intense loveliness. I lay down at her feet, and gazed up into her face
as I lay. She began, and told me a strange tale, which, likewise, I
cannot recollect; but which, at every turn and every pause, somehow or
other fixed my eyes and thoughts upon her extreme beauty; seeming always
to culminate in something that had a relation, revealed or hidden, but
always operative, with her own loveliness. I lay entranced. It was a
tale which brings back a feeling as of snows and tempests; torrents
and water-sprites; lovers parted for long, and meeting at last; with a
gorgeous summer night to close up the whole. I listened till she and I
were blended with the tale; till she and I were the whole history. And
we had met at last in this same cave of greenery, while the summer night
hung round us heavy with love, and the odours that crept through the
silence from the sleeping woods were the only signs of an outer world
that invaded our solitude. What followed I cannot clearly remember. The
succeeding horror almost obliterated it. I woke as a grey dawn stole
into the cave. The damsel had disappeared; but in the shrubbery, at the
mouth of the cave, stood a strange horrible object. It looked like an
open coffin set up on one end; only that the part for the head and
neck was defined from the shoulder-part. In fact, it was a rough
representation of the human frame, only hollow, as if made of decaying
bark torn from a tree.

It had arms, which were only slightly seamed, down from the
shoulder-blade by the elbow, as if the bark had healed again from the
cut of a knife. But the arms moved, and the hand and the fingers were
tearing asunder a long silky tress of hair. The thing turned round--it
had for a face and front those of my enchantress, but now of a pale
greenish hue in the light of the morning, and with dead lustreless eyes.
In the horror of the moment, another fear invaded me. I put my hand to
my waist, and found indeed that my girdle of beech-leaves was gone.
Hair again in her hands, she was tearing it fiercely. Once more, as she
turned, she laughed a low laugh, but now full of scorn and derision; and
then she said, as if to a companion with whom she had been talking while
I slept, “There he is; you can take him now.” I lay still, petrified
with dismay and fear; for I now saw another figure beside her, which,
although vague and indistinct, I yet recognised but too well. It was the
Ash-tree. My beauty was the Maid of the Alder! and she was giving
me, spoiled of my only availing defence, into the hands of my awful foe.
The Ash bent his Gorgon-head, and entered the cave. I could not stir.
He drew near me. His ghoul-eyes and his ghastly face fascinated me.
He came stooping, with the hideous hand outstretched, like a beast of
prey. I had given myself up to a death of unfathomable horror, when,
suddenly, and just as he was on the point of seizing me, the dull,
heavy blow of an axe echoed through the wood, followed by others in
quick repetition. The Ash shuddered and groaned, withdrew the
outstretched hand, retreated backwards to the mouth of the cave, then
turned and disappeared amongst the trees. The other walking Death
looked at me once, with a careless dislike on her beautifully moulded
features; then, heedless any more to conceal her hollow deformity,
turned her frightful back and likewise vanished amid the green
obscurity without. I lay and wept. The Maid of the Alder-tree had
befooled me--nearly slain me--in spite of all the warnings I had
received from those who knew my danger.





CHAPTER VII

         “Fight on, my men, Sir Andrew sayes,
          A little I am hurt, but yett not slaine;
          I’le but lye downe and bleede awhile,
          And then I’le rise and fight againe.”
                         Ballad of Sir Andrew Barton.

But I could not remain where I was any longer, though the daylight was
hateful to me, and the thought of the great, innocent, bold sunrise
unendurable. Here there was no well to cool my face, smarting with the
bitterness of my own tears. Nor would I have washed in the well of
that grotto, had it flowed clear as the rivers of Paradise. I rose, and
feebly left the sepulchral cave. I took my way I knew not whither, but
still towards the sunrise. The birds were singing; but not for me. All
the creatures spoke a language of their own, with which I had nothing to
do, and to which I cared not to find the key any more.

I walked listlessly along. What distressed me most--more even than my
own folly--was the perplexing question, How can beauty and ugliness
dwell so near? Even with her altered complexion and her face of dislike;
disenchanted of the belief that clung around her; known for a
living, walking sepulchre, faithless, deluding, traitorous; I felt
notwithstanding all this, that she was beautiful. Upon this I pondered
with undiminished perplexity, though not without some gain. Then I began
to make surmises as to the mode of my deliverance; and concluded that
some hero, wandering in search of adventure, had heard how the forest
was infested; and, knowing it was useless to attack the evil thing in
person, had assailed with his battle-axe the body in which he dwelt, and
on which he was dependent for his power of mischief in the wood. “Very
likely,” I thought, “the repentant-knight, who warned me of the evil
which has befallen me, was busy retrieving his lost honour, while I was
sinking into the same sorrow with himself; and, hearing of the dangerous
and mysterious being, arrived at his tree in time to save me from being
dragged to its roots, and buried like carrion, to nourish him for
yet deeper insatiableness.” I found afterwards that my conjecture was
correct. I wondered how he had fared when his blows recalled the Ash
himself, and that too I learned afterwards.

I walked on the whole day, with intervals of rest, but without food; for
I could not have eaten, had any been offered me; till, in the afternoon,
I seemed to approach the outskirts of the forest, and at length arrived
at a farm-house. An unspeakable joy arose in my heart at beholding an
abode of human beings once more, and I hastened up to the door, and
knocked. A kind-looking, matronly woman, still handsome, made her
appearance; who, as soon as she saw me, said kindly, “Ah, my poor boy,
you have come from the wood! Were you in it last night?”

I should have ill endured, the day before, to be called BOY; but now the
motherly kindness of the word went to my heart; and, like a boy indeed,
I burst into tears. She soothed me right gently; and, leading me into
a room, made me lie down on a settle, while she went to find me some
refreshment. She soon returned with food, but I could not eat. She
almost compelled me to swallow some wine, when I revived sufficiently to
be able to answer some of her questions. I told her the whole story.

“It is just as I feared,” she said; “but you are now for the night
beyond the reach of any of these dreadful creatures. It is no wonder
they could delude a child like you. But I must beg you, when my husband
comes in, not to say a word about these things; for he thinks me even
half crazy for believing anything of the sort. But I must believe my
senses, as he cannot believe beyond his, which give him no intimations
of this kind. I think he could spend the whole of Midsummer-eve in
the wood and come back with the report that he saw nothing worse than
himself. Indeed, good man, he would hardly find anything better than
himself, if he had seven more senses given him.”

“But tell me how it is that she could be so beautiful without any heart
at all--without any place even for a heart to live in.”

“I cannot quite tell,” she said; “but I am sure she would not look so
beautiful if she did not take means to make herself look more beautiful
than she is. And then, you know, you began by being in love with
her before you saw her beauty, mistaking her for the lady of the
marble--another kind altogether, I should think. But the chief thing
that makes her beautiful is this: that, although she loves no man, she
loves the love of any man; and when she finds one in her power, her
desire to bewitch him and gain his love (not for the sake of his love
either, but that she may be conscious anew of her own beauty,
through the admiration he manifests), makes her very lovely--with a
self-destructive beauty, though; for it is that which is constantly
wearing her away within, till, at last, the decay will reach her face,
and her whole front, when all the lovely mask of nothing will fall to
pieces, and she be vanished for ever. So a wise man, whom she met in
the wood some years ago, and who, I think, for all his wisdom, fared no
better than you, told me, when, like you, he spent the next night here,
and recounted to me his adventures.”

I thanked her very warmly for her solution, though it was but partial;
wondering much that in her, as in woman I met on my first entering the
forest, there should be such superiority to her apparent condition. Here
she left me to take some rest; though, indeed, I was too much agitated
to rest in any other way than by simply ceasing to move.

In half an hour, I heard a heavy step approach and enter the house. A
jolly voice, whose slight huskiness appeared to proceed from overmuch
laughter, called out “Betsy, the pigs’ trough is quite empty, and that
is a pity. Let them swill, lass! They’re of no use but to get fat. Ha!
ha! ha! Gluttony is not forbidden in their commandments. Ha! ha! ha!”
 The very voice, kind and jovial, seemed to disrobe the room of the
strange look which all new places wear--to disenchant it out of the
realm of the ideal into that of the actual. It began to look as if I
had known every corner of it for twenty years; and when, soon after, the
dame came and fetched me to partake of their early supper, the grasp of
his great hand, and the harvest-moon of his benevolent face, which was
needed to light up the rotundity of the globe beneath it, produced such
a reaction in me, that, for a moment, I could hardly believe that there
was a Fairy Land; and that all I had passed through since I left home,
had not been the wandering dream of a diseased imagination, operating on
a too mobile frame, not merely causing me indeed to travel, but peopling
for me with vague phantoms the regions through which my actual steps
had led me. But the next moment my eye fell upon a little girl who was
sitting in the chimney-corner, with a little book open on her knee, from
which she had apparently just looked up to fix great inquiring eyes upon
me. I believed in Fairy Land again. She went on with her reading, as
soon as she saw that I observed her looking at me. I went near, and
peeping over her shoulder, saw that she was reading “The History of
Graciosa and Percinet.”

“Very improving book, sir,” remarked the old farmer, with a
good-humoured laugh. “We are in the very hottest corner of Fairy Land
here. Ha! ha! Stormy night, last night, sir.”

“Was it, indeed?” I rejoined. “It was not so with me. A lovelier night I
never saw.” “Indeed! Where were you last night?”

“I spent it in the forest. I had lost my way.”

“Ah! then, perhaps, you will be able to convince my good woman, that
there is nothing very remarkable about the forest; for, to tell the
truth, it bears but a bad name in these parts. I dare say you saw
nothing worse than yourself there?”

“I hope I did,” was my inward reply; but, for an audible one, I
contented myself with saying, “Why, I certainly did see some appearances
I could hardly account for; but that is nothing to be wondered at in an
unknown wild forest, and with the uncertain light of the moon alone to
go by.”

“Very true! you speak like a sensible man, sir. We have but few sensible
folks round about us. Now, you would hardly credit it, but my wife
believes every fairy-tale that ever was written. I cannot account for
it. She is a most sensible woman in everything else.”

“But should not that make you treat her belief with something of
respect, though you cannot share in it yourself?”

“Yes, that is all very well in theory; but when you come to live
every day in the midst of absurdity, it is far less easy to behave
respectfully to it. Why, my wife actually believes the story of the
‘White Cat.’ You know it, I dare say.”

“I read all these tales when a child, and know that one especially
well.”

“But, father,” interposed the little girl in the chimney-corner, “you
know quite well that mother is descended from that very princess who was
changed by the wicked fairy into a white cat. Mother has told me so a
many times, and you ought to believe everything she says.”

“I can easily believe that,” rejoined the farmer, with another fit of
laughter; “for, the other night, a mouse came gnawing and scratching
beneath the floor, and would not let us go to sleep. Your mother sprang
out of bed, and going as near it as she could, mewed so infernally like
a great cat, that the noise ceased instantly. I believe the poor mouse
died of the fright, for we have never heard it again. Ha! ha! ha!”

The son, an ill-looking youth, who had entered during the conversation,
joined in his father’s laugh; but his laugh was very different from the
old man’s: it was polluted with a sneer. I watched him, and saw that,
as soon as it was over, he looked scared, as if he dreaded some evil
consequences to follow his presumption. The woman stood near, waiting
till we should seat ourselves at the table, and listening to it all
with an amused air, which had something in it of the look with which one
listens to the sententious remarks of a pompous child. We sat down to
supper, and I ate heartily. My bygone distresses began already to look
far off.

“In what direction are you going?” asked the old man.

“Eastward,” I replied; nor could I have given a more definite answer.
“Does the forest extend much further in that direction?”

“Oh! for miles and miles; I do not know how far. For although I have
lived on the borders of it all my life, I have been too busy to make
journeys of discovery into it. Nor do I see what I could discover. It
is only trees and trees, till one is sick of them. By the way, if you
follow the eastward track from here, you will pass close to what the
children say is the very house of the ogre that Hop-o’-my-Thumb visited,
and ate his little daughters with the crowns of gold.”

“Oh, father! ate his little daughters! No; he only changed their gold
crowns for nightcaps; and the great long-toothed ogre killed them in
mistake; but I do not think even he ate them, for you know they were his
own little ogresses.”

“Well, well, child; you know all about it a great deal better than I do.
However, the house has, of course, in such a foolish neighbourhood as
this, a bad enough name; and I must confess there is a woman living
in it, with teeth long enough, and white enough too, for the lineal
descendant of the greatest ogre that ever was made. I think you had
better not go near her.”

In such talk as this the night wore on. When supper was finished, which
lasted some time, my hostess conducted me to my chamber.

“If you had not had enough of it already,” she said, “I would have put
you in another room, which looks towards the forest; and where you
would most likely have seen something more of its inhabitants. For they
frequently pass the window, and even enter the room sometimes. Strange
creatures spend whole nights in it, at certain seasons of the year. I am
used to it, and do not mind it. No more does my little girl, who sleeps
in it always. But this room looks southward towards the open country,
and they never show themselves here; at least I never saw any.”

I was somewhat sorry not to gather any experience that I might have, of
the inhabitants of Fairy Land; but the effect of the farmer’s company,
and of my own later adventures, was such, that I chose rather an
undisturbed night in my more human quarters; which, with their clean
white curtains and white linen, were very inviting to my weariness.

In the morning I awoke refreshed, after a profound and dreamless sleep.
The sun was high, when I looked out of the window, shining over a wide,
undulating, cultivated country. Various garden-vegetables were growing
beneath my window. Everything was radiant with clear sunlight. The
dew-drops were sparkling their busiest; the cows in a near-by field were
eating as if they had not been at it all day yesterday; the maids were
singing at their work as they passed to and fro between the out-houses:
I did not believe in Fairy Land. I went down, and found the family
already at breakfast. But before I entered the room where they sat, the
little girl came to me, and looked up in my face, as though she wanted
to say something to me. I stooped towards her; she put her arms round my
neck, and her mouth to my ear, and whispered--

“A white lady has been flitting about the house all night.”

“No whispering behind doors!” cried the farmer; and we entered together.
“Well, how have you slept? No bogies, eh?”

“Not one, thank you; I slept uncommonly well.”

“I am glad to hear it. Come and breakfast.”

After breakfast, the farmer and his son went out; and I was left alone
with the mother and daughter.

“When I looked out of the window this morning,” I said, “I felt almost
certain that Fairy Land was all a delusion of my brain; but whenever I
come near you or your little daughter, I feel differently. Yet I could
persuade myself, after my last adventures, to go back, and have nothing
more to do with such strange beings.”

“How will you go back?” said the woman.

“Nay, that I do not know.”

“Because I have heard, that, for those who enter Fairy Land, there is no
way of going back. They must go on, and go through it. How, I do not in
the least know.”

“That is quite the impression on my own mind. Something compels me to go
on, as if my only path was onward, but I feel less inclined this morning
to continue my adventures.”

“Will you come and see my little child’s room? She sleeps in the one I
told you of, looking towards the forest.”

“Willingly,” I said.

So we went together, the little girl running before to open the door for
us. It was a large room, full of old-fashioned furniture, that seemed to
have once belonged to some great house.

The window was built with a low arch, and filled with lozenge-shaped
panes. The wall was very thick, and built of solid stone. I could see
that part of the house had been erected against the remains of some old
castle or abbey, or other great building; the fallen stones of which
had probably served to complete it. But as soon as I looked out of the
window, a gush of wonderment and longing flowed over my soul like the
tide of a great sea. Fairy Land lay before me, and drew me towards it
with an irresistible attraction. The trees bathed their great heads in
the waves of the morning, while their roots were planted deep in gloom;
save where on the borders the sunshine broke against their stems, or
swept in long streams through their avenues, washing with brighter hue
all the leaves over which it flowed; revealing the rich brown of the
decayed leaves and fallen pine-cones, and the delicate greens of the
long grasses and tiny forests of moss that covered the channel over
which it passed in motionless rivers of light. I turned hurriedly to bid
my hostess farewell without further delay. She smiled at my haste, but
with an anxious look.

“You had better not go near the house of the ogre, I think. My son will
show you into another path, which will join the first beyond it.”

Not wishing to be headstrong or too confident any more, I agreed;
and having taken leave of my kind entertainers, went into the wood,
accompanied by the youth. He scarcely spoke as we went along; but he led
me through the trees till we struck upon a path. He told me to follow
it, and, with a muttered “good morning” left me.





CHAPTER VIII

     “I am a part of the part, which at first was the whole.”
      GOETHE.--Mephistopheles in Faust.

My spirits rose as I went deeper; into the forest; but I could not
regain my former elasticity of mind. I found cheerfulness to be like
life itself--not to be created by any argument. Afterwards I learned,
that the best way to manage some kinds of pain filled thoughts, is to dare
them to do their worst; to let them lie and gnaw at your heart till they
are tired; and you find you still have a residue of life they cannot
kill. So, better and worse, I went on, till I came to a little clearing
in the forest. In the middle of this clearing stood a long, low hut,
built with one end against a single tall cypress, which rose like a
spire to the building. A vague misgiving crossed my mind when I saw it;
but I must needs go closer, and look through a little half-open door,
near the opposite end from the cypress. Window I saw none. On peeping
in, and looking towards the further end, I saw a lamp burning, with
a dim, reddish flame, and the head of a woman, bent downwards, as if
reading by its light. I could see nothing more for a few moments. At
length, as my eyes got used to the dimness of the place, I saw that the
part of the rude building near me was used for household purposes;
for several rough utensils lay here and there, and a bed stood in the
corner.

An irresistible attraction caused me to enter. The woman never raised
her face, the upper part of which alone I could see distinctly; but, as
soon as I stepped within the threshold, she began to read aloud, in a
low and not altogether unpleasing voice, from an ancient little volume
which she held open with one hand on the table upon which stood the
lamp. What she read was something like this:

“So, then, as darkness had no beginning, neither will it ever have
an end. So, then, is it eternal. The negation of aught else, is its
affirmation. Where the light cannot come, there abideth the darkness.
The light doth but hollow a mine out of the infinite extension of the
darkness. And ever upon the steps of the light treadeth the darkness;
yea, springeth in fountains and wells amidst it, from the secret
channels of its mighty sea. Truly, man is but a passing flame, moving
unquietly amid the surrounding rest of night; without which he yet could
not be, and whereof he is in part compounded.”

As I drew nearer, and she read on, she moved a little to turn a leaf
of the dark old volume, and I saw that her face was sallow and slightly
forbidding. Her forehead was high, and her black eyes repressedly quiet.
But she took no notice of me. This end of the cottage, if cottage it
could be called, was destitute of furniture, except the table with the
lamp, and the chair on which the woman sat. In one corner was a door,
apparently of a cupboard in the wall, but which might lead to a room
beyond. Still the irresistible desire which had made me enter the
building urged me: I must open that door, and see what was beyond it.
I approached, and laid my hand on the rude latch. Then the woman spoke,
but without lifting her head or looking at me: “You had better not open
that door.” This was uttered quite quietly; and she went on with her
reading, partly in silence, partly aloud; but both modes seemed equally
intended for herself alone. The prohibition, however, only increased my
desire to see; and as she took no further notice, I gently opened the
door to its full width, and looked in. At first, I saw nothing worthy
of attention. It seemed a common closet, with shelves on each hand, on
which stood various little necessaries for the humble uses of a cottage.
In one corner stood one or two brooms, in another a hatchet and other
common tools; showing that it was in use every hour of the day for
household purposes. But, as I looked, I saw that there were no shelves
at the back, and that an empty space went in further; its termination
appearing to be a faintly glimmering wall or curtain, somewhat less,
however, than the width and height of the doorway where I stood. But,
as I continued looking, for a few seconds, towards this faintly luminous
limit, my eyes came into true relation with their object. All at once,
with such a shiver as when one is suddenly conscious of the presence of
another in a room where he has, for hours, considered himself alone, I
saw that the seemingly luminous extremity was a sky, as of night, beheld
through the long perspective of a narrow, dark passage, through what, or
built of what, I could not tell. As I gazed, I clearly discerned two or
three stars glimmering faintly in the distant blue. But, suddenly, and
as if it had been running fast from a far distance for this very point,
and had turned the corner without abating its swiftness, a dark figure
sped into and along the passage from the blue opening at the remote end.
I started back and shuddered, but kept looking, for I could not help it.
On and on it came, with a speedy approach but delayed arrival; till, at
last, through the many gradations of approach, it seemed to come within
the sphere of myself, rushed up to me, and passed me into the cottage.
All I could tell of its appearance was, that it seemed to be a dark
human figure. Its motion was entirely noiseless, and might be called a
gliding, were it not that it appeared that of a runner, but with ghostly
feet. I had moved back yet a little to let him pass me, and looked round
after him instantly. I could not see him.

“Where is he?” I said, in some alarm, to the woman, who still sat
reading.

“There, on the floor, behind you,” she said, pointing with her arm
half-outstretched, but not lifting her eyes. I turned and looked, but
saw nothing. Then with a feeling that there was yet something behind me,
I looked round over my shoulder; and there, on the ground, lay a black
shadow, the size of a man. It was so dark, that I could see it in the
dim light of the lamp, which shone full upon it, apparently without
thinning at all the intensity of its hue.

“I told you,” said the woman, “you had better not look into that
closet.”

“What is it?” I said, with a growing sense of horror.

“It is only your shadow that has found you,” she replied. “Everybody’s
shadow is ranging up and down looking for him. I believe you call it by
a different name in your world: yours has found you, as every person’s
is almost certain to do who looks into that closet, especially after
meeting one in the forest, whom I dare say you have met.”

Here, for the first time, she lifted her head, and looked full at me:
her mouth was full of long, white, shining teeth; and I knew that I was
in the house of the ogre. I could not speak, but turned and left the
house, with the shadow at my heels. “A nice sort of valet to have,” I
said to myself bitterly, as I stepped into the sunshine, and, looking
over my shoulder, saw that it lay yet blacker in the full blaze of the
sunlight. Indeed, only when I stood between it and the sun, was the
blackness at all diminished. I was so bewildered--stunned--both by the
event itself and its suddenness, that I could not at all realise to
myself what it would be to have such a constant and strange attendance;
but with a dim conviction that my present dislike would soon grow to
loathing, I took my dreary way through the wood.





CHAPTER IX

        “O lady! we receive but what we give,
         And in our life alone does nature live:
         Ours is her wedding garments ours her shrorwd!
                .  .  .  .  .
         Ah! from the soul itself must issue forth,
         A light, a glory, a fair luminous cloud,

         Enveloping the Earth--
         And from the soul itself must there be sent
         A sweet and potent voice of its own birth,
         Of all sweet sounds the life and element!”
                                         COLERIDGE.

From this time, until I arrived at the palace of Fairy Land, I can
attempt no consecutive account of my wanderings and adventures.
Everything, henceforward, existed for me in its relation to my
attendant. What influence he exercised upon everything into contact with
which I was brought, may be understood from a few detached instances. To
begin with this very day on which he first joined me: after I had walked
heartlessly along for two or three hours, I was very weary, and lay
down to rest in a most delightful part of the forest, carpeted with wild
flowers. I lay for half an hour in a dull repose, and then got up to
pursue my way. The flowers on the spot where I had lain were crushed to
the earth: but I saw that they would soon lift their heads and rejoice
again in the sun and air. Not so those on which my shadow had lain. The
very outline of it could be traced in the withered lifeless grass,
and the scorched and shrivelled flowers which stood there, dead, and
hopeless of any resurrection. I shuddered, and hastened away with sad
forebodings.

In a few days, I had reason to dread an extension of its baleful
influences from the fact, that it was no longer confined to one position
in regard to myself. Hitherto, when seized with an irresistible desire
to look on my evil demon (which longing would unaccountably seize me at
any moment, returning at longer or shorter intervals, sometimes every
minute), I had to turn my head backwards, and look over my shoulder; in
which position, as long as I could retain it, I was fascinated. But one
day, having come out on a clear grassy hill, which commanded a glorious
prospect, though of what I cannot now tell, my shadow moved round, and
came in front of me. And, presently, a new manifestation increased
my distress. For it began to coruscate, and shoot out on all sides a
radiation of dim shadow. These rays of gloom issued from the central
shadow as from a black sun, lengthening and shortening with continual
change. But wherever a ray struck, that part of earth, or sea, or
sky, became void, and desert, and sad to my heart. On this, the first
development of its new power, one ray shot out beyond the rest, seeming
to lengthen infinitely, until it smote the great sun on the face, which
withered and darkened beneath the blow. I turned away and went on. The
shadow retreated to its former position; and when I looked again, it
had drawn in all its spears of darkness, and followed like a dog at my
heels.

Once, as I passed by a cottage, there came out a lovely fairy child,
with two wondrous toys, one in each hand. The one was the tube through
which the fairy-gifted poet looks when he beholds the same thing
everywhere; the other that through which he looks when he combines into
new forms of loveliness those images of beauty which his own choice has
gathered from all regions wherein he has travelled. Round the child’s
head was an aureole of emanating rays. As I looked at him in wonder and
delight, round crept from behind me the something dark, and the child
stood in my shadow. Straightway he was a commonplace boy, with a rough
broad-brimmed straw hat, through which brim the sun shone from behind.
The toys he carried were a multiplying-glass and a kaleidoscope. I
sighed and departed.

One evening, as a great silent flood of western gold flowed through an
avenue in the woods, down the stream, just as when I saw him first, came
the sad knight, riding on his chestnut steed.

But his armour did not shine half so red as when I saw him first.

Many a blow of mighty sword and axe, turned aside by the strength of
his mail, and glancing adown the surface, had swept from its path the
fretted rust, and the glorious steel had answered the kindly blow with
the thanks of returning light. These streaks and spots made his armour
look like the floor of a forest in the sunlight. His forehead was higher
than before, for the contracting wrinkles were nearly gone; and the
sadness that remained on his face was the sadness of a dewy summer
twilight, not that of a frosty autumn morn. He, too, had met the
Alder-maiden as I, but he had plunged into the torrent of mighty deeds,
and the stain was nearly washed away. No shadow followed him. He had
not entered the dark house; he had not had time to open the closet door.
“Will he ever look in?” I said to myself. “MUST his shadow find him some
day?” But I could not answer my own questions.

We travelled together for two days, and I began to love him. It was
plain that he suspected my story in some degree; and I saw him once or
twice looking curiously and anxiously at my attendant gloom, which all
this time had remained very obsequiously behind me; but I offered no
explanation, and he asked none. Shame at my neglect of his warning, and
a horror which shrunk from even alluding to its cause, kept me silent;
till, on the evening of the second day, some noble words from my
companion roused all my heart; and I was at the point of falling on
his neck, and telling him the whole story; seeking, if not for
helpful advice, for of that I was hopeless, yet for the comfort of
sympathy--when round slid the shadow and inwrapt my friend; and I could
not trust him.

The glory of his brow vanished; the light of his eye grew cold; and I
held my peace. The next morning we parted.

But the most dreadful thing of all was, that I now began to feel
something like satisfaction in the presence of the shadow. I began to
be rather vain of my attendant, saying to myself, “In a land like this,
with so many illusions everywhere, I need his aid to disenchant the
things around me. He does away with all appearances, and shows me things
in their true colour and form. And I am not one to be fooled with the
vanities of the common crowd. I will not see beauty where there is
none. I will dare to behold things as they are. And if I live in a waste
instead of a paradise, I will live knowing where I live.” But of this
a certain exercise of his power which soon followed quite cured me,
turning my feelings towards him once more into loathing and distrust. It
was thus:

One bright noon, a little maiden joined me, coming through the wood in
a direction at right angles to my path. She came along singing and
dancing, happy as a child, though she seemed almost a woman. In her
hands--now in one, now in another--she carried a small globe, bright and
clear as the purest crystal. This seemed at once her plaything and her
greatest treasure. At one moment, you would have thought her utterly
careless of it, and at another, overwhelmed with anxiety for its safety.
But I believe she was taking care of it all the time, perhaps not least
when least occupied about it. She stopped by me with a smile, and bade
me good day with the sweetest voice. I felt a wonderful liking to the
child--for she produced on me more the impression of a child, though my
understanding told me differently. We talked a little, and then walked
on together in the direction I had been pursuing. I asked her about the
globe she carried, but getting no definite answer, I held out my hand
to take it. She drew back, and said, but smiling almost invitingly the
while, “You must not touch it;”--then, after a moment’s pause--“Or if
you do, it must be very gently.” I touched it with a finger. A slight
vibratory motion arose in it, accompanied, or perhaps manifested, by
a faint sweet sound. I touched it again, and the sound increased. I
touched it the third time: a tiny torrent of harmony rolled out of the
little globe. She would not let me touch it any more.

We travelled on together all that day. She left me when twilight came
on; but next day, at noon, she met me as before, and again we travelled
till evening. The third day she came once more at noon, and we walked on
together. Now, though we had talked about a great many things connected
with Fairy Land, and the life she had led hitherto, I had never been
able to learn anything about the globe. This day, however, as we went
on, the shadow glided round and inwrapt the maiden. It could not change
her. But my desire to know about the globe, which in his gloom began to
waver as with an inward light, and to shoot out flashes of many-coloured
flame, grew irresistible. I put out both my hands and laid hold of it.
It began to sound as before. The sound rapidly increased, till it grew
a low tempest of harmony, and the globe trembled, and quivered, and
throbbed between my hands. I had not the heart to pull it away from the
maiden, though I held it in spite of her attempts to take it from me;
yes, I shame to say, in spite of her prayers, and, at last, her tears.
The music went on growing in, intensity and complication of tones, and
the globe vibrated and heaved; till at last it burst in our hands, and
a black vapour broke upwards from out of it; then turned, as if blown
sideways, and enveloped the maiden, hiding even the shadow in its
blackness. She held fast the fragments, which I abandoned, and fled from
me into the forest in the direction whence she had come, wailing like
a child, and crying, “You have broken my globe; my globe is broken--my
globe is broken!” I followed her, in the hope of comforting her; but
had not pursued her far, before a sudden cold gust of wind bowed the
tree-tops above us, and swept through their stems around us; a great
cloud overspread the day, and a fierce tempest came on, in which I lost
sight of her. It lies heavy on my heart to this hour. At night, ere I
fall asleep, often, whatever I may be thinking about, I suddenly hear
her voice, crying out, “You have broken my globe; my globe is broken;
ah, my globe!”

Here I will mention one more strange thing; but whether this peculiarity
was owing to my shadow at all, I am not able to assure myself. I came
to a village, the inhabitants of which could not at first sight be
distinguished from the dwellers in our land. They rather avoided than
sought my company, though they were very pleasant when I addressed them.
But at last I observed, that whenever I came within a certain distance
of any one of them, which distance, however, varied with different
individuals, the whole appearance of the person began to change; and
this change increased in degree as I approached. When I receded to the
former distance, the former appearance was restored. The nature of the
change was grotesque, following no fixed rule. The nearest resemblance
to it that I know, is the distortion produced in your countenance when
you look at it as reflected in a concave or convex surface--say, either
side of a bright spoon. Of this phenomenon I first became aware in
rather a ludicrous way. My host’s daughter was a very pleasant pretty
girl, who made herself more agreeable to me than most of those about me.
For some days my companion-shadow had been less obtrusive than usual;
and such was the reaction of spirits occasioned by the simple mitigation
of torment, that, although I had cause enough besides to be gloomy, I
felt light and comparatively happy. My impression is, that she was quite
aware of the law of appearances that existed between the people of the
place and myself, and had resolved to amuse herself at my expense; for
one evening, after some jesting and raillery, she, somehow or other,
provoked me to attempt to kiss her. But she was well defended from
any assault of the kind. Her countenance became, of a sudden, absurdly
hideous; the pretty mouth was elongated and otherwise amplified
sufficiently to have allowed of six simultaneous kisses. I started back
in bewildered dismay; she burst into the merriest fit of laughter, and
ran from the room. I soon found that the same undefinable law of change
operated between me and all the other villagers; and that, to feel I was
in pleasant company, it was absolutely necessary for me to discover and
observe the right focal distance between myself and each one with whom
I had to do. This done, all went pleasantly enough. Whether, when I
happened to neglect this precaution, I presented to them an equally
ridiculous appearance, I did not ascertain; but I presume that the
alteration was common to the approximating parties. I was likewise
unable to determine whether I was a necessary party to the production of
this strange transformation, or whether it took place as well, under the
given circumstances, between the inhabitants themselves.




CHAPTER X

        “From Eden’s bowers the full-fed rivers flow,
         To guide the outcasts to the land of woe:
         Our Earth one little toiling streamlet yields.
         To guide the wanderers to the happy fields.”

 After leaving this village, where I had rested for nearly a
week, I travelled through a desert region of dry sand and glittering
rocks, peopled principally by goblin-fairies. When I first entered their
domains, and, indeed, whenever I fell in with another tribe of them,
they began mocking me with offered handfuls of gold and jewels, making
hideous grimaces at me, and performing the most antic homage, as if they
thought I expected reverence, and meant to humour me like a maniac. But
ever, as soon as one cast his eyes on the shadow behind me, he made a
wry face, partly of pity, partly of contempt, and looked ashamed, as
if he had been caught doing something inhuman; then, throwing down his
handful of gold, and ceasing all his grimaces, he stood aside to let me
pass in peace, and made signs to his companions to do the like. I had no
inclination to observe them much, for the shadow was in my heart as well
as at my heels. I walked listlessly and almost hopelessly along, till I
arrived one day at a small spring; which, bursting cool from the heart
of a sun-heated rock, flowed somewhat southwards from the direction I
had been taking. I drank of this spring, and found myself wonderfully
refreshed. A kind of love to the cheerful little stream arose in my
heart. It was born in a desert; but it seemed to say to itself, “I will
flow, and sing, and lave my banks, till I make my desert a paradise.”
 I thought I could not do better than follow it, and see what it made
of it. So down with the stream I went, over rocky lands, burning with
sunbeams. But the rivulet flowed not far, before a few blades of
grass appeared on its banks, and then, here and there, a stunted bush.
Sometimes it disappeared altogether under ground; and after I had
wandered some distance, as near as I could guess, in the direction it
seemed to take, I would suddenly hear it again, singing, sometimes far
away to my right or left, amongst new rocks, over which it made new
cataracts of watery melodies. The verdure on its banks increased as it
flowed; other streams joined it; and at last, after many days’ travel,
I found myself, one gorgeous summer evening, resting by the side of a
broad river, with a glorious horse-chestnut tree towering above me, and
dropping its blossoms, milk-white and rosy-red, all about me. As I sat,
a gush of joy sprang forth in my heart, and over flowed at my eyes.

Through my tears, the whole landscape glimmered in such bewildering
loveliness, that I felt as if I were entering Fairy Land for the first
time, and some loving hand were waiting to cool my head, and a loving
word to warm my heart. Roses, wild roses, everywhere! So plentiful were
they, they not only perfumed the air, they seemed to dye it a faint
rose-hue. The colour floated abroad with the scent, and clomb, and
spread, until the whole west blushed and glowed with the gathered
incense of roses. And my heart fainted with longing in my bosom.

Could I but see the Spirit of the Earth, as I saw once the in dwelling
woman of the beech-tree, and my beauty of the pale marble, I should be
content. Content!--Oh, how gladly would I die of the light of her eyes!
Yea, I would cease to be, if that would bring me one word of love from
the one mouth. The twilight sank around, and infolded me with sleep. I
slept as I had not slept for months. I did not awake till late in the
morning; when, refreshed in body and mind, I rose as from the death that
wipes out the sadness of life, and then dies itself in the new morrow.
Again I followed the stream; now climbing a steep rocky bank that hemmed
it in; now wading through long grasses and wild flowers in its path; now
through meadows; and anon through woods that crowded down to the very
lip of the water.

At length, in a nook of the river, gloomy with the weight of overhanging
foliage, and still and deep as a soul in which the torrent eddies of
pain have hollowed a great gulf, and then, subsiding in violence, have
left it full of a motionless, fathomless sorrow--I saw a little boat
lying. So still was the water here, that the boat needed no fastening.
It lay as if some one had just stepped ashore, and would in a moment
return. But as there were no signs of presence, and no track through the
thick bushes; and, moreover, as I was in Fairy Land where one does very
much as he pleases, I forced my way to the brink, stepped into the boat,
pushed it, with the help of the tree-branches, out into the stream,
lay down in the bottom, and let my boat and me float whither the stream
would carry us. I seemed to lose myself in the great flow of sky above
me unbroken in its infinitude, except when now and then, coming nearer
the shore at a bend in the river, a tree would sweep its mighty head
silently above mine, and glide away back into the past, never more to
fling its shadow over me. I fell asleep in this cradle, in which mother
Nature was rocking her weary child; and while I slept, the sun slept
not, but went round his arched way. When I awoke, he slept in the
waters, and I went on my silent path beneath a round silvery moon. And
a pale moon looked up from the floor of the great blue cave that lay in
the abysmal silence beneath.

Why are all reflections lovelier than what we call the reality?--not
so grand or so strong, it may be, but always lovelier? Fair as is the
gliding sloop on the shining sea, the wavering, trembling, unresting
sail below is fairer still. Yea, the reflecting ocean itself, reflected
in the mirror, has a wondrousness about its waters that somewhat
vanishes when I turn towards itself. All mirrors are magic mirrors. The
commonest room is a room in a poem when I turn to the glass. (And this
reminds me, while I write, of a strange story which I read in the fairy
palace, and of which I will try to make a feeble memorial in its place.)
In whatever way it may be accounted for, of one thing we may be sure,
that this feeling is no cheat; for there is no cheating in nature and
the simple unsought feelings of the soul. There must be a truth involved
in it, though we may but in part lay hold of the meaning. Even the
memories of past pain are beautiful; and past delights, though beheld
only through clefts in the grey clouds of sorrow, are lovely as Fairy
Land. But how have I wandered into the deeper fairyland of the soul,
while as yet I only float towards the fairy palace of Fairy Land! The
moon, which is the lovelier memory or reflex of the down-gone sun, the
joyous day seen in the faint mirror of the brooding night, had rapt me
away.

I sat up in the boat. Gigantic forest trees were about me; through
which, like a silver snake, twisted and twined the great river. The
little waves, when I moved in the boat, heaved and fell with a plash
as of molten silver, breaking the image of the moon into a thousand
morsels, fusing again into one, as the ripples of laughter die into the
still face of joy. The sleeping woods, in undefined massiveness; the
water that flowed in its sleep; and, above all, the enchantress moon,
which had cast them all, with her pale eye, into the charmed slumber,
sank into my soul, and I felt as if I had died in a dream, and should
never more awake.

From this I was partly aroused by a glimmering of white, that, through
the trees on the left, vaguely crossed my vision, as I gazed upwards.
But the trees again hid the object; and at the moment, some strange
melodious bird took up its song, and sang, not an ordinary bird-song,
with constant repetitions of the same melody, but what sounded like
a continuous strain, in which one thought was expressed, deepening in
intensity as evolved in progress. It sounded like a welcome already
overshadowed with the coming farewell. As in all sweetest music, a tinge
of sadness was in every note. Nor do we know how much of the pleasures
even of life we owe to the intermingled sorrows. Joy cannot unfold
the deepest truths, although deepest truth must be deepest joy. Cometh
white-robed Sorrow, stooping and wan, and flingeth wide the doors she
may not enter. Almost we linger with Sorrow for very love.

As the song concluded the stream bore my little boat with a gentle sweep
round a bend of the river; and lo! on a broad lawn, which rose from the
water’s edge with a long green slope to a clear elevation from which the
trees receded on all sides, stood a stately palace glimmering ghostly in
the moonshine: it seemed to be built throughout of the whitest marble.
There was no reflection of moonlight from windows--there seemed to be
none; so there was no cold glitter; only, as I said, a ghostly shimmer.
Numberless shadows tempered the shine, from column and balcony and
tower. For everywhere galleries ran along the face of the buildings;
wings were extended in many directions; and numberless openings, through
which the moonbeams vanished into the interior, and which served
both for doors and windows, had their separate balconies in front,
communicating with a common gallery that rose on its own pillars.
Of course, I did not discover all this from the river, and in the
moonlight. But, though I was there for many days, I did not succeed
in mastering the inner topography of the building, so extensive and
complicated was it.

Here I wished to land, but the boat had no oars on board. However, I
found that a plank, serving for a seat, was unfastened, and with that I
brought the boat to the bank and scrambled on shore. Deep soft turf sank
beneath my feet, as I went up the ascent towards the palace.

When I reached it, I saw that it stood on a great platform of marble,
with an ascent, by broad stairs of the same, all round it. Arrived on
the platform, I found there was an extensive outlook over the forest,
which, however, was rather veiled than revealed by the moonlight.

Entering by a wide gateway, but without gates, into an inner court,
surrounded on all sides by great marble pillars supporting galleries
above, I saw a large fountain of porphyry in the middle, throwing up a
lofty column of water, which fell, with a noise as of the fusion of all
sweet sounds, into a basin beneath; overflowing which, it ran into a
single channel towards the interior of the building. Although the moon
was by this time so low in the west, that not a ray of her light fell
into the court, over the height of the surrounding buildings; yet was
the court lighted by a second reflex from the sun of other lands. For
the top of the column of water, just as it spread to fall, caught the
moonbeams, and like a great pale lamp, hung high in the night air, threw
a dim memory of light (as it were) over the court below. This court was
paved in diamonds of white and red marble. According to my custom since
I entered Fairy Land, of taking for a guide whatever I first found
moving in any direction, I followed the stream from the basin of the
fountain. It led me to a great open door, beneath the ascending steps of
which it ran through a low arch and disappeared. Entering here, I found
myself in a great hall, surrounded with white pillars, and paved with
black and white. This I could see by the moonlight, which, from the
other side, streamed through open windows into the hall.

Its height I could not distinctly see. As soon as I entered, I had
the feeling so common to me in the woods, that there were others
there besides myself, though I could see no one, and heard no sound to
indicate a presence. Since my visit to the Church of Darkness, my power
of seeing the fairies of the higher orders had gradually diminished,
until it had almost ceased. But I could frequently believe in their
presence while unable to see them. Still, although I had company, and
doubtless of a safe kind, it seemed rather dreary to spend the night in
an empty marble hall, however beautiful, especially as the moon was near
the going down, and it would soon be dark. So I began at the place where
I entered, and walked round the hall, looking for some door or passage
that might lead me to a more hospitable chamber. As I walked, I was
deliciously haunted with the feeling that behind some one of the
seemingly innumerable pillars, one who loved me was waiting for me. Then
I thought she was following me from pillar to pillar as I went along;
but no arms came out of the faint moonlight, and no sigh assured me of
her presence.

At length I came to an open corridor, into which I turned;
notwithstanding that, in doing so, I left the light behind. Along this
I walked with outstretched hands, groping my way, till, arriving at
another corridor, which seemed to strike off at right angles to that in
which I was, I saw at the end a faintly glimmering light, too pale even
for moonshine, resembling rather a stray phosphorescence. However, where
everything was white, a little light went a great way. So I walked on
to the end, and a long corridor it was. When I came up to the light, I
found that it proceeded from what looked like silver letters upon a door
of ebony; and, to my surprise even in the home of wonder itself, the
letters formed the words, THE CHAMBER OF SIR ANODOS. Although I had as
yet no right to the honours of a knight, I ventured to conclude that
the chamber was indeed intended for me; and, opening the door without
hesitation, I entered. Any doubt as to whether I was right in so doing,
was soon dispelled. What to my dark eyes seemed a blaze of light, burst
upon me. A fire of large pieces of some sweet-scented wood, supported by
dogs of silver, was burning on the hearth, and a bright lamp stood on a
table, in the midst of a plentiful meal, apparently awaiting my arrival.
But what surprised me more than all, was, that the room was in every
respect a copy of my own room, the room whence the little stream from my
basin had led me into Fairy Land. There was the very carpet of grass and
moss and daisies, which I had myself designed; the curtains of pale blue
silk, that fell like a cataract over the windows; the old-fashioned bed,
with the chintz furniture, on which I had slept from boyhood. “Now I
shall sleep,” I said to myself. “My shadow dares not come here.”

I sat down to the table, and began to help myself to the good things
before me with confidence. And now I found, as in many instances before,
how true the fairy tales are; for I was waited on, all the time of my
meal, by invisible hands. I had scarcely to do more than look towards
anything I wanted, when it was brought me, just as if it had come to me
of itself. My glass was kept filled with the wine I had chosen, until
I looked towards another bottle or decanter; when a fresh glass was
substituted, and the other wine supplied. When I had eaten and drank
more heartily and joyfully than ever since I entered Fairy Land, the
whole was removed by several attendants, of whom some were male and some
female, as I thought I could distinguish from the way the dishes were
lifted from the table, and the motion with which they were carried out
of the room. As soon as they were all taken away, I heard a sound as of
the shutting of a door, and knew that I was left alone. I sat long by
the fire, meditating, and wondering how it would all end; and when at
length, wearied with thinking, I betook myself to my own bed, it was
half with a hope that, when I awoke in the morning, I should awake not
only in my own room, but in my own castle also; and that I should walk,
out upon my own native soil, and find that Fairy Land was, after all,
only a vision of the night. The sound of the falling waters of the
fountain floated me into oblivion.





CHAPTER XI

            “A wilderness of building, sinking far
             And self-withdrawn into a wondrous depth,
             Far sinking into splendour--without end:
             Fabric it seemed of diamond and of gold,
             With alabaster domes, and silver spires,
             And blazing terrace upon terrace, high
             Uplifted.”
                                         WORDSWORTH.

But when, after a sleep, which, although dreamless, yet left behind it a
sense of past blessedness, I awoke in the full morning, I found, indeed,
that the room was still my own; but that it looked abroad upon an
unknown landscape of forest and hill and dale on the one side--and on
the other, upon the marble court, with the great fountain, the crest of
which now flashed glorious in the sun, and cast on the pavement beneath
a shower of faint shadows from the waters that fell from it into the
marble basin below.

Agreeably to all authentic accounts of the treatment of travellers in
Fairy Land, I found by my bedside a complete suit of fresh clothing,
just such as I was in the habit of wearing; for, though varied
sufficiently from the one removed, it was yet in complete accordance
with my tastes. I dressed myself in this, and went out. The whole palace
shone like silver in the sun. The marble was partly dull and partly
polished; and every pinnacle, dome, and turret ended in a ball, or cone,
or cusp of silver. It was like frost-work, and too dazzling, in the sun,
for earthly eyes like mine.

I will not attempt to describe the environs, save by saying, that all
the pleasures to be found in the most varied and artistic arrangement of
wood and river, lawn and wild forest, garden and shrubbery, rocky hill
and luxurious vale; in living creatures wild and tame, in gorgeous
birds, scattered fountains, little streams, and reedy lakes--all were
here. Some parts of the palace itself I shall have occasion to describe
more minutely.

For this whole morning I never thought of my demon shadow; and not till
the weariness which supervened on delight brought it again to my
memory, did I look round to see if it was behind me: it was scarcely
discernible. But its presence, however faintly revealed, sent a pang to
my heart, for the pain of which, not all the beauties around me could
compensate. It was followed, however, by the comforting reflection that,
peradventure, I might here find the magic word of power to banish
the demon and set me free, so that I should no longer be a man beside
myself. The Queen of Fairy Land, thought I, must dwell here: surely she
will put forth her power to deliver me, and send me singing through
the further gates of her country back to my own land. “Shadow of me!”
 I said; “which art not me, but which representest thyself to me as me;
here I may find a shadow of light which will devour thee, the shadow of
darkness! Here I may find a blessing which will fall on thee as a curse,
and damn thee to the blackness whence thou hast emerged unbidden.” I
said this, stretched at length on the slope of the lawn above the river;
and as the hope arose within me, the sun came forth from a light fleecy
cloud that swept across his face; and hill and dale, and the great river
winding on through the still mysterious forest, flashed back his rays as
with a silent shout of joy; all nature lived and glowed; the very earth
grew warm beneath me; a magnificent dragon-fly went past me like an
arrow from a bow, and a whole concert of birds burst into choral song.

The heat of the sun soon became too intense even for passive support. I
therefore rose, and sought the shelter of one of the arcades. Wandering
along from one to another of these, wherever my heedless steps led me,
and wondering everywhere at the simple magnificence of the building, I
arrived at another hall, the roof of which was of a pale blue, spangled
with constellations of silver stars, and supported by porphyry pillars
of a paler red than ordinary.--In this house (I may remark in passing),
silver seemed everywhere preferred to gold; and such was the purity of
the air, that it showed nowhere signs of tarnishing.--The whole of the
floor of this hall, except a narrow path behind the pillars, paved with
black, was hollowed into a huge basin, many feet deep, and filled with
the purest, most liquid and radiant water. The sides of the basin were
white marble, and the bottom was paved with all kinds of refulgent
stones, of every shape and hue.

In their arrangement, you would have supposed, at first sight, that
there was no design, for they seemed to lie as if cast there from
careless and playful hands; but it was a most harmonious confusion; and
as I looked at the play of their colours, especially when the waters
were in motion, I came at last to feel as if not one little pebble could
be displaced, without injuring the effect of the whole. Beneath this
floor of the water, lay the reflection of the blue inverted roof,
fretted with its silver stars, like a second deeper sea, clasping and
upholding the first. The fairy bath was probably fed from the fountain
in the court. Led by an irresistible desire, I undressed, and plunged
into the water. It clothed me as with a new sense and its object both in
one. The waters lay so close to me, they seemed to enter and revive my
heart. I rose to the surface, shook the water from my hair, and swam as
in a rainbow, amid the coruscations of the gems below seen through the
agitation caused by my motion. Then, with open eyes, I dived, and swam
beneath the surface. And here was a new wonder. For the basin, thus
beheld, appeared to extend on all sides like a sea, with here and there
groups as of ocean rocks, hollowed by ceaseless billows into wondrous
caves and grotesque pinnacles. Around the caves grew sea-weeds of all
hues, and the corals glowed between; while far off, I saw the glimmer
of what seemed to be creatures of human form at home in the waters. I
thought I had been enchanted; and that when I rose to the surface, I
should find myself miles from land, swimming alone upon a heaving
sea; but when my eyes emerged from the waters, I saw above me the blue
spangled vault, and the red pillars around. I dived again, and found
myself once more in the heart of a great sea. I then arose, and swam to
the edge, where I got out easily, for the water reached the very brim,
and, as I drew near washed in tiny waves over the black marble border. I
dressed, and went out, deeply refreshed.

And now I began to discern faint, gracious forms, here and there
throughout the building. Some walked together in earnest conversation.
Others strayed alone. Some stood in groups, as if looking at and talking
about a picture or a statue. None of them heeded me. Nor were they
plainly visible to my eyes. Sometimes a group, or single individual,
would fade entirely out of the realm of my vision as I gazed. When
evening came, and the moon arose, clear as a round of a horizon-sea when
the sun hangs over it in the west, I began to see them all more
plainly; especially when they came between me and the moon; and yet more
especially, when I myself was in the shade. But, even then, I sometimes
saw only the passing wave of a white robe; or a lovely arm or neck
gleamed by in the moonshine; or white feet went walking alone over the
moony sward. Nor, I grieve to say, did I ever come much nearer to these
glorious beings, or ever look upon the Queen of the Fairies herself. My
destiny ordered otherwise.

In this palace of marble and silver, and fountains and moonshine, I
spent many days; waited upon constantly in my room with everything
desirable, and bathing daily in the fairy bath. All this time I was
little troubled with my demon shadow I had a vague feeling that he was
somewhere about the palace; but it seemed as if the hope that I should
in this place be finally freed from his hated presence, had sufficed to
banish him for a time. How and where I found him, I shall soon have to
relate.

The third day after my arrival, I found the library of the palace; and
here, all the time I remained, I spent most of the middle of the day.
For it was, not to mention far greater attractions, a luxurious retreat
from the noontide sun. During the mornings and afternoons, I wandered
about the lovely neighbourhood, or lay, lost in delicious day-dreams,
beneath some mighty tree on the open lawn. My evenings were by-and-by
spent in a part of the palace, the account of which, and of my
adventures in connection with it, I must yet postpone for a little.

The library was a mighty hall, lighted from the roof, which was formed
of something like glass, vaulted over in a single piece, and stained
throughout with a great mysterious picture in gorgeous colouring.

The walls were lined from floor to roof with books and books: most of
them in ancient bindings, but some in strange new fashions which I had
never seen, and which, were I to make the attempt, I could ill describe.
All around the walls, in front of the books, ran galleries in rows,
communicating by stairs. These galleries were built of all kinds of
coloured stones; all sorts of marble and granite, with porphyry, jasper,
lapis lazuli, agate, and various others, were ranged in wonderful melody
of successive colours. Although the material, then, of which these
galleries and stairs were built, rendered necessary a certain degree
of massiveness in the construction, yet such was the size of the place,
that they seemed to run along the walls like cords.

Over some parts of the library, descended curtains of silk of various
dyes, none of which I ever saw lifted while I was there; and I felt
somehow that it would be presumptuous in me to venture to look within
them. But the use of the other books seemed free; and day after day I
came to the library, threw myself on one of the many sumptuous eastern
carpets, which lay here and there on the floor, and read, and read,
until weary; if that can be designated as weariness, which was rather
the faintness of rapturous delight; or until, sometimes, the failing of
the light invited me to go abroad, in the hope that a cool gentle breeze
might have arisen to bathe, with an airy invigorating bath, the limbs
which the glow of the burning spirit within had withered no less than
the glow of the blazing sun without.

One peculiarity of these books, or at least most of those I looked into,
I must make a somewhat vain attempt to describe.

If, for instance, it was a book of metaphysics I opened, I had scarcely
read two pages before I seemed to myself to be pondering over discovered
truth, and constructing the intellectual machine whereby to communicate
the discovery to my fellow men. With some books, however, of this
nature, it seemed rather as if the process was removed yet a great way
further back; and I was trying to find the root of a manifestation,
the spiritual truth whence a material vision sprang; or to combine
two propositions, both apparently true, either at once or in different
remembered moods, and to find the point in which their invisibly
converging lines would unite in one, revealing a truth higher than
either and differing from both; though so far from being opposed to
either, that it was that whence each derived its life and power. Or if
the book was one of travels, I found myself the traveller. New
lands, fresh experiences, novel customs, rose around me. I walked, I
discovered, I fought, I suffered, I rejoiced in my success. Was it a
history? I was the chief actor therein. I suffered my own blame; I was
glad in my own praise. With a fiction it was the same. Mine was the
whole story. For I took the place of the character who was most like
myself, and his story was mine; until, grown weary with the life of
years condensed in an hour, or arrived at my deathbed, or the end of the
volume, I would awake, with a sudden bewilderment, to the consciousness
of my present life, recognising the walls and roof around me, and
finding I joyed or sorrowed only in a book. If the book was a poem, the
words disappeared, or took the subordinate position of an accompaniment
to the succession of forms and images that rose and vanished with a
soundless rhythm, and a hidden rime.

In one, with a mystical title, which I cannot recall, I read of a
world that is not like ours. The wondrous account, in such a feeble,
fragmentary way as is possible to me, I would willingly impart. Whether
or not it was all a poem, I cannot tell; but, from the impulse I felt,
when I first contemplated writing it, to break into rime, to which
impulse I shall give way if it comes upon me again, I think it must have
been, partly at least, in verse.





CHAPTER XII

            “Chained is the Spring.  The night-wind bold
              Blows over the hard earth;
             Time is not more confused and cold,
              Nor keeps more wintry mirth.

            “Yet blow, and roll the world about;
               Blow, Time--blow, winter’s Wind!
             Through chinks of Time, heaven peepeth out,
               And Spring the frost behind.”
                                         G. E. M.

They who believe in the influences of the stars over the fates of men,
are, in feeling at least, nearer the truth than they who regard the
heavenly bodies as related to them merely by a common obedience to an
external law. All that man sees has to do with man. Worlds cannot be
without an intermundane relationship. The community of the centre of
all creation suggests an interradiating connection and dependence of
the parts. Else a grander idea is conceivable than that which is already
imbodied. The blank, which is only a forgotten life, lying behind the
consciousness, and the misty splendour, which is an undeveloped
life, lying before it, may be full of mysterious revelations of other
connexions with the worlds around us, than those of science and
poetry. No shining belt or gleaming moon, no red and green glory in a
self-encircling twin-star, but has a relation with the hidden things
of a man’s soul, and, it may be, with the secret history of his body as
well. They are portions of the living house wherein he abides.

             Through the realms of the monarch Sun
         Creeps a world, whose course had begun,
         On a weary path with a weary pace,
         Before the Earth sprang forth on her race:
         But many a time the Earth had sped
         Around the path she still must tread,
         Ere the elder planet, on leaden wing,
         Once circled the court of the planet’s king.

            There, in that lonely and distant star,
         The seasons are not as our seasons are;
         But many a year hath Autumn to dress
         The trees in their matron loveliness;
         As long hath old Winter in triumph to go
         O’er beauties dead in his vaults below;
         And many a year the Spring doth wear
         Combing the icicles from her hair;
         And Summer, dear Summer, hath years of June,
         With large white clouds, and cool showers at noon:
         And a beauty that grows to a weight like grief,
         Till a burst of tears is the heart’s relief.

            Children, born when Winter is king,
         May never rejoice in the hoping Spring;
         Though their own heart-buds are bursting with joy,
         And the child hath grown to the girl or boy;
         But may die with cold and icy hours
         Watching them ever in place of flowers.
         And some who awake from their primal sleep,
         When the sighs of Summer through forests creep,
         Live, and love, and are loved again;
         Seek for pleasure, and find its pain;
         Sink to their last, their forsaken sleeping,
         With the same sweet odours around them creeping.

Now the children, there, are not born as the children are born in worlds
nearer to the sun. For they arrive no one knows how. A maiden, walking
alone, hears a cry: for even there a cry is the first utterance; and
searching about, she findeth, under an overhanging rock, or within a
clump of bushes, or, it may be, betwixt gray stones on the side of a
hill, or in any other sheltered and unexpected spot, a little child.
This she taketh tenderly, and beareth home with joy, calling out,
“Mother, mother”--if so be that her mother lives--“I have got a baby--I
have found a child!” All the household gathers round to see;--“WHERE IS
IT? WHAT IS IT LIKE? WHERE DID YOU FIND IT?” and such-like questions,
abounding. And thereupon she relates the whole story of the discovery;
for by the circumstances, such as season of the year, time of the day,
condition of the air, and such like, and, especially, the peculiar and
never-repeated aspect of the heavens and earth at the time, and the
nature of the place of shelter wherein it is found, is determined, or at
least indicated, the nature of the child thus discovered. Therefore,
at certain seasons, and in certain states of the weather, according, in
part, to their own fancy, the young women go out to look for children.
They generally avoid seeking them, though they cannot help sometimes
finding them, in places and with circumstances uncongenial to their
peculiar likings. But no sooner is a child found, than its claim for
protection and nurture obliterates all feeling of choice in the matter.
Chiefly, however, in the season of summer, which lasts so long, coming
as it does after such long intervals; and mostly in the warm evenings,
about the middle of twilight; and principally in the woods and along
the river banks, do the maidens go looking for children just as children
look for flowers. And ever as the child grows, yea, more and more as he
advances in years, will his face indicate to those who understand the
spirit of Nature, and her utterances in the face of the world, the
nature of the place of his birth, and the other circumstances thereof;
whether a clear morning sun guided his mother to the nook whence issued
the boy’s low cry; or at eve the lonely maiden (for the same woman never
finds a second, at least while the first lives) discovers the girl by
the glimmer of her white skin, lying in a nest like that of the lark,
amid long encircling grasses, and the upward-gazing eyes of the lowly
daisies; whether the storm bowed the forest trees around, or the still
frost fixed in silence the else flowing and babbling stream.

After they grow up, the men and women are but little together. There is
this peculiar difference between them, which likewise distinguishes the
women from those of the earth. The men alone have arms; the women
have only wings. Resplendent wings are they, wherein they can shroud
themselves from head to foot in a panoply of glistering glory. By these
wings alone, it may frequently be judged in what seasons, and under what
aspects, they were born. From those that came in winter, go great white
wings, white as snow; the edge of every feather shining like the sheen
of silver, so that they flash and glitter like frost in the sun. But
underneath, they are tinged with a faint pink or rose-colour. Those born
in spring have wings of a brilliant green, green as grass; and
towards the edges the feathers are enamelled like the surface of the
grass-blades. These again are white within. Those that are born in
summer have wings of a deep rose-colour, lined with pale gold. And those
born in autumn have purple wings, with a rich brown on the inside. But
these colours are modified and altered in all varieties, corresponding
to the mood of the day and hour, as well as the season of the year; and
sometimes I found the various colours so intermingled, that I could not
determine even the season, though doubtless the hieroglyphic could be
deciphered by more experienced eyes. One splendour, in particular, I
remember--wings of deep carmine, with an inner down of warm gray, around
a form of brilliant whiteness.

She had been found as the sun went down through a low sea-fog, casting
crimson along a broad sea-path into a little cave on the shore, where a
bathing maiden saw her lying.

But though I speak of sun and fog, and sea and shore, the world there
is in some respects very different from the earth whereon men live.
For instance, the waters reflect no forms. To the unaccustomed eye they
appear, if undisturbed, like the surface of a dark metal, only that
the latter would reflect indistinctly, whereas they reflect not at all,
except light which falls immediately upon them. This has a great effect
in causing the landscapes to differ from those on the earth. On
the stillest evening, no tall ship on the sea sends a long wavering
reflection almost to the feet of him on shore; the face of no maiden
brightens at its own beauty in a still forest-well. The sun and moon
alone make a glitter on the surface. The sea is like a sea of death,
ready to ingulf and never to reveal: a visible shadow of oblivion. Yet
the women sport in its waters like gorgeous sea-birds. The men more
rarely enter them. But, on the contrary, the sky reflects everything
beneath it, as if it were built of water like ours. Of course, from
its concavity there is some distortion of the reflected objects; yet
wondrous combinations of form are often to be seen in the overhanging
depth. And then it is not shaped so much like a round dome as the sky of
the earth, but, more of an egg-shape, rises to a great towering height
in the middle, appearing far more lofty than the other. When the stars
come out at night, it shows a mighty cupola, “fretted with golden
fires,” wherein there is room for all tempests to rush and rave.

One evening in early summer, I stood with a group of men and women on a
steep rock that overhung the sea. They were all questioning me about my
world and the ways thereof. In making reply to one of their questions,
I was compelled to say that children are not born in the Earth as with
them. Upon this I was assailed with a whole battery of inquiries, which
at first I tried to avoid; but, at last, I was compelled, in the vaguest
manner I could invent, to make some approach to the subject in question.
Immediately a dim notion of what I meant, seemed to dawn in the minds
of most of the women. Some of them folded their great wings all around
them, as they generally do when in the least offended, and stood erect
and motionless. One spread out her rosy pinions, and flashed from the
promontory into the gulf at its foot. A great light shone in the eyes of
one maiden, who turned and walked slowly away, with her purple and white
wings half dispread behind her. She was found, the next morning, dead
beneath a withered tree on a bare hill-side, some miles inland. They
buried her where she lay, as is their custom; for, before they die,
they instinctively search for a spot like the place of their birth, and
having found one that satisfies them, they lie down, fold their wings
around them, if they be women, or cross their arms over their breasts,
if they are men, just as if they were going to sleep; and so sleep
indeed. The sign or cause of coming death is an indescribable longing
for something, they know not what, which seizes them, and drives them
into solitude, consuming them within, till the body fails. When a youth
and a maiden look too deep into each other’s eyes, this longing seizes
and possesses them; but instead of drawing nearer to each other, they
wander away, each alone, into solitary places, and die of their desire.
But it seems to me, that thereafter they are born babes upon our earth:
where, if, when grown, they find each other, it goes well with them;
if not, it will seem to go ill. But of this I know nothing. When I told
them that the women on the Earth had not wings like them, but arms, they
stared, and said how bold and masculine they must look; not knowing that
their wings, glorious as they are, are but undeveloped arms.

But see the power of this book, that, while recounting what I can recall
of its contents, I write as if myself had visited the far-off planet,
learned its ways and appearances, and conversed with its men and women.
And so, while writing, it seemed to me that I had.

The book goes on with the story of a maiden, who, born at the close of
autumn, and living in a long, to her endless winter, set out at last
to find the regions of spring; for, as in our earth, the seasons are
divided over the globe. It begins something like this:

            She watched them dying for many a day,
            Dropping from off the old trees away,
            One by one; or else in a shower
            Crowding over the withered flower
            For as if they had done some grievous wrong,
            The sun, that had nursed them and loved them so long,
            Grew weary of loving, and, turning back,
            Hastened away on his southern track;
            And helplessly hung each shrivelled leaf,
            Faded away with an idle grief.
            And the gusts of wind, sad Autumn’s sighs,
            Mournfully swept through their families;
            Casting away with a helpless moan
            All that he yet might call his own,
            As the child, when his bird is gone for ever,
            Flingeth the cage on the wandering river.
            And the giant trees, as bare as Death,
            Slowly bowed to the great Wind’s breath;
            And groaned with trying to keep from groaning
            Amidst the young trees bending and moaning.
            And the ancient planet’s mighty sea
            Was heaving and falling most restlessly,
            And the tops of the waves were broken and white,
            Tossing about to ease their might;
            And the river was striving to reach the main,
            And the ripple was hurrying back again.
            Nature lived in sadness now;
            Sadness lived on the maiden’s brow,
            As she watched, with a fixed, half-conscious eye,
            One lonely leaf that trembled on high,
            Till it dropped at last from the desolate bough--
            Sorrow, oh, sorrow! ‘tis winter now.
            And her tears gushed forth, though it was but a leaf,
            For little will loose the swollen fountain of grief:
            When up to the lip the water goes,
            It needs but a drop, and it overflows.

            Oh! many and many a dreary year
            Must pass away ere the buds appear:
            Many a night of darksome sorrow
            Yield to the light of a joyless morrow,
            Ere birds again, on the clothed trees,
            Shall fill the branches with melodies.
            She will dream of meadows with wakeful streams;
            Of wavy grass in the sunny beams;
            Of hidden wells that soundless spring,
            Hoarding their joy as a holy thing;
            Of founts that tell it all day long
            To the listening woods, with exultant song;
            She will dream of evenings that die into nights,
            Where each sense is filled with its own delights,
            And the soul is still as the vaulted sky,
            Lulled with an inner harmony;

            And the flowers give out to the dewy night,
            Changed into perfume, the gathered light;
            And the darkness sinks upon all their host,
            Till the sun sail up on the eastern coast--
            She will wake and see the branches bare,
            Weaving a net in the frozen air.



The story goes on to tell how, at last, weary with wintriness, she
travelled towards the southern regions of her globe, to meet the spring
on its slow way northwards; and how, after many sad adventures, many
disappointed hopes, and many tears, bitter and fruitless, she found
at last, one stormy afternoon, in a leafless forest, a single snowdrop
growing betwixt the borders of the winter and spring. She lay down
beside it and died. I almost believe that a child, pale and peaceful as
a snowdrop, was born in the Earth within a fixed season from that stormy
afternoon.




CHAPTER XIII

             “I saw a ship sailing upon the sea
              Deeply laden as ship could be;
              But not so deep as in love I am
              For I care not whether I sink or swim.”
                                     Old Ballad.

            “But Love is such a Mystery
                 I cannot find it out:
              For when I think I’m best resolv’d,
                 I then am in most doubt.”
                                SIR JOHN SUCKLING.

One story I will try to reproduce. But, alas! it is like trying to
reconstruct a forest out of broken branches and withered leaves. In the
fairy book, everything was just as it should be, though whether in words
or something else, I cannot tell. It glowed and flashed the thoughts
upon the soul, with such a power that the medium disappeared from the
consciousness, and it was occupied only with the things themselves.
My representation of it must resemble a translation from a rich and
powerful language, capable of embodying the thoughts of a splendidly
developed people, into the meagre and half-articulate speech of a savage
tribe. Of course, while I read it, I was Cosmo, and his history
was mine. Yet, all the time, I seemed to have a kind of double
consciousness, and the story a double meaning. Sometimes it seemed
only to represent a simple story of ordinary life, perhaps almost of
universal life; wherein two souls, loving each other and longing to come
nearer, do, after all, but behold each other as in a glass darkly.

As through the hard rock go the branching silver veins; as into the
solid land run the creeks and gulfs from the unresting sea; as the
lights and influences of the upper worlds sink silently through
the earth’s atmosphere; so doth Faerie invade the world of men, and
sometimes startle the common eye with an association as of cause and
effect, when between the two no connecting links can be traced.

Cosmo von Wehrstahl was a student at the University of Prague. Though
of a noble family, he was poor, and prided himself upon the independence
that poverty gives; for what will not a man pride himself upon, when he
cannot get rid of it? A favourite with his fellow students, he yet had
no companions; and none of them had ever crossed the threshold of his
lodging in the top of one of the highest houses in the old town. Indeed,
the secret of much of that complaisance which recommended him to his
fellows, was the thought of his unknown retreat, whither in the evening
he could betake himself and indulge undisturbed in his own studies and
reveries. These studies, besides those subjects necessary to his course
at the University, embraced some less commonly known and approved;
for in a secret drawer lay the works of Albertus Magnus and Cornelius
Agrippa, along with others less read and more abstruse. As yet, however,
he had followed these researches only from curiosity, and had turned
them to no practical purpose.

His lodging consisted of one large low-ceiled room, singularly bare of
furniture; for besides a couple of wooden chairs, a couch which served
for dreaming on both by day and night, and a great press of black oak,
there was very little in the room that could be called furniture.

But curious instruments were heaped in the corners; and in one stood
a skeleton, half-leaning against the wall, half-supported by a string
about its neck. One of its hands, all of fingers, rested on the heavy
pommel of a great sword that stood beside it.

Various weapons were scattered about over the floor. The walls were
utterly bare of adornment; for the few strange things, such as a large
dried bat with wings dispread, the skin of a porcupine, and a stuffed
sea-mouse, could hardly be reckoned as such. But although his fancy
delighted in vagaries like these, he indulged his imagination with far
different fare. His mind had never yet been filled with an absorbing
passion; but it lay like a still twilight open to any wind, whether the
low breath that wafts but odours, or the storm that bows the great trees
till they strain and creak. He saw everything as through a rose-coloured
glass. When he looked from his window on the street below, not a maiden
passed but she moved as in a story, and drew his thoughts after her till
she disappeared in the vista. When he walked in the streets, he always
felt as if reading a tale, into which he sought to weave every face of
interest that went by; and every sweet voice swept his soul as with the
wing of a passing angel. He was in fact a poet without words; the more
absorbed and endangered, that the springing-waters were dammed back
into his soul, where, finding no utterance, they grew, and swelled, and
undermined. He used to lie on his hard couch, and read a tale or a poem,
till the book dropped from his hand; but he dreamed on, he knew not
whether awake or asleep, until the opposite roof grew upon his sense,
and turned golden in the sunrise. Then he arose too; and the impulses of
vigorous youth kept him ever active, either in study or in sport, until
again the close of the day left him free; and the world of night, which
had lain drowned in the cataract of the day, rose up in his soul, with
all its stars, and dim-seen phantom shapes. But this could hardly last
long. Some one form must sooner or later step within the charmed circle,
enter the house of life, and compel the bewildered magician to kneel and
worship.

One afternoon, towards dusk, he was wandering dreamily in one of the
principal streets, when a fellow student roused him by a slap on the
shoulder, and asked him to accompany him into a little back alley to
look at some old armour which he had taken a fancy to possess. Cosmo was
considered an authority in every matter pertaining to arms, ancient or
modern. In the use of weapons, none of the students could come near him;
and his practical acquaintance with some had principally contributed
to establish his authority in reference to all. He accompanied him
willingly.

They entered a narrow alley, and thence a dirty little court, where
a low arched door admitted them into a heterogeneous assemblage of
everything musty, and dusty, and old, that could well be imagined.
His verdict on the armour was satisfactory, and his companion at once
concluded the purchase. As they were leaving the place, Cosmo’s eye was
attracted by an old mirror of an elliptical shape, which leaned against
the wall, covered with dust. Around it was some curious carving, which
he could see but very indistinctly by the glimmering light which
the owner of the shop carried in his hand. It was this carving that
attracted his attention; at least so it appeared to him. He left the
place, however, with his friend, taking no further notice of it. They
walked together to the main street, where they parted and took opposite
directions.

No sooner was Cosmo left alone, than the thought of the curious old
mirror returned to him. A strong desire to see it more plainly arose
within him, and he directed his steps once more towards the shop. The
owner opened the door when he knocked, as if he had expected him. He
was a little, old, withered man, with a hooked nose, and burning eyes
constantly in a slow restless motion, and looking here and there as if
after something that eluded them. Pretending to examine several other
articles, Cosmo at last approached the mirror, and requested to have it
taken down.

“Take it down yourself, master; I cannot reach it,” said the old man.

Cosmo took it down carefully, when he saw that the carving was indeed
delicate and costly, being both of admirable design and execution;
containing withal many devices which seemed to embody some meaning
to which he had no clue. This, naturally, in one of his tastes and
temperament, increased the interest he felt in the old mirror; so much,
indeed, that he now longed to possess it, in order to study its frame at
his leisure. He pretended, however, to want it only for use; and saying
he feared the plate could be of little service, as it was rather old, he
brushed away a little of the dust from its face, expecting to see a dull
reflection within. His surprise was great when he found the reflection
brilliant, revealing a glass not only uninjured by age, but wondrously
clear and perfect (should the whole correspond to this part) even for
one newly from the hands of the maker. He asked carelessly what the
owner wanted for the thing. The old man replied by mentioning a sum of
money far beyond the reach of poor Cosmo, who proceeded to replace the
mirror where it had stood before.

“You think the price too high?” said the old man.

“I do not know that it is too much for you to ask,” replied Cosmo; “but
it is far too much for me to give.”

The old man held up his light towards Cosmo’s face. “I like your look,”
 said he.

Cosmo could not return the compliment. In fact, now he looked closely
at him for the first time, he felt a kind of repugnance to him, mingled
with a strange feeling of doubt whether a man or a woman stood before
him.

“What is your name?” he continued.

“Cosmo von Wehrstahl.”

“Ah, ah! I thought as much. I see your father in you. I knew your father
very well, young sir. I dare say in some odd corners of my house, you
might find some old things with his crest and cipher upon them still.
Well, I like you: you shall have the mirror at the fourth part of what I
asked for it; but upon one condition.”

“What is that?” said Cosmo; for, although the price was still a great
deal for him to give, he could just manage it; and the desire to possess
the mirror had increased to an altogether unaccountable degree, since it
had seemed beyond his reach.

“That if you should ever want to get rid of it again, you will let me
have the first offer.”

“Certainly,” replied Cosmo, with a smile; adding, “a moderate condition
indeed.”

“On your honour?” insisted the seller.

“On my honour,” said the buyer; and the bargain was concluded.

“I will carry it home for you,” said the old man, as Cosmo took it in
his hands.

“No, no; I will carry it myself,” said he; for he had a peculiar dislike
to revealing his residence to any one, and more especially to this
person, to whom he felt every moment a greater antipathy. “Just as you
please,” said the old creature, and muttered to himself as he held his
light at the door to show him out of the court: “Sold for the sixth
time! I wonder what will be the upshot of it this time. I should think
my lady had enough of it by now!”

Cosmo carried his prize carefully home. But all the way he had an
uncomfortable feeling that he was watched and dogged. Repeatedly he
looked about, but saw nothing to justify his suspicions. Indeed, the
streets were too crowded and too ill lighted to expose very readily
a careful spy, if such there should be at his heels. He reached his
lodging in safety, and leaned his purchase against the wall, rather
relieved, strong as he was, to be rid of its weight; then, lighting his
pipe, threw himself on the couch, and was soon lapt in the folds of one
of his haunting dreams.

He returned home earlier than usual the next day, and fixed the mirror
to the wall, over the hearth, at one end of his long room.

He then carefully wiped away the dust from its face, and, clear as the
water of a sunny spring, the mirror shone out from beneath the envious
covering. But his interest was chiefly occupied with the curious carving
of the frame. This he cleaned as well as he could with a brush; and then
he proceeded to a minute examination of its various parts, in the hope
of discovering some index to the intention of the carver. In this,
however, he was unsuccessful; and, at length, pausing with some
weariness and disappointment, he gazed vacantly for a few moments into
the depth of the reflected room. But ere long he said, half aloud: “What
a strange thing a mirror is! and what a wondrous affinity exists between
it and a man’s imagination! For this room of mine, as I behold it in
the glass, is the same, and yet not the same. It is not the mere
representation of the room I live in, but it looks just as if I were
reading about it in a story I like. All its commonness has disappeared.
The mirror has lifted it out of the region of fact into the realm of
art; and the very representing of it to me has clothed with interest
that which was otherwise hard and bare; just as one sees with delight
upon the stage the representation of a character from which one would
escape in life as from something unendurably wearisome. But is it not
rather that art rescues nature from the weary and sated regards of our
senses, and the degrading injustice of our anxious everyday life, and,
appealing to the imagination, which dwells apart, reveals Nature in some
degree as she really is, and as she represents herself to the eye of the
child, whose every-day life, fearless and unambitious, meets the true
import of the wonder-teeming world around him, and rejoices therein
without questioning? That skeleton, now--I almost fear it, standing
there so still, with eyes only for the unseen, like a watch-tower
looking across all the waste of this busy world into the quiet regions
of rest beyond. And yet I know every bone and every joint in it as well
as my own fist. And that old battle-axe looks as if any moment it might
be caught up by a mailed hand, and, borne forth by the mighty arm, go
crashing through casque, and skull, and brain, invading the Unknown with
yet another bewildered ghost. I should like to live in THAT room if I
could only get into it.”

Scarcely had the half-moulded words floated from him, as he stood gazing
into the mirror, when, striking him as with a flash of amazement that
fixed him in his posture, noiseless and unannounced, glided suddenly
through the door into the reflected room, with stately motion, yet
reluctant and faltering step, the graceful form of a woman, clothed all
in white. Her back only was visible as she walked slowly up to the
couch in the further end of the room, on which she laid herself
wearily, turning towards him a face of unutterable loveliness, in which
suffering, and dislike, and a sense of compulsion, strangely mingled
with the beauty. He stood without the power of motion for some moments,
with his eyes irrecoverably fixed upon her; and even after he was
conscious of the ability to move, he could not summon up courage to
turn and look on her, face to face, in the veritable chamber in which
he stood. At length, with a sudden effort, in which the exercise of the
will was so pure, that it seemed involuntary, he turned his face to the
couch. It was vacant. In bewilderment, mingled with terror, he turned
again to the mirror: there, on the reflected couch, lay the exquisite
lady-form. She lay with closed eyes, whence two large tears were just
welling from beneath the veiling lids; still as death, save for the
convulsive motion of her bosom.

Cosmo himself could not have described what he felt. His emotions were
of a kind that destroyed consciousness, and could never be clearly
recalled. He could not help standing yet by the mirror, and keeping his
eyes fixed on the lady, though he was painfully aware of his rudeness,
and feared every moment that she would open hers, and meet his fixed
regard. But he was, ere long, a little relieved; for, after a while, her
eyelids slowly rose, and her eyes remained uncovered, but unemployed for
a time; and when, at length, they began to wander about the room, as if
languidly seeking to make some acquaintance with her environment, they
were never directed towards him: it seemed nothing but what was in the
mirror could affect her vision; and, therefore, if she saw him at all,
it could only be his back, which, of necessity, was turned towards her
in the glass. The two figures in the mirror could not meet face to face,
except he turned and looked at her, present in his room; and, as she was
not there, he concluded that if he were to turn towards the part in his
room corresponding to that in which she lay, his reflection would either
be invisible to her altogether, or at least it must appear to her to
gaze vacantly towards her, and no meeting of the eyes would produce
the impression of spiritual proximity. By-and-by her eyes fell upon the
skeleton, and he saw her shudder and close them. She did not open them
again, but signs of repugnance continued evident on her countenance.
Cosmo would have removed the obnoxious thing at once, but he feared to
discompose her yet more by the assertion of his presence which the act
would involve. So he stood and watched her. The eyelids yet shrouded
the eyes, as a costly case the jewels within; the troubled expression
gradually faded from the countenance, leaving only a faint sorrow
behind; the features settled into an unchanging expression of rest; and
by these signs, and the slow regular motion of her breathing, Cosmo knew
that she slept. He could now gaze on her without embarrassment. He saw
that her figure, dressed in the simplest robe of white, was worthy of
her face; and so harmonious, that either the delicately moulded foot, or
any finger of the equally delicate hand, was an index to the whole. As
she lay, her whole form manifested the relaxation of perfect repose. He
gazed till he was weary, and at last seated himself near the new-found
shrine, and mechanically took up a book, like one who watches by a
sick-bed. But his eyes gathered no thoughts from the page before him.
His intellect had been stunned by the bold contradiction, to its face,
of all its experience, and now lay passive, without assertion, or
speculation, or even conscious astonishment; while his imagination sent
one wild dream of blessedness after another coursing through his soul.
How long he sat he knew not; but at length he roused himself, rose, and,
trembling in every portion of his frame, looked again into the mirror.
She was gone. The mirror reflected faithfully what his room presented,
and nothing more. It stood there like a golden setting whence the
central jewel has been stolen away--like a night-sky without the glory
of its stars. She had carried with her all the strangeness of the
reflected room. It had sunk to the level of the one without.

But when the first pangs of his disappointment had passed, Cosmo began
to comfort himself with the hope that she might return, perhaps the next
evening, at the same hour. Resolving that if she did, she should not
at least be scared by the hateful skeleton, he removed that and several
other articles of questionable appearance into a recess by the side of
the hearth, whence they could not possibly cast any reflection into the
mirror; and having made his poor room as tidy as he could, sought the
solace of the open sky and of a night wind that had begun to blow, for
he could not rest where he was. When he returned, somewhat composed, he
could hardly prevail with himself to lie down on his bed; for he could
not help feeling as if she had lain upon it; and for him to lie there
now would be something like sacrilege. However, weariness prevailed; and
laying himself on the couch, dressed as he was, he slept till day.

With a beating heart, beating till he could hardly breathe, he stood
in dumb hope before the mirror, on the following evening. Again the
reflected room shone as through a purple vapour in the gathering
twilight. Everything seemed waiting like himself for a coming splendour
to glorify its poor earthliness with the presence of a heavenly joy. And
just as the room vibrated with the strokes of the neighbouring church
bell, announcing the hour of six, in glided the pale beauty, and again
laid herself on the couch. Poor Cosmo nearly lost his senses with
delight. She was there once more! Her eyes sought the corner where the
skeleton had stood, and a faint gleam of satisfaction crossed her face,
apparently at seeing it empty. She looked suffering still, but there was
less of discomfort expressed in her countenance than there had been the
night before. She took more notice of the things about her, and seemed
to gaze with some curiosity on the strange apparatus standing here and
there in her room. At length, however, drowsiness seemed to overtake
her, and again she fell asleep. Resolved not to lose sight of her this
time, Cosmo watched the sleeping form. Her slumber was so deep and
absorbing that a fascinating repose seemed to pass contagiously from her
to him as he gazed upon her; and he started as if from a dream, when
the lady moved, and, without opening her eyes, rose, and passed from the
room with the gait of a somnambulist.

Cosmo was now in a state of extravagant delight. Most men have a secret
treasure somewhere. The miser has his golden hoard; the virtuoso his pet
ring; the student his rare book; the poet his favourite haunt; the lover
his secret drawer; but Cosmo had a mirror with a lovely lady in it. And
now that he knew by the skeleton, that she was affected by the things
around her, he had a new object in life: he would turn the bare chamber
in the mirror into a room such as no lady need disdain to call her own.
This he could effect only by furnishing and adorning his. And Cosmo was
poor. Yet he possessed accomplishments that could be turned to account;
although, hitherto, he had preferred living on his slender allowance, to
increasing his means by what his pride considered unworthy of his rank.
He was the best swordsman in the University; and now he offered to give
lessons in fencing and similar exercises, to such as chose to pay
him well for the trouble. His proposal was heard with surprise by the
students; but it was eagerly accepted by many; and soon his instructions
were not confined to the richer students, but were anxiously sought by
many of the young nobility of Prague and its neighbourhood. So that very
soon he had a good deal of money at his command. The first thing he did
was to remove his apparatus and oddities into a closet in the room.
Then he placed his bed and a few other necessaries on each side of the
hearth, and parted them from the rest of the room by two screens of
Indian fabric. Then he put an elegant couch for the lady to lie upon, in
the corner where his bed had formerly stood; and, by degrees, every
day adding some article of luxury, converted it, at length, into a rich
boudoir.

Every night, about the same time, the lady entered. The first time she
saw the new couch, she started with a half-smile; then her face grew
very sad, the tears came to her eyes, and she laid herself upon the
couch, and pressed her face into the silken cushions, as if to hide from
everything. She took notice of each addition and each change as the work
proceeded; and a look of acknowledgment, as if she knew that some
one was ministering to her, and was grateful for it, mingled with the
constant look of suffering. At length, after she had lain down as usual
one evening, her eyes fell upon some paintings with which Cosmo had just
finished adorning the walls. She rose, and to his great delight, walked
across the room, and proceeded to examine them carefully, testifying
much pleasure in her looks as she did so. But again the sorrowful,
tearful expression returned, and again she buried her face in the
pillows of her couch. Gradually, however, her countenance had grown more
composed; much of the suffering manifest on her first appearance had
vanished, and a kind of quiet, hopeful expression had taken its place;
which, however, frequently gave way to an anxious, troubled look,
mingled with something of sympathetic pity.

Meantime, how fared Cosmo? As might be expected in one of his
temperament, his interest had blossomed into love, and his love--shall
I call it RIPENED, or--WITHERED into passion. But, alas! he loved a
shadow. He could not come near her, could not speak to her, could not
hear a sound from those sweet lips, to which his longing eyes would
cling like bees to their honey-founts. Ever and anon he sang to himself:

            “I shall die for love of the maiden;”

and ever he looked again, and died not, though his heart seemed ready to
break with intensity of life and longing. And the more he did for her,
the more he loved her; and he hoped that, although she never appeared
to see him, yet she was pleased to think that one unknown would give his
life to her. He tried to comfort himself over his separation from her,
by thinking that perhaps some day she would see him and make signs to
him, and that would satisfy him; “for,” thought he, “is not this all
that a loving soul can do to enter into communion with another? Nay,
how many who love never come nearer than to behold each other as in a
mirror; seem to know and yet never know the inward life; never enter
the other soul; and part at last, with but the vaguest notion of the
universe on the borders of which they have been hovering for years? If
I could but speak to her, and knew that she heard me, I should be
satisfied.” Once he contemplated painting a picture on the wall, which
should, of necessity, convey to the lady a thought of himself; but,
though he had some skill with the pencil, he found his hand tremble so
much when he began the attempt, that he was forced to give it up. . . .
. .

        “Who lives, he dies; who dies, he is alive.”

 One evening, as he stood gazing on his treasure, he thought he
saw a faint expression of self-consciousness on her countenance, as if
she surmised that passionate eyes were fixed upon her. This grew; till
at last the red blood rose over her neck, and cheek, and brow. Cosmo’s
longing to approach her became almost delirious. This night she was
dressed in an evening costume, resplendent with diamonds. This could add
nothing to her beauty, but it presented it in a new aspect; enabled her
loveliness to make a new manifestation of itself in a new embodiment.
For essential beauty is infinite; and, as the soul of Nature needs an
endless succession of varied forms to embody her loveliness, countless
faces of beauty springing forth, not any two the same, at any one of
her heart-throbs; so the individual form needs an infinite change of its
environments, to enable it to uncover all the phases of its loveliness.
Diamonds glittered from amidst her hair, half hidden in its luxuriance,
like stars through dark rain-clouds; and the bracelets on her white arms
flashed all the colours of a rainbow of lightnings, as she lifted her
snowy hands to cover her burning face. But her beauty shone down all its
adornment. “If I might have but one of her feet to kiss,” thought Cosmo,
“I should be content.” Alas! he deceived himself, for passion is never
content. Nor did he know that there are TWO ways out of her enchanted
house. But, suddenly, as if the pang had been driven into his heart
from without, revealing itself first in pain, and afterwards in definite
form, the thought darted into his mind, “She has a lover somewhere.
Remembered words of his bring the colour on her face now. I am nowhere
to her. She lives in another world all day, and all night, after she
leaves me. Why does she come and make me love her, till I, a strong man,
am too faint to look upon her more?” He looked again, and her face was
pale as a lily. A sorrowful compassion seemed to rebuke the glitter of
the restless jewels, and the slow tears rose in her eyes. She left her
room sooner this evening than was her wont. Cosmo remained alone, with a
feeling as if his bosom had been suddenly left empty and hollow, and the
weight of the whole world was crushing in its walls. The next evening,
for the first time since she began to come, she came not.

And now Cosmo was in wretched plight. Since the thought of a rival
had occurred to him, he could not rest for a moment. More than ever he
longed to see the lady face to face. He persuaded himself that if he but
knew the worst he would be satisfied; for then he could abandon Prague,
and find that relief in constant motion, which is the hope of all active
minds when invaded by distress. Meantime he waited with unspeakable
anxiety for the next night, hoping she would return: but she did not
appear. And now he fell really ill. Rallied by his fellow students on
his wretched looks, he ceased to attend the lectures. His engagements
were neglected. He cared for nothing. The sky, with the great sun in it,
was to him a heartless, burning desert. The men and women in the streets
were mere puppets, without motives in themselves, or interest to him. He
saw them all as on the ever-changing field of a camera obscura. She--she
alone and altogether--was his universe, his well of life, his incarnate
good. For six evenings she came not. Let his absorbing passion, and
the slow fever that was consuming his brain, be his excuse for the
resolution which he had taken and begun to execute, before that time had
expired.

Reasoning with himself, that it must be by some enchantment connected
with the mirror, that the form of the lady was to be seen in it, he
determined to attempt to turn to account what he had hitherto studied
principally from curiosity. “For,” said he to himself, “if a spell can
force her presence in that glass (and she came unwillingly at first),
may not a stronger spell, such as I know, especially with the aid of
her half-presence in the mirror, if ever she appears again, compel
her living form to come to me here? If I do her wrong, let love be
my excuse. I want only to know my doom from her own lips.” He never
doubted, all the time, that she was a real earthly woman; or, rather,
that there was a woman, who, somehow or other, threw this reflection of
her form into the magic mirror.

He opened his secret drawer, took out his books of magic, lighted his
lamp, and read and made notes from midnight till three in the morning,
for three successive nights. Then he replaced his books; and the next
night went out in quest of the materials necessary for the conjuration.
These were not easy to find; for, in love-charms and all incantations of
this nature, ingredients are employed scarcely fit to be mentioned,
and for the thought even of which, in connexion with her, he could only
excuse himself on the score of his bitter need. At length he succeeded
in procuring all he required; and on the seventh evening from that on
which she had last appeared, he found himself prepared for the exercise
of unlawful and tyrannical power.

He cleared the centre of the room; stooped and drew a circle of red on
the floor, around the spot where he stood; wrote in the four quarters
mystical signs, and numbers which were all powers of seven or nine;
examined the whole ring carefully, to see that no smallest break had
occurred in the circumference; and then rose from his bending posture.
As he rose, the church clock struck seven; and, just as she had appeared
the first time, reluctant, slow, and stately, glided in the lady. Cosmo
trembled; and when, turning, she revealed a countenance worn and wan, as
with sickness or inward trouble, he grew faint, and felt as if he dared
not proceed. But as he gazed on the face and form, which now possessed
his whole soul, to the exclusion of all other joys and griefs, the
longing to speak to her, to know that she heard him, to hear from her
one word in return, became so unendurable, that he suddenly and hastily
resumed his preparations. Stepping carefully from the circle, he put
a small brazier into its centre. He then set fire to its contents of
charcoal, and while it burned up, opened his window and seated himself,
waiting, beside it.

It was a sultry evening. The air was full of thunder. A sense of
luxurious depression filled the brain. The sky seemed to have grown
heavy, and to compress the air beneath it. A kind of purplish tinge
pervaded the atmosphere, and through the open window came the scents of
the distant fields, which all the vapours of the city could not quench.
Soon the charcoal glowed. Cosmo sprinkled upon it the incense and other
substances which he had compounded, and, stepping within the circle,
turned his face from the brazier and towards the mirror. Then, fixing
his eyes upon the face of the lady, he began with a trembling voice to
repeat a powerful incantation. He had not gone far, before the lady grew
pale; and then, like a returning wave, the blood washed all its banks
with its crimson tide, and she hid her face in her hands. Then he passed
to a conjuration stronger yet.

The lady rose and walked uneasily to and fro in her room. Another spell;
and she seemed seeking with her eyes for some object on which they
wished to rest. At length it seemed as if she suddenly espied him;
for her eyes fixed themselves full and wide upon his, and she drew
gradually, and somewhat unwillingly, close to her side of the mirror,
just as if his eyes had fascinated her. Cosmo had never seen her so near
before. Now at least, eyes met eyes; but he could not quite understand
the expression of hers. They were full of tender entreaty, but there was
something more that he could not interpret. Though his heart seemed to
labour in his throat, he would allow no delight or agitation to turn him
from his task. Looking still in her face, he passed on to the mightiest
charm he knew. Suddenly the lady turned and walked out of the door
of her reflected chamber. A moment after she entered his room with
veritable presence; and, forgetting all his precautions, he sprang from
the charmed circle, and knelt before her. There she stood, the living
lady of his passionate visions, alone beside him, in a thundery
twilight, and the glow of a magic fire.

“Why,” said the lady, with a trembling voice, “didst thou bring a poor
maiden through the rainy streets alone?”

“Because I am dying for love of thee; but I only brought thee from the
mirror there.”

“Ah, the mirror!” and she looked up at it, and shuddered. “Alas! I am
but a slave, while that mirror exists. But do not think it was the power
of thy spells that drew me; it was thy longing desire to see me, that
beat at the door of my heart, till I was forced to yield.”

“Canst thou love me then?” said Cosmo, in a voice calm as death, but
almost inarticulate with emotion.

“I do not know,” she replied sadly; “that I cannot tell, so long as I am
bewildered with enchantments. It were indeed a joy too great, to lay my
head on thy bosom and weep to death; for I think thou lovest me, though
I do not know;--but----”

Cosmo rose from his knees.

“I love thee as--nay, I know not what--for since I have loved thee,
there is nothing else.”

He seized her hand: she withdrew it.

“No, better not; I am in thy power, and therefore I may not.”

She burst into tears, and kneeling before him in her turn, said--

“Cosmo, if thou lovest me, set me free, even from thyself; break the
mirror.”

“And shall I see thyself instead?”

“That I cannot tell, I will not deceive thee; we may never meet again.”

A fierce struggle arose in Cosmo’s bosom. Now she was in his power. She
did not dislike him at least; and he could see her when he would. To
break the mirror would be to destroy his very life to banish out of his
universe the only glory it possessed. The whole world would be but a
prison, if he annihilated the one window that looked into the paradise
of love. Not yet pure in love, he hesitated.

With a wail of sorrow the lady rose to her feet. “Ah! he loves me not;
he loves me not even as I love him; and alas! I care more for his love
than even for the freedom I ask.”

“I will not wait to be willing,” cried Cosmo; and sprang to the corner
where the great sword stood.

Meantime it had grown very dark; only the embers cast a red glow through
the room. He seized the sword by the steel scabbard, and stood before
the mirror; but as he heaved a great blow at it with the heavy pommel,
the blade slipped half-way out of the scabbard, and the pommel struck
the wall above the mirror. At that moment, a terrible clap of thunder
seemed to burst in the very room beside them; and ere Cosmo could repeat
the blow, he fell senseless on the hearth. When he came to himself, he
found that the lady and the mirror had both disappeared. He was seized
with a brain fever, which kept him to his couch for weeks.

When he recovered his reason, he began to think what could have become
of the mirror. For the lady, he hoped she had found her way back as
she came; but as the mirror involved her fate with its own, he was more
immediately anxious about that. He could not think she had carried it
away. It was much too heavy, even if it had not been too firmly fixed in
the wall, for her to remove it. Then again, he remembered the thunder;
which made him believe that it was not the lightning, but some other
blow that had struck him down. He concluded that, either by supernatural
agency, he having exposed himself to the vengeance of the demons in
leaving the circle of safety, or in some other mode, the mirror had
probably found its way back to its former owner; and, horrible to think
of, might have been by this time once more disposed of, delivering up
the lady into the power of another man; who, if he used his power no
worse than he himself had done, might yet give Cosmo abundant cause to
curse the selfish indecision which prevented him from shattering the
mirror at once. Indeed, to think that she whom he loved, and who had
prayed to him for freedom, should be still at the mercy, in some degree,
of the possessor of the mirror, and was at least exposed to his constant
observation, was in itself enough to madden a chary lover.

Anxiety to be well retarded his recovery; but at length he was able to
creep abroad. He first made his way to the old broker’s, pretending to
be in search of something else. A laughing sneer on the creature’s face
convinced him that he knew all about it; but he could not see it amongst
his furniture, or get any information out of him as to what had become
of it. He expressed the utmost surprise at hearing it had been stolen, a
surprise which Cosmo saw at once to be counterfeited; while, at the same
time, he fancied that the old wretch was not at all anxious to have it
mistaken for genuine. Full of distress, which he concealed as well as he
could, he made many searches, but with no avail. Of course he could
ask no questions; but he kept his ears awake for any remotest hint that
might set him in a direction of search. He never went out without a
short heavy hammer of steel about him, that he might shatter the mirror
the moment he was made happy by the sight of his lost treasure, if ever
that blessed moment should arrive. Whether he should see the lady again,
was now a thought altogether secondary, and postponed to the achievement
of her freedom. He wandered here and there, like an anxious ghost, pale
and haggard; gnawed ever at the heart, by the thought of what she might
be suffering--all from his fault.

One night, he mingled with a crowd that filled the rooms of one of
the most distinguished mansions in the city; for he accepted every
invitation, that he might lose no chance, however poor, of obtaining
some information that might expedite his discovery. Here he wandered
about, listening to every stray word that he could catch, in the hope of
a revelation. As he approached some ladies who were talking quietly in a
corner, one said to another:

“Have you heard of the strange illness of the Princess von Hohenweiss?”

“Yes; she has been ill for more than a year now. It is very sad for so
fine a creature to have such a terrible malady. She was better for
some weeks lately, but within the last few days the same attacks have
returned, apparently accompanied with more suffering than ever. It is
altogether an inexplicable story.”

“Is there a story connected with her illness?”

“I have only heard imperfect reports of it; but it is said that she gave
offence some eighteen months ago to an old woman who had held an
office of trust in the family, and who, after some incoherent threats,
disappeared. This peculiar affection followed soon after. But the
strangest part of the story is its association with the loss of an
antique mirror, which stood in her dressing-room, and of which she
constantly made use.”

Here the speaker’s voice sank to a whisper; and Cosmo, although his very
soul sat listening in his ears, could hear no more. He trembled too much
to dare to address the ladies, even if it had been advisable to expose
himself to their curiosity. The name of the Princess was well known to
him, but he had never seen her; except indeed it was she, which now he
hardly doubted, who had knelt before him on that dreadful night. Fearful
of attracting attention, for, from the weak state of his health, he
could not recover an appearance of calmness, he made his way to the open
air, and reached his lodgings; glad in this, that he at least knew where
she lived, although he never dreamed of approaching her openly, even
if he should be happy enough to free her from her hateful bondage. He
hoped, too, that as he had unexpectedly learned so much, the other and
far more important part might be revealed to him ere long.


*****


“Have you seen Steinwald lately?”

“No, I have not seen him for some time. He is almost a match for me at
the rapier, and I suppose he thinks he needs no more lessons.”

“I wonder what has become of him. I want to see him very much. Let me
see; the last time I saw him he was coming out of that old broker’s
den, to which, if you remember, you accompanied me once, to look at some
armour. That is fully three weeks ago.”

This hint was enough for Cosmo. Von Steinwald was a man of influence in
the court, well known for his reckless habits and fierce passions. The
very possibility that the mirror should be in his possession was hell
itself to Cosmo. But violent or hasty measures of any sort were most
unlikely to succeed. All that he wanted was an opportunity of breaking
the fatal glass; and to obtain this he must bide his time. He revolved
many plans in his mind, but without being able to fix upon any.

At length, one evening, as he was passing the house of Von Steinwald, he
saw the windows more than usually brilliant. He watched for a while,
and seeing that company began to arrive, hastened home, and dressed
as richly as he could, in the hope of mingling with the guests
unquestioned: in effecting which, there could be no difficulty for a man
of his carriage.

*****

In a lofty, silent chamber, in another part of the city, lay a form more
like marble than a living woman. The loveliness of death seemed frozen
upon her face, for her lips were rigid, and her eyelids closed. Her long
white hands were crossed over her breast, and no breathing disturbed
their repose. Beside the dead, men speak in whispers, as if the deepest
rest of all could be broken by the sound of a living voice. Just so,
though the soul was evidently beyond the reach of all intimations from
the senses, the two ladies, who sat beside her, spoke in the gentlest
tones of subdued sorrow. “She has lain so for an hour.”

“This cannot last long, I fear.”

“How much thinner she has grown within the last few weeks! If she would
only speak, and explain what she suffers, it would be better for her.
I think she has visions in her trances, but nothing can induce her to
refer to them when she is awake.”

“Does she ever speak in these trances?”

“I have never heard her; but they say she walks sometimes, and once put
the whole household in a terrible fright by disappearing for a whole
hour, and returning drenched with rain, and almost dead with exhaustion
and fright. But even then she would give no account of what had
happened.”

A scarce audible murmur from the yet motionless lips of the lady
here startled her attendants. After several ineffectual attempts at
articulation, the word “COSMO!” burst from her. Then she lay still as
before; but only for a moment. With a wild cry, she sprang from the
couch erect on the floor, flung her arms above her head, with clasped
and straining hands, and, her wide eyes flashing with light, called
aloud, with a voice exultant as that of a spirit bursting from a
sepulchre, “I am free! I am free! I thank thee!” Then she flung herself
on the couch, and sobbed; then rose, and paced wildly up and down the
room, with gestures of mingled delight and anxiety. Then turning to her
motionless attendants--“Quick, Lisa, my cloak and hood!” Then lower--“I
must go to him. Make haste, Lisa! You may come with me, if you will.”

In another moment they were in the street, hurrying along towards one
of the bridges over the Moldau. The moon was near the zenith, and the
streets were almost empty. The Princess soon outstripped her attendant,
and was half-way over the bridge, before the other reached it.

“Are you free, lady? The mirror is broken: are you free?”

The words were spoken close beside her, as she hurried on. She turned;
and there, leaning on the parapet in a recess of the bridge, stood
Cosmo, in a splendid dress, but with a white and quivering face.

“Cosmo!--I am free--and thy servant for ever. I was coming to you now.”

“And I to you, for Death made me bold; but I could get no further. Have
I atoned at all? Do I love you a little--truly?”

“Ah, I know now that you love me, my Cosmo; but what do you say about
death?”

He did not reply. His hand was pressed against his side. She looked more
closely: the blood was welling from between the fingers. She flung her
arms around him with a faint bitter wail.

When Lisa came up, she found her mistress kneeling above a wan dead
face, which smiled on in the spectral moonbeams.

 And now I will say no more about these wondrous volumes; though
I could tell many a tale out of them, and could, perhaps, vaguely
represent some entrancing thoughts of a deeper kind which I found within
them. From many a sultry noon till twilight, did I sit in that grand
hall, buried and risen again in these old books. And I trust I have
carried away in my soul some of the exhalations of their undying leaves.
In after hours of deserved or needful sorrow, portions of what I read
there have often come to me again, with an unexpected comforting;
which was not fruitless, even though the comfort might seem in itself
groundless and vain.




CHAPTER XIV

                                         “Your gallery
             Ha we pass’d through, not without much content
             In many singularities; but we saw not
             That which my daughter came to look upon,
             The state of her mother.”
                                      Winter’s Tale.

It seemed to me strange, that all this time I had heard no music in the
fairy palace. I was convinced there must be music in it, but that my
sense was as yet too gross to receive the influence of those mysterious
motions that beget sound. Sometimes I felt sure, from the way the few
figures of which I got such transitory glimpses passed me, or glided
into vacancy before me, that they were moving to the law of music;
and, in fact, several times I fancied for a moment that I heard a few
wondrous tones coming I knew not whence. But they did not last long
enough to convince me that I had heard them with the bodily sense. Such
as they were, however, they took strange liberties with me, causing me
to burst suddenly into tears, of which there was no presence to make
me ashamed, or casting me into a kind of trance of speechless delight,
which, passing as suddenly, left me faint and longing for more.

Now, on an evening, before I had been a week in the palace, I was
wandering through one lighted arcade and corridor after another. At
length I arrived, through a door that closed behind me, in another vast
hall of the palace. It was filled with a subdued crimson light; by
which I saw that slender pillars of black, built close to walls of white
marble, rose to a great height, and then, dividing into innumerable
divergent arches, supported a roof, like the walls, of white marble,
upon which the arches intersected intricately, forming a fretting of
black upon the white, like the network of a skeleton-leaf. The floor was
black.

Between several pairs of the pillars upon every side, the place of the
wall behind was occupied by a crimson curtain of thick silk, hanging in
heavy and rich folds. Behind each of these curtains burned a powerful
light, and these were the sources of the glow that filled the hall. A
peculiar delicious odour pervaded the place. As soon as I entered, the
old inspiration seemed to return to me, for I felt a strong impulse to
sing; or rather, it seemed as if some one else was singing a song in my
soul, which wanted to come forth at my lips, imbodied in my breath. But
I kept silence; and feeling somewhat overcome by the red light and the
perfume, as well as by the emotion within me, and seeing at one end of
the hall a great crimson chair, more like a throne than a chair, beside
a table of white marble, I went to it, and, throwing myself in it, gave
myself up to a succession of images of bewildering beauty, which passed
before my inward eye, in a long and occasionally crowded train. Here I
sat for hours, I suppose; till, returning somewhat to myself, I saw that
the red light had paled away, and felt a cool gentle breath gliding over
my forehead. I rose and left the hall with unsteady steps, finding my
way with some difficulty to my own chamber, and faintly remembering,
as I went, that only in the marble cave, before I found the sleeping
statue, had I ever had a similar experience.

After this, I repaired every morning to the same hall; where I sometimes
sat in the chair and dreamed deliciously, and sometimes walked up and
down over the black floor. Sometimes I acted within myself a whole
drama, during one of these perambulations; sometimes walked deliberately
through the whole epic of a tale; sometimes ventured to sing a song,
though with a shrinking fear of I knew not what. I was astonished at
the beauty of my own voice as it rang through the place, or rather crept
undulating, like a serpent of sound, along the walls and roof of this
superb music-hall. Entrancing verses arose within me as of their own
accord, chanting themselves to their own melodies, and requiring no
addition of music to satisfy the inward sense. But, ever in the pauses
of these, when the singing mood was upon me, I seemed to hear something
like the distant sound of multitudes of dancers, and felt as if it
was the unheard music, moving their rhythmic motion, that within me
blossomed in verse and song. I felt, too, that could I but see the
dance, I should, from the harmony of complicated movements, not of
the dancers in relation to each other merely, but of each dancer
individually in the manifested plastic power that moved the consenting
harmonious form, understand the whole of the music on the billows of
which they floated and swung.

At length, one night, suddenly, when this feeling of dancing came upon
me, I bethought me of lifting one of the crimson curtains, and looking
if, perchance, behind it there might not be hid some other mystery,
which might at least remove a step further the bewilderment of the
present one. Nor was I altogether disappointed. I walked to one of the
magnificent draperies, lifted a corner, and peeped in. There, burned
a great, crimson, globe-shaped light, high in the cubical centre of
another hall, which might be larger or less than that in which I stood,
for its dimensions were not easily perceived, seeing that floor and roof
and walls were entirely of black marble.

The roof was supported by the same arrangement of pillars radiating in
arches, as that of the first hall; only, here, the pillars and
arches were of dark red. But what absorbed my delighted gaze, was an
innumerable assembly of white marble statues, of every form, and in
multitudinous posture, filling the hall throughout. These stood, in the
ruddy glow of the great lamp, upon pedestals of jet black. Around the
lamp shone in golden letters, plainly legible from where I stood, the
two words--

                     TOUCH NOT!

There was in all this, however, no solution to the sound of dancing; and
now I was aware that the influence on my mind had ceased. I did not
go in that evening, for I was weary and faint, but I hoarded up the
expectation of entering, as of a great coming joy.

Next night I walked, as on the preceding, through the hall. My mind was
filled with pictures and songs, and therewith so much absorbed, that
I did not for some time think of looking within the curtain I had last
night lifted. When the thought of doing so occurred to me first, I
happened to be within a few yards of it. I became conscious, at the same
moment, that the sound of dancing had been for some time in my ears. I
approached the curtain quickly, and, lifting it, entered the black hall.
Everything was still as death. I should have concluded that the
sound must have proceeded from some other more distant quarter,
which conclusion its faintness would, in ordinary circumstances, have
necessitated from the first; but there was a something about the statues
that caused me still to remain in doubt. As I said, each stood perfectly
still upon its black pedestal: but there was about every one a certain
air, not of motion, but as if it had just ceased from movement; as if
the rest were not altogether of the marbly stillness of thousands of
years. It was as if the peculiar atmosphere of each had yet a kind
of invisible tremulousness; as if its agitated wavelets had not
yet subsided into a perfect calm. I had the suspicion that they had
anticipated my appearance, and had sprung, each, from the living joy of
the dance, to the death-silence and blackness of its isolated pedestal,
just before I entered. I walked across the central hall to the curtain
opposite the one I had lifted, and, entering there, found all the
appearances similar; only that the statues were different, and
differently grouped. Neither did they produce on my mind that
impression--of motion just expired, which I had experienced from the
others. I found that behind every one of the crimson curtains was a
similar hall, similarly lighted, and similarly occupied.

The next night, I did not allow my thoughts to be absorbed as before
with inward images, but crept stealthily along to the furthest curtain
in the hall, from behind which, likewise, I had formerly seemed to hear
the sound of dancing. I drew aside its edge as suddenly as I could, and,
looking in, saw that the utmost stillness pervaded the vast place. I
walked in, and passed through it to the other end.

There I found that it communicated with a circular corridor, divided
from it only by two rows of red columns. This corridor, which was black,
with red niches holding statues, ran entirely about the statue-halls,
forming a communication between the further ends of them all; further,
that is, as regards the central hall of white whence they all diverged
like radii, finding their circumference in the corridor.

Round this corridor I now went, entering all the halls, of which there
were twelve, and finding them all similarly constructed, but filled with
quite various statues, of what seemed both ancient and modern sculpture.
After I had simply walked through them, I found myself sufficiently
tired to long for rest, and went to my own room.

In the night I dreamed that, walking close by one of the curtains, I was
suddenly seized with the desire to enter, and darted in. This time I was
too quick for them. All the statues were in motion, statues no longer,
but men and women--all shapes of beauty that ever sprang from the brain
of the sculptor, mingled in the convolutions of a complicated dance.
Passing through them to the further end, I almost started from my
sleep on beholding, not taking part in the dance with the others, nor
seemingly endued with life like them, but standing in marble coldness
and rigidity upon a black pedestal in the extreme left corner--my lady
of the cave; the marble beauty who sprang from her tomb or her cradle
at the call of my songs. While I gazed in speechless astonishment and
admiration, a dark shadow, descending from above like the curtain of a
stage, gradually hid her entirely from my view. I felt with a shudder
that this shadow was perchance my missing demon, whom I had not seen for
days. I awoke with a stifled cry.

Of course, the next evening I began my journey through the halls (for I
knew not to which my dream had carried me), in the hope of proving the
dream to be a true one, by discovering my marble beauty upon her black
pedestal. At length, on reaching the tenth hall, I thought I
recognised some of the forms I had seen dancing in my dream; and to my
bewilderment, when I arrived at the extreme corner on the left, there
stood, the only one I had yet seen, a vacant pedestal. It was exactly in
the position occupied, in my dream, by the pedestal on which the white
lady stood. Hope beat violently in my heart.

“Now,” said I to myself, “if yet another part of the dream would but
come true, and I should succeed in surprising these forms in their
nightly dance; it might be the rest would follow, and I should see on
the pedestal my marble queen. Then surely if my songs sufficed to give
her life before, when she lay in the bonds of alabaster, much more would
they be sufficient then to give her volition and motion, when she alone
of assembled crowds of marble forms, would be standing rigid and cold.”

But the difficulty was, to surprise the dancers. I had found that a
premeditated attempt at surprise, though executed with the utmost care
and rapidity, was of no avail. And, in my dream, it was effected by a
sudden thought suddenly executed. I saw, therefore, that there was no
plan of operation offering any probability of success, but this: to
allow my mind to be occupied with other thoughts, as I wandered around
the great centre-hall; and so wait till the impulse to enter one of the
others should happen to arise in me just at the moment when I was close
to one of the crimson curtains. For I hoped that if I entered any one of
the twelve halls at the right moment, that would as it were give me the
right of entrance to all the others, seeing they all had communication
behind. I would not diminish the hope of the right chance, by supposing
it necessary that a desire to enter should awake within me, precisely
when I was close to the curtains of the tenth hall.

At first the impulses to see recurred so continually, in spite of the
crowded imagery that kept passing through my mind, that they formed
too nearly a continuous chain, for the hope that any one of them would
succeed as a surprise. But as I persisted in banishing them, they
recurred less and less often; and after two or three, at considerable
intervals, had come when the spot where I happened to be was unsuitable,
the hope strengthened, that soon one might arise just at the right
moment; namely, when, in walking round the hall, I should be close to
one of the curtains.

At length the right moment and the impulse coincided. I darted into the
ninth hall. It was full of the most exquisite moving forms. The whole
space wavered and swam with the involutions of an intricate dance. It
seemed to break suddenly as I entered, and all made one or two bounds
towards their pedestals; but, apparently on finding that they were
thoroughly overtaken, they returned to their employment (for it seemed
with them earnest enough to be called such) without further heeding
me. Somewhat impeded by the floating crowd, I made what haste I could
towards the bottom of the hall; whence, entering the corridor, I turned
towards the tenth. I soon arrived at the corner I wanted to reach, for
the corridor was comparatively empty; but, although the dancers here,
after a little confusion, altogether disregarded my presence, I
was dismayed at beholding, even yet, a vacant pedestal. But I had a
conviction that she was near me. And as I looked at the pedestal, I
thought I saw upon it, vaguely revealed as if through overlapping folds
of drapery, the indistinct outlines of white feet. Yet there was no
sign of drapery or concealing shadow whatever. But I remembered the
descending shadow in my dream. And I hoped still in the power of my
songs; thinking that what could dispel alabaster, might likewise be
capable of dispelling what concealed my beauty now, even if it were the
demon whose darkness had overshadowed all my life.




CHAPTER XV

              “Alexander. ‘When will you finish Campaspe?’
               Apelles.  ‘Never finish: for always in absolute
               beauty there is somewhat above art.’”
                                           LYLY’S Campaspe.

And now, what song should I sing to unveil my Isis, if indeed she was
present unseen? I hurried away to the white hall of Phantasy, heedless
of the innumerable forms of beauty that crowded my way: these might
cross my eyes, but the unseen filled my brain. I wandered long, up and
down the silent space: no songs came. My soul was not still enough for
songs. Only in the silence and darkness of the soul’s night, do those
stars of the inward firmament sink to its lower surface from the singing
realms beyond, and shine upon the conscious spirit. Here all effort was
unavailing. If they came not, they could not be found.

Next night, it was just the same. I walked through the red glimmer of
the silent hall; but lonely as there I walked, as lonely trod my soul
up and down the halls of the brain. At last I entered one of the
statue-halls. The dance had just commenced, and I was delighted to find
that I was free of their assembly. I walked on till I came to the sacred
corner. There I found the pedestal just as I had left it, with the faint
glimmer as of white feet still resting on the dead black. As soon as I
saw it, I seemed to feel a presence which longed to become visible; and,
as it were, called to me to gift it with self-manifestation, that it
might shine on me. The power of song came to me. But the moment my
voice, though I sang low and soft, stirred the air of the hall, the
dancers started; the quick interweaving crowd shook, lost its form,
divided; each figure sprang to its pedestal, and stood, a self-evolving
life no more, but a rigid, life-like, marble shape, with the whole form
composed into the expression of a single state or act. Silence rolled
like a spiritual thunder through the grand space. My song had ceased,
scared at its own influences. But I saw in the hand of one of the
statues close by me, a harp whose chords yet quivered. I remembered
that as she bounded past me, her harp had brushed against my arm; so
the spell of the marble had not infolded it. I sprang to her, and with a
gesture of entreaty, laid my hand on the harp. The marble hand, probably
from its contact with the uncharmed harp, had strength enough to relax
its hold, and yield the harp to me. No other motion indicated life.
Instinctively I struck the chords and sang. And not to break upon the
record of my song, I mention here, that as I sang the first four lines,
the loveliest feet became clear upon the black pedestal; and ever as I
sang, it was as if a veil were being lifted up from before the form, but
an invisible veil, so that the statue appeared to grow before me, not
so much by evolution, as by infinitesimal degrees of added height. And,
while I sang, I did not feel that I stood by a statue, as indeed it
appeared to be, but that a real woman-soul was revealing itself by
successive stages of imbodiment, and consequent manifestatlon and
expression.

        Feet of beauty, firmly planting
             Arches white on rosy heel!
         Whence the life-spring, throbbing, panting,
             Pulses upward to reveal!
         Fairest things know least despising;
             Foot and earth meet tenderly:
         ‘Tis the woman, resting, rising
             Upward to sublimity,
         Rise the limbs, sedately sloping,
             Strong and gentle, full and free;
         Soft and slow, like certain hoping,
             Drawing nigh the broad firm knee.
         Up to speech!  As up to roses
             Pants the life from leaf to flower,
         So each blending change discloses,
             Nearer still, expression’s power.

         Lo! fair sweeps, white surges, twining
             Up and outward fearlessly!
         Temple columns, close combining,
             Lift a holy mystery.
         Heart of mine! what strange surprises
             Mount aloft on such a stair!
         Some great vision upward rises,
             Curving, bending, floating fair.

         Bands and sweeps, and hill and hollow
             Lead my fascinated eye;
         Some apocalypse will follow,
             Some new world of deity.
         Zoned unseen, and outward swelling,
             With new thoughts and wonders rife,
         Queenly majesty foretelling,
             See the expanding house of life!

         Sudden heaving, unforbidden
             Sighs eternal, still the same--
         Mounts of snow have summits hidden
             In the mists of uttered flame.
         But the spirit, dawning nearly
             Finds no speech for earnest pain;
         Finds a soundless sighing merely--
             Builds its stairs, and mounts again.

         Heart, the queen, with secret hoping,
             Sendeth out her waiting pair;
         Hands, blind hands, half blindly groping,
             Half inclasping visions rare;
         And the great arms, heartways bending;
             Might of Beauty, drawing home
         There returning, and re-blending,
             Where from roots of love they roam.

         Build thy slopes of radiance beamy
             Spirit, fair with womanhood!
         Tower thy precipice, white-gleamy,
             Climb unto the hour of good.
         Dumb space will be rent asunder,
             Now the shining column stands
         Ready to be crowned with wonder
             By the builder’s joyous hands.

         All the lines abroad are spreading,
             Like a fountain’s falling race.
         Lo, the chin, first feature, treading,
             Airy foot to rest the face!
         Speech is nigh; oh, see the blushing,
             Sweet approach of lip and breath!
         Round the mouth dim silence, hushing,
             Waits to die ecstatic death.

         Span across in treble curving,
             Bow of promise, upper lip!
         Set them free, with gracious swerving;
             Let the wing-words float and dip.
         DUMB ART THOU?  O Love immortal,
             More than words thy speech must be;
         Childless yet the tender portal
             Of the home of melody.

         Now the nostrils open fearless,
             Proud in calm unconsciousness,
         Sure it must be something peerless
             That the great Pan would express!
         Deepens, crowds some meaning tender,
             In the pure, dear lady-face.
         Lo, a blinding burst of splendour!--
             ‘Tis the free soul’s issuing grace.

         Two calm lakes of molten glory
             Circling round unfathomed deeps!
         Lightning-flashes, transitory,
             Cross the gulfs where darkness sleeps.
         This the gate, at last, of gladness,
             To the outward striving me:
         In a rain of light and sadness,
             Out its loves and longings flee!

         With a presence I am smitten
             Dumb, with a foreknown surprise;
         Presence greater yet than written
             Even in the glorious eyes.
         Through the gulfs, with inward gazes,
             I may look till I am lost;
         Wandering deep in spirit-mazes,
             In a sea without a coast.

         Windows open to the glorious!
             Time and space, oh, far beyond!
         Woman, ah! thou art victorious,
             And I perish, overfond.
         Springs aloft the yet Unspoken
             In the forehead’s endless grace,
         Full of silences unbroken;
             Infinite, unfeatured face.

         Domes above, the mount of wonder;
             Height and hollow wrapt in night;
         Hiding in its caverns under
             Woman-nations in their might.
         Passing forms, the highest Human
             Faints away to the Divine
         Features none, of man or woman,
             Can unveil the holiest shine.

         Sideways, grooved porches only
             Visible to passing eye,
         Stand the silent, doorless, lonely
             Entrance-gates of melody.
         But all sounds fly in as boldly,
             Groan and song, and kiss and cry
         At their galleries, lifted coldly,
             Darkly, ‘twixt the earth and sky.

         Beauty, thou art spent, thou knowest
             So, in faint, half-glad despair,
         From the summit thou o’erflowest
             In a fall of torrent hair;
         Hiding what thou hast created
             In a half-transparent shroud:
         Thus, with glory soft-abated,
             Shines the moon through vapoury cloud.




CHAPTER XVI

        “Ev’n the Styx, which ninefold her infoldeth
             Hems not Ceres’ daughter in its flow;
         But she grasps the apple--ever holdeth
             Her, sad Orcus, down below.”
                       SCHILLER, Das Ideal und das Leben.

Ever as I sang, the veil was uplifted; ever as I sang, the signs of life
grew; till, when the eyes dawned upon me, it was with that sunrise of
splendour which my feeble song attempted to re-imbody.

The wonder is, that I was not altogether overcome, but was able to
complete my song as the unseen veil continued to rise. This ability came
solely from the state of mental elevation in which I found myself. Only
because uplifted in song, was I able to endure the blaze of the dawn.
But I cannot tell whether she looked more of statue or more of woman;
she seemed removed into that region of phantasy where all is intensely
vivid, but nothing clearly defined. At last, as I sang of her descending
hair, the glow of soul faded away, like a dying sunset. A lamp within
had been extinguished, and the house of life shone blank in a winter
morn. She was a statue once more--but visible, and that was much gained.
Yet the revulsion from hope and fruition was such, that, unable to
restrain myself, I sprang to her, and, in defiance of the law of the
place, flung my arms around her, as if I would tear her from the grasp
of a visible Death, and lifted her from the pedestal down to my heart.
But no sooner had her feet ceased to be in contact with the black
pedestal, than she shuddered and trembled all over; then, writhing
from my arms, before I could tighten their hold, she sprang into the
corridor, with the reproachful cry, “You should not have touched
me!” darted behind one of the exterior pillars of the circle, and
disappeared. I followed almost as fast; but ere I could reach the
pillar, the sound of a closing door, the saddest of all sounds
sometimes, fell on my ear; and, arriving at the spot where she had
vanished, I saw, lighted by a pale yellow lamp which hung above it,
a heavy, rough door, altogether unlike any others I had seen in
the palace; for they were all of ebony, or ivory, or covered with
silver-plates, or of some odorous wood, and very ornate; whereas this
seemed of old oak, with heavy nails and iron studs. Notwithstanding the
precipitation of my pursuit, I could not help reading, in silver letters
beneath the lamp: “NO ONE ENTERS HERE WITHOUT THE LEAVE OF THE QUEEN.”
 But what was the Queen to me, when I followed my white lady? I dashed
the door to the wall and sprang through. Lo! I stood on a waste windy
hill. Great stones like tombstones stood all about me. No door, no
palace was to be seen. A white figure gleamed past me, wringing her
hands, and crying, “Ah! you should have sung to me; you should have sung
to me!” and disappeared behind one of the stones. I followed. A cold
gust of wind met me from behind the stone; and when I looked, I saw
nothing but a great hole in the earth, into which I could find no way
of entering. Had she fallen in? I could not tell. I must wait for the
daylight. I sat down and wept, for there was no help.




CHAPTER XVII

         “First, I thought, almost despairing,
             This must crush my spirit now;
          Yet I bore it, and am bearing--
             Only do not ask me how.”
                              HEINE.

When the daylight came, it brought the possibility of action, but with
it little of consolation. With the first visible increase of light,
I gazed into the chasm, but could not, for more than an hour, see
sufficiently well to discover its nature. At last I saw it was almost a
perpendicular opening, like a roughly excavated well, only very large.
I could perceive no bottom; and it was not till the sun actually rose,
that I discovered a sort of natural staircase, in many parts little more
than suggested, which led round and round the gulf, descending spirally
into its abyss. I saw at once that this was my path; and without a
moment’s hesitation, glad to quit the sunlight, which stared at me most
heartlessly, I commenced my tortuous descent. It was very difficult.
In some parts I had to cling to the rocks like a bat. In one place, I
dropped from the track down upon the next returning spire of the stair;
which being broad in this particular portion, and standing out from the
wall at right angles, received me upon my feet safe, though somewhat
stupefied by the shock. After descending a great way, I found the stair
ended at a narrow opening which entered the rock horizontally. Into this
I crept, and, having entered, had just room to turn round. I put my head
out into the shaft by which I had come down, and surveyed the course of
my descent. Looking up, I saw the stars; although the sun must by this
time have been high in the heavens. Looking below, I saw that the sides
of the shaft went sheer down, smooth as glass; and far beneath me, I saw
the reflection of the same stars I had seen in the heavens when I looked
up. I turned again, and crept inwards some distance, when the passage
widened, and I was at length able to stand and walk upright. Wider and
loftier grew the way; new paths branched off on every side; great open
halls appeared; till at last I found myself wandering on through an
underground country, in which the sky was of rock, and instead of trees
and flowers, there were only fantastic rocks and stones. And ever as I
went, darker grew my thoughts, till at last I had no hope whatever of
finding the white lady: I no longer called her to myself MY white lady.
Whenever a choice was necessary, I always chose the path which seemed to
lead downwards.

At length I began to find that these regions were inhabited. From behind
a rock a peal of harsh grating laughter, full of evil humour, rang
through my ears, and, looking round, I saw a queer, goblin creature,
with a great head and ridiculous features, just such as those described,
in German histories and travels, as Kobolds. “What do you want with me?”
 I said. He pointed at me with a long forefinger, very thick at the root,
and sharpened to a point, and answered, “He! he! he! what do YOU
want here?” Then, changing his tone, he continued, with mock
humility--“Honoured sir, vouchsafe to withdraw from thy slaves the
lustre of thy august presence, for thy slaves cannot support its
brightness.” A second appeared, and struck in: “You are so big, you keep
the sun from us. We can’t see for you, and we’re so cold.” Thereupon
arose, on all sides, the most terrific uproar of laughter, from voices
like those of children in volume, but scrannel and harsh as those of
decrepit age, though, unfortunately, without its weakness. The whole
pandemonium of fairy devils, of all varieties of fantastic ugliness,
both in form and feature, and of all sizes from one to four feet, seemed
to have suddenly assembled about me. At length, after a great babble of
talk among themselves, in a language unknown to me, and after seemingly
endless gesticulation, consultation, elbow-nudging, and unmitigated
peals of laughter, they formed into a circle about one of their number,
who scrambled upon a stone, and, much to my surprise, and somewhat to
my dismay, began to sing, in a voice corresponding in its nature to his
talking one, from beginning to end, the song with which I had brought
the light into the eyes of the white lady. He sang the same air too;
and, all the time, maintained a face of mock entreaty and worship;
accompanying the song with the travestied gestures of one playing on
the lute. The whole assembly kept silence, except at the close of every
verse, when they roared, and danced, and shouted with laughter, and
flung themselves on the ground, in real or pretended convulsions of
delight. When he had finished, the singer threw himself from the top
of the stone, turning heels over head several times in his descent; and
when he did alight, it was on the top of his head, on which he hopped
about, making the most grotesque gesticulations with his legs in the
air. Inexpressible laughter followed, which broke up in a shower of
tiny stones from innumerable hands. They could not materially injure me,
although they cut me on the head and face. I attempted to run away, but
they all rushed upon me, and, laying hold of every part that afforded
a grasp, held me tight. Crowding about me like bees, they shouted an
insect-swarm of exasperating speeches up into my face, among which the
most frequently recurring were--“You shan’t have her; you shan’t have
her; he! he! he! She’s for a better man; how he’ll kiss her! how he’ll
kiss her!”

The galvanic torrent of this battery of malevolence stung to life within
me a spark of nobleness, and I said aloud, “Well, if he is a better man,
let him have her.”

They instantly let go their hold of me, and fell back a step or two,
with a whole broadside of grunts and humphs, as of unexpected and
disappointed approbation. I made a step or two forward, and a lane was
instantly opened for me through the midst of the grinning little antics,
who bowed most politely to me on every side as I passed. After I had
gone a few yards, I looked back, and saw them all standing quite still,
looking after me, like a great school of boys; till suddenly one turned
round, and with a loud whoop, rushed into the midst of the others. In
an instant, the whole was one writhing and tumbling heap of contortion,
reminding me of the live pyramids of intertwined snakes of which
travellers make report. As soon as one was worked out of the mass, he
bounded off a few paces, and then, with a somersault and a run, threw
himself gyrating into the air, and descended with all his weight on the
summit of the heaving and struggling chaos of fantastic figures. I left
them still busy at this fierce and apparently aimless amusement. And as
I went, I sang--

        If a nobler waits for thee,
             I will weep aside;
         It is well that thou should’st be,
             Of the nobler, bride.

        For if love builds up the home,
             Where the heart is free,
         Homeless yet the heart must roam,
             That has not found thee.

        One must suffer: I, for her
             Yield in her my part
         Take her, thou art worthier--
             Still I be still, my heart!

         Gift ungotten! largess high
             Of a frustrate will!
          But to yield it lovingly
             Is a something still.

Then a little song arose of itself in my soul; and I felt for the
moment, while it sank sadly within me, as if I was once more walking up
and down the white hall of Phantasy in the Fairy Palace. But this lasted
no longer than the song; as will be seen.

        Do not vex thy violet
             Perfume to afford:
         Else no odour thou wilt get
             From its little hoard.

        In thy lady’s gracious eyes
             Look not thou too long;
         Else from them the glory flies,
             And thou dost her wrong.

        Come not thou too near the maid,
             Clasp her not too wild;
         Else the splendour is allayed,
             And thy heart beguiled.

A crash of laughter, more discordant and deriding than any I had yet
heard, invaded my ears. Looking on in the direction of the sound, I saw
a little elderly woman, much taller, however, than the goblins I had
just left, seated upon a stone by the side of the path. She rose, as I
drew near, and came forward to meet me.

She was very plain and commonplace in appearance, without being
hideously ugly. Looking up in my face with a stupid sneer, she said:
“Isn’t it a pity you haven’t a pretty girl to walk all alone with
you through this sweet country? How different everything would look?
wouldn’t it? Strange that one can never have what one would like best!
How the roses would bloom and all that, even in this infernal hole!
wouldn’t they, Anodos? Her eyes would light up the old cave, wouldn’t
they?”

“That depends on who the pretty girl should be,” replied I.

“Not so very much matter that,” she answered; “look here.”

I had turned to go away as I gave my reply, but now I stopped and looked
at her. As a rough unsightly bud might suddenly blossom into the most
lovely flower; or rather, as a sunbeam bursts through a shapeless cloud,
and transfigures the earth; so burst a face of resplendent beauty, as it
were THROUGH the unsightly visage of the woman, destroying it with light
as it dawned through it. A summer sky rose above me, gray with heat;
across a shining slumberous landscape, looked from afar the peaks of
snow-capped mountains; and down from a great rock beside me fell a sheet
of water mad with its own delight.

“Stay with me,” she said, lifting up her exquisite face, and looking
full in mine.

I drew back. Again the infernal laugh grated upon my ears; again the
rocks closed in around me, and the ugly woman looked at me with wicked,
mocking hazel eyes.

“You shall have your reward,” said she. “You shall see your white lady
again.”

“That lies not with you,” I replied, and turned and left her.

She followed me with shriek upon shriek of laughter, as I went on my
way.

I may mention here, that although there was always light enough to see
my path and a few yards on every side of me, I never could find out the
source of this sad sepulchral illumination.




CHAPTER XVIII

        “In the wind’s uproar, the sea’s raging grim,
          And the sighs that are born in him.”
                                      HEINE.


        “From dreams of bliss shall men awake
          One day, but not to weep:
          The dreams remain; they only break
          The mirror of the sleep.”
                                     JEAN PAUL, Hesperus.

How I got through this dreary part of my travels, I do not know. I do
not think I was upheld by the hope that any moment the light might break
in upon me; for I scarcely thought about that. I went on with a dull
endurance, varied by moments of uncontrollable sadness; for more and
more the conviction grew upon me that I should never see the white
lady again. It may seem strange that one with whom I had held so little
communion should have so engrossed my thoughts; but benefits conferred
awaken love in some minds, as surely as benefits received in others.
Besides being delighted and proud that my songs had called the
beautiful creature to life, the same fact caused me to feel a tenderness
unspeakable for her, accompanied with a kind of feeling of property in
her; for so the goblin Selfishness would reward the angel Love. When
to all this is added, an overpowering sense of her beauty, and
an unquestioning conviction that this was a true index to inward
loveliness, it may be understood how it came to pass that my imagination
filled my whole soul with the play of its own multitudinous colours and
harmonies around the form which yet stood, a gracious marble radiance,
in the midst of ITS white hall of phantasy. The time passed by unheeded;
for my thoughts were busy. Perhaps this was also in part the cause of my
needing no food, and never thinking how I should find any, during this
subterraneous part of my travels. How long they endured I could not
tell, for I had no means of measuring time; and when I looked back,
there was such a discrepancy between the decisions of my imagination
and my judgment, as to the length of time that had passed, that I was
bewildered, and gave up all attempts to arrive at any conclusion on the
point.

A gray mist continually gathered behind me. When I looked back towards
the past, this mist was the medium through which my eyes had to strain
for a vision of what had gone by; and the form of the white lady had
receded into an unknown region. At length the country of rock began
to close again around me, gradually and slowly narrowing, till I found
myself walking in a gallery of rock once more, both sides of which I
could touch with my outstretched hands. It narrowed yet, until I
was forced to move carefully, in order to avoid striking against the
projecting pieces of rock. The roof sank lower and lower, until I was
compelled, first to stoop, and then to creep on my hands and knees.
It recalled terrible dreams of childhood; but I was not much afraid,
because I felt sure that this was my path, and my only hope of leaving
Fairy Land, of which I was now almost weary.

At length, on getting past an abrupt turn in the passage, through
which I had to force myself, I saw, a few yards ahead of me, the
long-forgotten daylight shining through a small opening, to which the
path, if path it could now be called, led me. With great difficulty I
accomplished these last few yards, and came forth to the day. I stood on
the shore of a wintry sea, with a wintry sun just a few feet above its
horizon-edge. It was bare, and waste, and gray. Hundreds of hopeless
waves rushed constantly shorewards, falling exhausted upon a beach
of great loose stones, that seemed to stretch miles and miles in both
directions. There was nothing for the eye but mingling shades of
gray; nothing for the ear but the rush of the coming, the roar of the
breaking, and the moan of the retreating wave. No rock lifted up a
sheltering severity above the dreariness around; even that from which I
had myself emerged rose scarcely a foot above the opening by which I
had reached the dismal day, more dismal even than the tomb I had left.
A cold, death-like wind swept across the shore, seeming to issue from a
pale mouth of cloud upon the horizon. Sign of life was nowhere visible.
I wandered over the stones, up and down the beach, a human imbodiment of
the nature around me. The wind increased; its keen waves flowed through
my soul; the foam rushed higher up the stones; a few dead stars began
to gleam in the east; the sound of the waves grew louder and yet more
despairing. A dark curtain of cloud was lifted up, and a pale blue rent
shone between its foot and the edge of the sea, out from which rushed an
icy storm of frozen wind, that tore the waters into spray as it passed,
and flung the billows in raving heaps upon the desolate shore. I could
bear it no longer.

“I will not be tortured to death,” I cried; “I will meet it half-way.
The life within me is yet enough to bear me up to the face of Death, and
then I die unconquered.”

Before it had grown so dark, I had observed, though without any
particular interest, that on one part of the shore a low platform of
rock seemed to run out far into the midst of the breaking waters.

Towards this I now went, scrambling over smooth stones, to which scarce
even a particle of sea-weed clung; and having found it, I got on it, and
followed its direction, as near as I could guess, out into the tumbling
chaos. I could hardly keep my feet against the wind and sea. The waves
repeatedly all but swept me off my path; but I kept on my way, till I
reached the end of the low promontory, which, in the fall of the waves,
rose a good many feet above the surface, and, in their rise, was covered
with their waters. I stood one moment and gazed into the heaving abyss
beneath me; then plunged headlong into the mounting wave below. A
blessing, like the kiss of a mother, seemed to alight on my soul; a
calm, deeper than that which accompanies a hope deferred, bathed my
spirit. I sank far into the waters, and sought not to return. I felt as
if once more the great arms of the beech-tree were around me, soothing
me after the miseries I had passed through, and telling me, like a
little sick child, that I should be better to-morrow. The waters of
themselves lifted me, as with loving arms, to the surface. I breathed
again, but did not unclose my eyes. I would not look on the wintry sea,
and the pitiless gray sky. Thus I floated, till something gently touched
me. It was a little boat floating beside me. How it came there I could
not tell; but it rose and sank on the waters, and kept touching me in
its fall, as if with a human will to let me know that help was by me. It
was a little gay-coloured boat, seemingly covered with glistering scales
like those of a fish, all of brilliant rainbow hues. I scrambled into
it, and lay down in the bottom, with a sense of exquisite repose.

Then I drew over me a rich, heavy, purple cloth that was beside me; and,
lying still, knew, by the sound of the waters, that my little bark was
fleeting rapidly onwards. Finding, however, none of that stormy motion
which the sea had manifested when I beheld it from the shore, I opened
my eyes; and, looking first up, saw above me the deep violet sky of a
warm southern night; and then, lifting my head, saw that I was sailing
fast upon a summer sea, in the last border of a southern twilight. The
aureole of the sun yet shot the extreme faint tips of its longest rays
above the horizon-waves, and withdrew them not. It was a perpetual
twilight. The stars, great and earnest, like children’s eyes, bent down
lovingly towards the waters; and the reflected stars within seemed to
float up, as if longing to meet their embraces. But when I looked down,
a new wonder met my view. For, vaguely revealed beneath the wave, I
floated above my whole Past. The fields of my childhood flitted by; the
halls of my youthful labours; the streets of great cities where I had
dwelt; and the assemblies of men and women wherein I had wearied myself
seeking for rest. But so indistinct were the visions, that sometimes
I thought I was sailing on a shallow sea, and that strange rocks and
forests of sea-plants beguiled my eye, sufficiently to be transformed,
by the magic of the phantasy, into well-known objects and regions. Yet,
at times, a beloved form seemed to lie close beneath me in sleep; and
the eyelids would tremble as if about to forsake the conscious eye;
and the arms would heave upwards, as if in dreams they sought for a
satisfying presence. But these motions might come only from the heaving
of the waters between those forms and me. Soon I fell asleep, overcome
with fatigue and delight. In dreams of unspeakable joy--of restored
friendships; of revived embraces; of love which said it had never died;
of faces that had vanished long ago, yet said with smiling lips that
they knew nothing of the grave; of pardons implored, and granted with
such bursting floods of love, that I was almost glad I had sinned--thus
I passed through this wondrous twilight. I awoke with the feeling that I
had been kissed and loved to my heart’s content; and found that my boat
was floating motionless by the grassy shore of a little island.




CHAPTER XIX

     “In still rest, in changeless simplicity, I bear,
     uninterrupted, the consciousness of the whole of Humanity
     within me.”--SCHLEIERMACHERS, Monologen.

            “... such a sweetness, such a grace,
                 In all thy speech appear,
              That what to th’eye a beauteous face,
                 That thy tongue is to the ear.”
                                           --COWLEY.

The water was deep to the very edge; and I sprang from the little boat
upon a soft grassy turf. The island seemed rich with a profusion of all
grasses and low flowers. All delicate lowly things were most plentiful;
but no trees rose skywards, not even a bush overtopped the tall grasses,
except in one place near the cottage I am about to describe, where a few
plants of the gum-cistus, which drops every night all the blossoms that
the day brings forth, formed a kind of natural arbour. The whole island
lay open to the sky and sea. It rose nowhere more than a few feet above
the level of the waters, which flowed deep all around its border. Here
there seemed to be neither tide nor storm. A sense of persistent calm
and fulness arose in the mind at the sight of the slow, pulse-like rise
and fall of the deep, clear, unrippled waters against the bank of the
island, for shore it could hardly be called, being so much more like
the edge of a full, solemn river. As I walked over the grass towards the
cottage, which stood at a little distance from the bank, all the flowers
of childhood looked at me with perfect child-eyes out of the grass. My
heart, softened by the dreams through which it had passed, overflowed
in a sad, tender love towards them. They looked to me like children
impregnably fortified in a helpless confidence. The sun stood half-way
down the western sky, shining very soft and golden; and there grew a
second world of shadows amidst the world of grasses and wild flowers.

The cottage was square, with low walls, and a high pyramidal roof
thatched with long reeds, of which the withered blossoms hung over all
the eaves. It is noticeable that most of the buildings I saw in Fairy
Land were cottages. There was no path to a door, nor, indeed, was there
any track worn by footsteps in the island.

The cottage rose right out of the smooth turf. It had no windows that I
could see; but there was a door in the centre of the side facing me,
up to which I went. I knocked, and the sweetest voice I had ever heard
said, “Come in.” I entered. A bright fire was burning on a hearth in
the centre of the earthern floor, and the smoke found its way out at an
opening in the centre of the pyramidal roof. Over the fire hung a little
pot, and over the pot bent a woman-face, the most wonderful, I thought,
that I had ever beheld. For it was older than any countenance I had ever
looked upon. There was not a spot in which a wrinkle could lie, where a
wrinkle lay not. And the skin was ancient and brown, like old parchment.
The woman’s form was tall and spare: and when she stood up to welcome
me, I saw that she was straight as an arrow. Could that voice of
sweetness have issued from those lips of age? Mild as they were, could
they be the portals whence flowed such melody? But the moment I saw
her eyes, I no longer wondered at her voice: they were absolutely
young--those of a woman of five-and-twenty, large, and of a clear gray.
Wrinkles had beset them all about; the eyelids themselves were old, and
heavy, and worn; but the eyes were very incarnations of soft light. She
held out her hand to me, and the voice of sweetness again greeted me,
with the single word, “Welcome.” She set an old wooden chair for me,
near the fire, and went on with her cooking. A wondrous sense of refuge
and repose came upon me. I felt like a boy who has got home from school,
miles across the hills, through a heavy storm of wind and snow. Almost,
as I gazed on her, I sprang from my seat to kiss those old lips. And
when, having finished her cooking, she brought some of the dish she had
prepared, and set it on a little table by me, covered with a snow-white
cloth, I could not help laying my head on her bosom, and bursting
into happy tears. She put her arms round me, saying, “Poor child; poor
child!”

As I continued to weep, she gently disengaged herself, and, taking a
spoon, put some of the food (I did not know what it was) to my lips,
entreating me most endearingly to swallow it. To please her, I made an
effort, and succeeded. She went on feeding me like a baby, with one arm
round me, till I looked up in her face and smiled: then she gave me the
spoon and told me to eat, for it would do me good. I obeyed her, and
found myself wonderfully refreshed. Then she drew near the fire an
old-fashioned couch that was in the cottage, and making me lie down
upon it, sat at my feet, and began to sing. Amazing store of old ballads
rippled from her lips, over the pebbles of ancient tunes; and the voice
that sang was sweet as the voice of a tuneful maiden that singeth ever
from very fulness of song. The songs were almost all sad, but with a
sound of comfort. One I can faintly recall. It was something like this:

            Sir Aglovaile through the churchyard rode;
                 SING, ALL ALONE I LIE:
             Little recked he where’er he yode,
                 ALL ALONE, UP IN THE SKY.

             Swerved his courser, and plunged with fear
                 ALL ALONE I LIE:
             His cry might have wakened the dead men near,
                 ALL ALONE, UP IN THE SKY.

            The very dead that lay at his feet,
             Lapt in the mouldy winding-sheet.

            But he curbed him and spurred him, until he stood
             Still in his place, like a horse of wood,

            With nostrils uplift, and eyes wide and wan;
             But the sweat in streams from his fetlocks ran.

            A ghost grew out of the shadowy air,
             And sat in the midst of her moony hair.

            In her gleamy hair she sat and wept;
             In the dreamful moon they lay and slept;

            The shadows above, and the bodies below,
             Lay and slept in the moonbeams slow.

            And she sang, like the moan of an autumn wind
             Over the stubble left behind:

              Alas, how easily things go wrong!
               A sigh too much, or a kiss too long,
              And there follows a mist and a weeping rain,
                 And life is never the same again.

                Alas, how hardly things go right!
                 ‘Tis hard to watch on a summer night,
                 For the sigh will come and the kiss will stay,
                 And the summer night is a winter day.

            “Oh, lovely ghosts my heart is woes
             To see thee weeping and wailing so.

            Oh, lovely ghost,” said the fearless knight,
             “Can the sword of a warrior set it right?

            Or prayer of bedesman, praying mild,
             As a cup of water a feverish child,

            Sooth thee at last, in dreamless mood
             To sleep the sleep a dead lady should?

            Thine eyes they fill me with longing sore,
             As if I had known thee for evermore.

            Oh, lovely ghost, I could leave the day
             To sit with thee in the moon away

            If thou wouldst trust me, and lay thy head
             To rest on a bosom that is not dead.”
              The lady sprang up with a strange ghost-cry,
             And she flung her white ghost-arms on high:

            And she laughed a laugh that was not gay,
             And it lengthened out till it died away;

            And the dead beneath turned and moaned,
             And the yew-trees above they shuddered and groaned.

            “Will he love me twice with a love that is vain?
             Will he kill the poor ghost yet again?

            I thought thou wert good; but I said, and wept:
             ‘Can I have dreamed who have not slept?’

            And I knew, alas! or ever I would,
             Whether I dreamed, or thou wert good.

            When my baby died, my brain grew wild.
             I awoke, and found I was with my child.”

            “If thou art the ghost of my Adelaide,
             How is it?  Thou wert but a village maid,

            And thou seemest an angel lady white,
             Though thin, and wan, and past delight.”

            The lady smiled a flickering smile,
             And she pressed her temples hard the while.

            “Thou seest that Death for a woman can
             Do more than knighthood for a man.”

            “But show me the child thou callest mine,
             Is she out to-night in the ghost’s sunshine?”

            “In St. Peter’s Church she is playing on,
             At hide-and-seek, with Apostle John.

            When the moonbeams right through the window go,
             Where the twelve are standing in glorious show,

            She says the rest of them do not stir,
             But one comes down to play with her.

            Then I can go where I list, and weep,
             For good St. John my child will keep.”

            “Thy beauty filleth the very air,
              Never saw I a woman so fair.”

            “Come, if thou darest, and sit by my side;
              But do not touch me, or woe will betide.

            Alas, I am weak: I might well know
             This gladness betokens some further woe.

             Yet come.  It will come.  I will bear it.  I can.
              For thou lovest me yet--though but as a man.”

            The knight dismounted in earnest speed;
              Away through the tombstones thundered the steed,

            And fell by the outer wall, and died.
             But the knight he kneeled by the lady’s side;

            Kneeled beside her in wondrous bliss,
             Rapt in an everlasting kiss:

            Though never his lips come the lady nigh,
             And his eyes alone on her beauty lie.

            All the night long, till the cock crew loud,
             He kneeled by the lady, lapt in her shroud.

            And what they said, I may not say:
             Dead night was sweeter than living day.

            How she made him so blissful glad
             Who made her and found her so ghostly sad,

            I may not tell; but it needs no touch
             To make them blessed who love so much.

            “Come every night, my ghost, to me;
             And one night I will come to thee.

            ‘Tis good to have a ghostly wife:
             She will not tremble at clang of strife;

            She will only hearken, amid the din,
             Behind the door, if he cometh in.”

            And this is how Sir Aglovaile
            Often walked in the moonlight pale.

            And oft when the crescent but thinned the gloom,
             Full orbed moonlight filled his room;

            And through beneath his chamber door,
             Fell a ghostly gleam on the outer floor;

            And they that passed, in fear averred
             That murmured words they often heard.

            ‘Twas then that the eastern crescent shone
              Through the chancel window, and good St. John

            Played with the ghost-child all the night,
             And the mother was free till the morning light,

            And sped through the dawning night, to stay
             With Aglovaile till the break of day.

            And their love was a rapture, lone and high,
             And dumb as the moon in the topmost sky.

            One night Sir Aglovaile, weary, slept
             And dreamed a dream wherein he wept.

            A warrior he was, not often wept he,
             But this night he wept full bitterly.

            He woke--beside him the ghost-girl shone
             Out of the dark: ‘twas the eve of St. John.

            He had dreamed a dream of a still, dark wood,
             Where the maiden of old beside him stood;

            But a mist came down, and caught her away,
             And he sought her in vain through the pathless day,

            Till he wept with the grief that can do no more,
             And thought he had dreamt the dream before.

            From bursting heart the weeping flowed on;
             And lo! beside him the ghost-girl shone;

            Shone like the light on a harbour’s breast,
             Over the sea of his dream’s unrest;

            Shone like the wondrous, nameless boon,
             That the heart seeks ever, night or noon:

            Warnings forgotten, when needed most,
             He clasped to his bosom the radiant ghost.

            She wailed aloud, and faded, and sank.
             With upturn’d white face, cold and blank,

            In his arms lay the corpse of the maiden pale,
             And she came no more to Sir Aglovaile.

            Only a voice, when winds were wild,
             Sobbed and wailed like a chidden child.

            Alas, how easily things go wrong!
             A sigh too much, or a kiss too long,
             And there follows a mist and a weeping rain,
             And life is never the same again.

This was one of the simplest of her songs, which, perhaps, is the cause
of my being able to remember it better than most of the others. While
she sung, I was in Elysium, with the sense of a rich soul upholding,
embracing, and overhanging mine, full of all plenty and bounty. I felt
as if she could give me everything I wanted; as if I should never wish
to leave her, but would be content to be sung to and fed by her, day
after day, as years rolled by. At last I fell asleep while she sang.

When I awoke, I knew not whether it was night or day. The fire had sunk
to a few red embers, which just gave light enough to show me the woman
standing a few feet from me, with her back towards me, facing the
door by which I had entered. She was weeping, but very gently and
plentifully. The tears seemed to come freely from her heart. Thus she
stood for a few minutes; then, slowly turning at right angles to her
former position, she faced another of the four sides of the cottage.
I now observed, for the first time, that here was a door likewise; and
that, indeed, there was one in the centre of every side of the cottage.

When she looked towards the second door, her tears ceased to flow, but
sighs took their place. She often closed her eyes as she stood; and
every time she closed her eyes, a gentle sigh seemed to be born in her
heart, and to escape at her lips. But when her eyes were open, her
sighs were deep and very sad, and shook her whole frame. Then she turned
towards the third door, and a cry as of fear or suppressed pain broke
from her; but she seemed to hearten herself against the dismay, and
to front it steadily; for, although I often heard a slight cry, and
sometimes a moan, yet she never moved or bent her head, and I felt sure
that her eyes never closed. Then she turned to the fourth door, and
I saw her shudder, and then stand still as a statue; till at last she
turned towards me and approached the fire. I saw that her face was white
as death. But she gave one look upwards, and smiled the sweetest, most
child-innocent smile; then heaped fresh wood on the fire, and, sitting
down by the blaze, drew her wheel near her, and began to spin. While
she spun, she murmured a low strange song, to which the hum of the wheel
made a kind of infinite symphony. At length she paused in her spinning
and singing, and glanced towards me, like a mother who looks whether
or not her child gives signs of waking. She smiled when she saw that my
eyes were open. I asked her whether it was day yet. She answered, “It is
always day here, so long as I keep my fire burning.”

I felt wonderfully refreshed; and a great desire to see more of the
island awoke within me. I rose, and saying that I wished to look about
me, went towards the door by which I had entered.

“Stay a moment,” said my hostess, with some trepidation in her voice.
“Listen to me. You will not see what you expect when you go out of that
door. Only remember this: whenever you wish to come back to me, enter
wherever you see this mark.”

She held up her left hand between me and the fire. Upon the palm, which
appeared almost transparent, I saw, in dark red, a mark like this -->
which I took care to fix in my mind.

She then kissed me, and bade me good-bye with a solemnity that awed me;
and bewildered me too, seeing I was only going out for a little ramble
in an island, which I did not believe larger than could easily be
compassed in a few hours’ walk at most. As I went she resumed her
spinning.

I opened the door, and stepped out. The moment my foot touched the
smooth sward, I seemed to issue from the door of an old barn on my
father’s estate, where, in the hot afternoons, I used to go and lie
amongst the straw, and read. It seemed to me now that I had been asleep
there. At a little distance in the field, I saw two of my brothers at
play. The moment they caught sight of me, they called out to me to come
and join them, which I did; and we played together as we had done years
ago, till the red sun went down in the west, and the gray fog began
to rise from the river. Then we went home together with a strange
happiness. As we went, we heard the continually renewed larum of a
landrail in the long grass. One of my brothers and I separated to a
little distance, and each commenced running towards the part whence the
sound appeared to come, in the hope of approaching the spot where the
bird was, and so getting at least a sight of it, if we should not be
able to capture the little creature. My father’s voice recalled us from
trampling down the rich long grass, soon to be cut down and laid aside
for the winter. I had quite forgotten all about Fairy Land, and the
wonderful old woman, and the curious red mark.

My favourite brother and I shared the same bed. Some childish dispute
arose between us; and our last words, ere we fell asleep, were not of
kindness, notwithstanding the pleasures of the day. When I woke in the
morning, I missed him. He had risen early, and had gone to bathe in the
river. In another hour, he was brought home drowned. Alas! alas! if we
had only gone to sleep as usual, the one with his arm about the other!
Amidst the horror of the moment, a strange conviction flashed across my
mind, that I had gone through the very same once before.

I rushed out of the house, I knew not why, sobbing and crying bitterly.
I ran through the fields in aimless distress, till, passing the old
barn, I caught sight of a red mark on the door. The merest trifles
sometimes rivet the attention in the deepest misery; the intellect has
so little to do with grief. I went up to look at this mark, which I did
not remember ever to have seen before. As I looked at it, I thought I
would go in and lie down amongst the straw, for I was very weary with
running about and weeping. I opened the door; and there in the cottage
sat the old woman as I had left her, at her spinning-wheel.

“I did not expect you quite so soon,” she said, as I shut the door
behind me. I went up to the couch, and threw myself on it with that
fatigue wherewith one awakes from a feverish dream of hopeless grief.

The old woman sang:

        The great sun, benighted,
             May faint from the sky;
         But love, once uplighted,
             Will never more die.

        Form, with its brightness,
             From eyes will depart:
         It walketh, in whiteness,
             The halls of the heart.

Ere she had ceased singing, my courage had returned. I started from the
couch, and, without taking leave of the old woman, opened the door of
Sighs, and sprang into what should appear.

I stood in a lordly hall, where, by a blazing fire on the hearth, sat a
lady, waiting, I knew, for some one long desired. A mirror was near me,
but I saw that my form had no place within its depths, so I feared not
that I should be seen. The lady wonderfully resembled my marble lady,
but was altogether of the daughters of men, and I could not tell whether
or not it was she.

It was not for me she waited. The tramp of a great horse rang through
the court without. It ceased, and the clang of armour told that his
rider alighted, and the sound of his ringing heels approached the hall.
The door opened; but the lady waited, for she would meet her lord alone.
He strode in: she flew like a home-bound dove into his arms, and nestled
on the hard steel. It was the knight of the soiled armour. But now the
armour shone like polished glass; and strange to tell, though the mirror
reflected not my form, I saw a dim shadow of myself in the shining
steel.

“O my beloved, thou art come, and I am blessed.”

Her soft fingers speedily overcame the hard clasp of his helmet; one by
one she undid the buckles of his armour; and she toiled under the
weight of the mail, as she WOULD carry it aside. Then she unclasped
his greaves, and unbuckled his spurs; and once more she sprang into
his arms, and laid her head where she could now feel the beating of his
heart. Then she disengaged herself from his embrace, and, moving back a
step or two, gazed at him. He stood there a mighty form, crowned with a
noble head, where all sadness had disappeared, or had been absorbed in
solemn purpose. Yet I suppose that he looked more thoughtful than
the lady had expected to see him, for she did not renew her caresses,
although his face glowed with love, and the few words he spoke were
as mighty deeds for strength; but she led him towards the hearth, and
seated him in an ancient chair, and set wine before him, and sat at his
feet.

“I am sad,” he said, “when I think of the youth whom I met twice in the
forests of Fairy Land; and who, you say, twice, with his songs, roused
you from the death-sleep of an evil enchantment. There was something
noble in him, but it was a nobleness of thought, and not of deed. He may
yet perish of vile fear.”

“Ah!” returned the lady, “you saved him once, and for that I thank you;
for may I not say that I somewhat loved him? But tell me how you fared,
when you struck your battle-axe into the ash-tree, and he came and found
you; for so much of the story you had told me, when the beggar-child
came and took you away.”

“As soon as I saw him,” rejoined the knight, “I knew that earthly arms
availed not against such as he; and that my soul must meet him in its
naked strength. So I unclasped my helm, and flung it on the ground; and,
holding my good axe yet in my hand, gazed at him with steady eyes. On
he came, a horror indeed, but I did not flinch. Endurance must conquer,
where force could not reach. He came nearer and nearer, till the ghastly
face was close to mine. A shudder as of death ran through me; but I
think I did not move, for he seemed to quail, and retreated. As soon
as he gave back, I struck one more sturdy blow on the stem of his tree,
that the forest rang; and then looked at him again. He writhed and
grinned with rage and apparent pain, and again approached me, but
retreated sooner than before. I heeded him no more, but hewed with a
will at the tree, till the trunk creaked, and the head bowed, and with a
crash it fell to the earth. Then I looked up from my labour, and lo! the
spectre had vanished, and I saw him no more; nor ever in my wanderings
have I heard of him again.”

“Well struck! well withstood! my hero,” said the lady.

“But,” said the knight, somewhat troubled, “dost thou love the youth
still?”

“Ah!” she replied, “how can I help it? He woke me from worse than death;
he loved me. I had never been for thee, if he had not sought me first.
But I love him not as I love thee. He was but the moon of my night; thou
art the sun of my day, O beloved.”

“Thou art right,” returned the noble man. “It were hard, indeed, not to
have some love in return for such a gift as he hath given thee. I, too,
owe him more than words can speak.”

Humbled before them, with an aching and desolate heart, I yet could not
restrain my words:

“Let me, then, be the moon of thy night still, O woman! And when thy day
is beclouded, as the fairest days will be, let some song of mine comfort
thee, as an old, withered, half-forgotten thing, that belongs to an
ancient mournful hour of uncompleted birth, which yet was beautiful in
its time.”

They sat silent, and I almost thought they were listening. The colour of
the lady’s eyes grew deeper and deeper; the slow tears grew, and filled
them, and overflowed. They rose, and passed, hand in hand, close
to where I stood; and each looked towards me in passing. Then they
disappeared through a door which closed behind them; but, ere it closed,
I saw that the room into which it opened was a rich chamber, hung with
gorgeous arras. I stood with an ocean of sighs frozen in my bosom. I
could remain no longer. She was near me, and I could not see her; near
me in the arms of one loved better than I, and I would not see her, and
I would not be by her. But how to escape from the nearness of the best
beloved? I had not this time forgotten the mark; for the fact that I
could not enter the sphere of these living beings kept me aware that,
for me, I moved in a vision, while they moved in life. I looked all
about for the mark, but could see it nowhere; for I avoided looking
just where it was. There the dull red cipher glowed, on the very door of
their secret chamber. Struck with agony, I dashed it open, and fell at
the feet of the ancient woman, who still spun on, the whole dissolved
ocean of my sighs bursting from me in a storm of tearless sobs. Whether
I fainted or slept, I do not know; but, as I returned to consciousness,
before I seemed to have power to move, I heard the woman singing, and
could distinguish the words:

        O light of dead and of dying days!
             O Love! in thy glory go,
         In a rosy mist and a moony maze,
             O’er the pathless peaks of snow.

        But what is left for the cold gray soul,
             That moans like a wounded dove?
         One wine is left in the broken bowl!--
             ‘Tis--TO LOVE, AND LOVE AND LOVE.

 Now I could weep.  When she saw me weeping, she sang:

        Better to sit at the waters’ birth,
             Than a sea of waves to win;
         To live in the love that floweth forth,
             Than the love that cometh in.

        Be thy heart a well of love, my child,
             Flowing, and free, and sure;
         For a cistern of love, though undefiled,
             Keeps not the spirit pure.

I rose from the earth, loving the white lady as I had never loved her
before.

Then I walked up to the door of Dismay, and opened it, and went out. And
lo! I came forth upon a crowded street, where men and women went to
and fro in multitudes. I knew it well; and, turning to one hand, walked
sadly along the pavement. Suddenly I saw approaching me, a little way
off, a form well known to me (WELL-KNOWN!--alas, how weak the word!) in
the years when I thought my boyhood was left behind, and shortly before
I entered the realm of Fairy Land. Wrong and Sorrow had gone together,
hand-in-hand as it is well they do.

Unchangeably dear was that face. It lay in my heart as a child lies in
its own white bed; but I could not meet her.

“Anything but that,” I said, and, turning aside, sprang up the steps
to a door, on which I fancied I saw the mystic sign. I entered--not the
mysterious cottage, but her home. I rushed wildly on, and stood by the
door of her room.

“She is out,” I said, “I will see the old room once more.”

I opened the door gently, and stood in a great solemn church. A
deep-toned bell, whose sounds throbbed and echoed and swam through the
empty building, struck the hour of midnight. The moon shone through
the windows of the clerestory, and enough of the ghostly radiance was
diffused through the church to let me see, walking with a stately, yet
somewhat trailing and stumbling step, down the opposite aisle, for I
stood in one of the transepts, a figure dressed in a white robe, whether
for the night, or for that longer night which lies too deep for the day,
I could not tell. Was it she? and was this her chamber? I crossed the
church, and followed. The figure stopped, seemed to ascend as it were
a high bed, and lay down. I reached the place where it lay, glimmering
white. The bed was a tomb. The light was too ghostly to see clearly, but
I passed my hand over the face and the hands and the feet, which were
all bare. They were cold--they were marble, but I knew them. It grew
dark. I turned to retrace my steps, but found, ere long, that I had
wandered into what seemed a little chapel. I groped about, seeking the
door. Everything I touched belonged to the dead. My hands fell on the
cold effigy of a knight who lay with his legs crossed and his sword
broken beside him. He lay in his noble rest, and I lived on in ignoble
strife. I felt for the left hand and a certain finger; I found there the
ring I knew: he was one of my own ancestors. I was in the chapel over
the burial-vault of my race. I called aloud: “If any of the dead are
moving here, let them take pity upon me, for I, alas! am still alive;
and let some dead woman comfort me, for I am a stranger in the land of
the dead, and see no light.” A warm kiss alighted on my lips through
the dark. And I said, “The dead kiss well; I will not be afraid.” And a
great hand was reached out of the dark, and grasped mine for a moment,
mightily and tenderly. I said to myself: “The veil between, though very
dark, is very thin.”

Groping my way further, I stumbled over the heavy stone that covered the
entrance of the vault: and, in stumbling, descried upon the stone the
mark, glowing in red fire. I caught the great ring. All my effort could
not have moved the huge slab; but it opened the door of the cottage, and
I threw myself once more, pale and speechless, on the couch beside the
ancient dame. She sang once more:

        Thou dreamest: on a rock thou art,
             High o’er the broken wave;
         Thou fallest with a fearful start
             But not into thy grave;
         For, waking in the morning’s light,
         Thou smilest at the vanished night

        So wilt thou sink, all pale and dumb,
             Into the fainting gloom;
         But ere the coming terrors come,
             Thou wak’st--where is the tomb?
         Thou wak’st--the dead ones smile above,
         With hovering arms of sleepless love.

 She paused; then sang again:

        We weep for gladness, weep for grief;
             The tears they are the same;
         We sigh for longing, and relief;
             The sighs have but one name,

        And mingled in the dying strife,
             Are moans that are not sad
          The pangs of death are throbs of life,
             Its sighs are sometimes glad.

         The face is very strange and white:
             It is Earth’s only spot
         That feebly flickers back the light
             The living seeth not.

 I fell asleep, and slept a dreamless sleep, for I know not how
long. When I awoke, I found that my hostess had moved from where she had
been sitting, and now sat between me and the fourth door.

I guessed that her design was to prevent my entering there. I sprang
from the couch, and darted past her to the door. I opened it at once and
went out. All I remember is a cry of distress from the woman: “Don’t go
there, my child! Don’t go there!” But I was gone.

I knew nothing more; or, if I did, I had forgot it all when I awoke to
consciousness, lying on the floor of the cottage, with my head in the
lap of the woman, who was weeping over me, and stroking my hair with
both hands, talking to me as a mother might talk to a sick and sleeping,
or a dead child. As soon as I looked up and saw her, she smiled
through her tears; smiled with withered face and young eyes, till her
countenance was irradiated with the light of the smile. Then she bathed
my head and face and hands in an icy cold, colourless liquid, which
smelt a little of damp earth. Immediately I was able to sit up. She rose
and put some food before me. When I had eaten, she said: “Listen to me,
my child. You must leave me directly!”

“Leave you!” I said. “I am so happy with you. I never was so happy in my
life.”

“But you must go,” she rejoined sadly. “Listen! What do you hear?”

“I hear the sound as of a great throbbing of water.”

“Ah! you do hear it? Well, I had to go through that door--the door of
the Timeless” (and she shuddered as she pointed to the fourth door)--“to
find you; for if I had not gone, you would never have entered again;
and because I went, the waters around my cottage will rise and rise,
and flow and come, till they build a great firmament of waters over my
dwelling. But as long as I keep my fire burning, they cannot enter.
I have fuel enough for years; and after one year they will sink away
again, and be just as they were before you came. I have not been buried
for a hundred years now.” And she smiled and wept.

“Alas! alas!” I cried. “I have brought this evil on the best and kindest
of friends, who has filled my heart with great gifts.”

“Do not think of that,” she rejoined. “I can bear it very well. You will
come back to me some day, I know. But I beg you, for my sake, my
dear child, to do one thing. In whatever sorrow you may be, however
inconsolable and irremediable it may appear, believe me that the old
woman in the cottage, with the young eyes” (and she smiled), “knows
something, though she must not always tell it, that would quite satisfy
you about it, even in the worst moments of your distress. Now you must
go.”

“But how can I go, if the waters are all about, and if the doors all
lead into other regions and other worlds?”

“This is not an island,” she replied; “but is joined to the land by a
narrow neck; and for the door, I will lead you myself through the right
one.”

She took my hand, and led me through the third door; whereupon I found
myself standing in the deep grassy turf on which I had landed from the
little boat, but upon the opposite side of the cottage. She pointed out
the direction I must take, to find the isthmus and escape the rising
waters.

Then putting her arms around me, she held me to her bosom; and as I
kissed her, I felt as if I were leaving my mother for the first time,
and could not help weeping bitterly. At length she gently pushed me
away, and with the words, “Go, my son, and do something worth doing,”
 turned back, and, entering the cottage, closed the door behind her. I
felt very desolate as I went.




CHAPTER XX

            “Thou hadst no fame; that which thou didst like good
         Was but thy appetite that swayed thy blood
         For that time to the best; for as a blast
         That through a house comes, usually doth cast
         Things out of order, yet by chance may come
         And blow some one thing to his proper room,
         So did thy appetite, and not thy zeal,
         Sway thee by chance to do some one thing well.”
                               FLETCHER’S Faithful Shepherdess.

            “The noble hart that harbours vertuous thought
         And is with childe of glorious great intent,
         Can never rest, until it forth have brought
         Th’ eternall brood of glorie excellent.”
                               SPENSER, The Faerie Queene.

I had not gone very far before I felt that the turf beneath my feet was
soaked with the rising waters. But I reached the isthmus in safety. It
was rocky, and so much higher than the level of the peninsula, that I
had plenty of time to cross. I saw on each side of me the water rising
rapidly, altogether without wind, or violent motion, or broken waves,
but as if a slow strong fire were glowing beneath it. Ascending a steep
acclivity, I found myself at last in an open, rocky country. After
travelling for some hours, as nearly in a straight line as I could,
I arrived at a lonely tower, built on the top of a little hill, which
overlooked the whole neighbouring country. As I approached, I heard
the clang of an anvil; and so rapid were the blows, that I despaired of
making myself heard till a pause in the work should ensue. It was
some minutes before a cessation took place; but when it did, I knocked
loudly, and had not long to wait; for, a moment after, the door was
partly opened by a noble-looking youth, half-undressed, glowing with
heat, and begrimed with the blackness of the forge. In one hand he held
a sword, so lately from the furnace that it yet shone with a dull fire.
As soon as he saw me, he threw the door wide open, and standing aside,
invited me very cordially to enter. I did so; when he shut and bolted
the door most carefully, and then led the way inwards. He brought me
into a rude hall, which seemed to occupy almost the whole of the ground
floor of the little tower, and which I saw was now being used as a
workshop. A huge fire roared on the hearth, beside which was an anvil.
By the anvil stood, in similar undress, and in a waiting attitude,
hammer in hand, a second youth, tall as the former, but far more
slightly built. Reversing the usual course of perception in such
meetings, I thought them, at first sight, very unlike; and at the second
glance, knew that they were brothers. The former, and apparently the
elder, was muscular and dark, with curling hair, and large hazel eyes,
which sometimes grew wondrously soft. The second was slender and fair,
yet with a countenance like an eagle, and an eye which, though pale
blue, shone with an almost fierce expression. He stood erect, as if
looking from a lofty mountain crag, over a vast plain outstretched
below. As soon as we entered the hall, the elder turned to me, and I saw
that a glow of satisfaction shone on both their faces. To my surprise
and great pleasure, he addressed me thus:

“Brother, will you sit by the fire and rest, till we finish this part of
our work?”

I signified my assent; and, resolved to await any disclosure they might
be inclined to make, seated myself in silence near the hearth.

The elder brother then laid the sword in the fire, covered it well over,
and when it had attained a sufficient degree of heat, drew it out and
laid it on the anvil, moving it carefully about, while the younger, with
a succession of quick smart blows, appeared either to be welding it,
or hammering one part of it to a consenting shape with the rest. Having
finished, they laid it carefully in the fire; and, when it was very
hot indeed, plunged it into a vessel full of some liquid, whence a blue
flame sprang upwards, as the glowing steel entered.

There they left it; and drawing two stools to the fire, sat down, one on
each side of me.

“We are very glad to see you, brother. We have been expecting you for
some days,” said the dark-haired youth.

“I am proud to be called your brother,” I rejoined; “and you will not
think I refuse the name, if I desire to know why you honour me with it?”

“Ah! then he does not know about it,” said the younger. “We thought you
had known of the bond betwixt us, and the work we have to do together.
You must tell him, brother, from the first.”

So the elder began:

“Our father is king of this country. Before we were born, three giant
brothers had appeared in the land. No one knew exactly when, and no one
had the least idea whence they came. They took possession of a ruined
castle that had stood unchanged and unoccupied within the memory of any
of the country people. The vaults of this castle had remained uninjured
by time, and these, I presume, they made use of at first. They were
rarely seen, and never offered the least injury to any one; so that they
were regarded in the neighbourhood as at least perfectly harmless, if
not rather benevolent beings. But it began to be observed, that the old
castle had assumed somehow or other, no one knew when or how, a somewhat
different look from what it used to have. Not only were several breaches
in the lower part of the walls built up, but actually some of the
battlements which yet stood, had been repaired, apparently to prevent
them from falling into worse decay, while the more important parts were
being restored. Of course, every one supposed the giants must have a
hand in the work, but no one ever saw them engaged in it. The peasants
became yet more uneasy, after one, who had concealed himself, and
watched all night, in the neighbourhood of the castle, reported that he
had seen, in full moonlight, the three huge giants working with might
and main, all night long, restoring to their former position some
massive stones, formerly steps of a grand turnpike stair, a great
portion of which had long since fallen, along with part of the wall
of the round tower in which it had been built. This wall they were
completing, foot by foot, along with the stair. But the people said
they had no just pretext for interfering: although the real reason for
letting the giants alone was, that everybody was far too much afraid of
them to interrupt them.

“At length, with the help of a neighbouring quarry, the whole of the
external wall of the castle was finished. And now the country folks were
in greater fear than before. But for several years the giants remained
very peaceful. The reason of this was afterwards supposed to be the
fact, that they were distantly related to several good people in the
country; for, as long as these lived, they remained quiet; but as soon
as they were all dead the real nature of the giants broke out. Having
completed the outside of their castle, they proceeded, by spoiling the
country houses around them, to make a quiet luxurious provision for
their comfort within. Affairs reached such a pass, that the news of
their robberies came to my father’s ears; but he, alas! was so crippled
in his resources, by a war he was carrying on with a neighbouring
prince, that he could only spare a very few men, to attempt the capture
of their stronghold. Upon these the giants issued in the night, and slew
every man of them. And now, grown bolder by success and impunity, they
no longer confined their depredations to property, but began to seize
the persons of their distinguished neighbours, knights and ladies, and
hold them in durance, the misery of which was heightened by all
manner of indignity, until they were redeemed by their friends, at an
exorbitant ransom. Many knights have adventured their overthrow, but to
their own instead; for they have all been slain, or captured, or forced
to make a hasty retreat. To crown their enormities, if any man now
attempts their destruction, they, immediately upon his defeat, put one
or more of their captives to a shameful death, on a turret in sight of
all passers-by; so that they have been much less molested of late;
and we, although we have burned, for years, to attack these demons
and destroy them, dared not, for the sake of their captives, risk the
adventure, before we should have reached at least our earliest manhood.
Now, however, we are preparing for the attempt; and the grounds of
this preparation are these. Having only the resolution, and not the
experience necessary for the undertaking, we went and consulted a lonely
woman of wisdom, who lives not very far from here, in the direction of
the quarter from which you have come. She received us most kindly, and
gave us what seems to us the best of advice. She first inquired what
experience we had had in arms. We told her we had been well exercised
from our boyhood, and for some years had kept ourselves in constant
practice, with a view to this necessity.

“‘But you have not actually fought for life and death?’ said she.

“We were forced to confess we had not.

“‘So much the better in some respects,’ she replied. ‘Now listen to me.
Go first and work with an armourer, for as long time as you find needful
to obtain a knowledge of his craft; which will not be long, seeing your
hearts will be all in the work. Then go to some lonely tower, you two
alone. Receive no visits from man or woman. There forge for yourselves
every piece of armour that you wish to wear, or to use, in your coming
encounter. And keep up your exercises. As, however, two of you can be no
match for the three giants, I will find you, if I can, a third brother,
who will take on himself the third share of the fight, and the
preparation. Indeed, I have already seen one who will, I think, be the
very man for your fellowship, but it will be some time before he comes
to me. He is wandering now without an aim. I will show him to you in a
glass, and, when he comes, you will know him at once. If he will share
your endeavours, you must teach him all you know, and he will repay you
well, in present song, and in future deeds.’

“She opened the door of a curious old cabinet that stood in the room.
On the inside of this door was an oval convex mirror. Looking in it for
some time, we at length saw reflected the place where we stood, and the
old dame seated in her chair. Our forms were not reflected. But at the
feet of the dame lay a young man, yourself, weeping.

“‘Surely this youth will not serve our ends,’ said I, ‘for he weeps.’

“The old woman smiled. ‘Past tears are present strength,’ said she.

“‘Oh!’ said my brother, ‘I saw you weep once over an eagle you shot.’

“‘That was because it was so like you, brother,’ I replied; ‘but indeed,
this youth may have better cause for tears than that--I was wrong.’

“‘Wait a while,’ said the woman; ‘if I mistake not, he will make you
weep till your tears are dry for ever. Tears are the only cure for
weeping. And you may have need of the cure, before you go forth to fight
the giants. You must wait for him, in your tower, till he comes.’

“Now if you will join us, we will soon teach you to make your armour;
and we will fight together, and work together, and love each other as
never three loved before. And you will sing to us, will you not?”

“That I will, when I can,” I answered; “but it is only at times that the
power of song comes upon me. For that I must wait; but I have a feeling
that if I work well, song will not be far off to enliven the labour.”

This was all the compact made: the brothers required nothing more, and
I did not think of giving anything more. I rose, and threw off my upper
garments.

“I know the uses of the sword,” I said. “I am ashamed of my white hands
beside yours so nobly soiled and hard; but that shame will soon be wiped
away.”

“No, no; we will not work to-day. Rest is as needful as toil. Bring the
wine, brother; it is your turn to serve to-day.”

The younger brother soon covered a table with rough viands, but good
wine; and we ate and drank heartily, beside our work. Before the meal
was over, I had learned all their story. Each had something in his heart
which made the conviction, that he would victoriously perish in the
coming conflict, a real sorrow to him. Otherwise they thought they would
have lived enough. The causes of their trouble were respectively these:

While they wrought with an armourer, in a city famed for workmanship
in steel and silver, the elder had fallen in love with a lady as
far beneath him in real rank, as she was above the station he had
as apprentice to an armourer. Nor did he seek to further his suit by
discovering himself; but there was simply so much manhood about him,
that no one ever thought of rank when in his company. This is what his
brother said about it. The lady could not help loving him in return. He
told her when he left her, that he had a perilous adventure before him,
and that when it was achieved, she would either see him return to claim
her, or hear that he had died with honour. The younger brother’s grief
arose from the fact, that, if they were both slain, his old father, the
king, would be childless. His love for his father was so exceeding, that
to one unable to sympathise with it, it would have appeared extravagant.
Both loved him equally at heart; but the love of the younger had
been more developed, because his thoughts and anxieties had not been
otherwise occupied. When at home, he had been his constant companion;
and, of late, had ministered to the infirmities of his growing age. The
youth was never weary of listening to the tales of his sire’s youthful
adventures; and had not yet in the smallest degree lost the conviction,
that his father was the greatest man in the world. The grandest triumph
possible to his conception was, to return to his father, laden with the
spoils of one of the hated giants. But they both were in some dread,
lest the thought of the loneliness of these two might occur to them,
in the moment when decision was most necessary, and disturb, in some
degree, the self-possession requisite for the success of their attempt.
For, as I have said, they were yet untried in actual conflict. “Now,”
 thought I, “I see to what the powers of my gift must minister.” For my
own part, I did not dread death, for I had nothing to care to live for;
but I dreaded the encounter because of the responsibility connected with
it. I resolved however to work hard, and thus grow cool, and quick, and
forceful.

The time passed away in work and song, in talk and ramble, in friendly
fight and brotherly aid. I would not forge for myself armour of heavy
mail like theirs, for I was not so powerful as they, and depended more
for any success I might secure, upon nimbleness of motion, certainty of
eye, and ready response of hand. Therefore I began to make for myself a
shirt of steel plates and rings; which work, while more troublesome,
was better suited to me than the heavier labour. Much assistance did the
brothers give me, even after, by their instructions, I was able to make
some progress alone. Their work was in a moment abandoned, to render any
required aid to mine. As the old woman had promised, I tried to repay
them with song; and many were the tears they both shed over my ballads
and dirges. The songs they liked best to hear were two which I made for
them. They were not half so good as many others I knew, especially some
I had learned from the wise woman in the cottage; but what comes nearest
to our needs we like the best.

I       The king sat on his throne
            Glowing in gold and red;
         The crown in his right hand shone,
             And the gray hairs crowned his head.

        His only son walks in,
            And in walls of steel he stands:
         Make me, O father, strong to win,
             With the blessing of holy hands.”

        He knelt before his sire,
             Who blessed him with feeble smile
          His eyes shone out with a kingly fire,
             But his old lips quivered the while.

        “Go to the fight, my son,
             Bring back the giant’s head;
         And the crown with which my brows have done,
             Shall glitter on thine instead.”

        “My father, I seek no crowns,
             But unspoken praise from thee;
         For thy people’s good, and thy renown,
             I will die to set them free.”

        The king sat down and waited there,
             And rose not, night nor day;
         Till a sound of shouting filled the air,
             And cries of a sore dismay.

        Then like a king he sat once more,
             With the crown upon his head;
         And up to the throne the people bore
             A mighty giant dead.

        And up to the throne the people bore
             A pale and lifeless boy.
         The king rose up like a prophet of yore,
             In a lofty, deathlike joy.

        He put the crown on the chilly brow:
             “Thou should’st have reigned with me
         But Death is the king of both, and now
             I go to obey with thee.

        “Surely some good in me there lay,
             To beget the noble one.”
          The old man smiled like a winter day,
             And fell beside his son.

II      “O lady, thy lover is dead,” they cried;
         “He is dead, but hath slain the foe;
         He hath left his name to be magnified
             In a song of wonder and woe.”

        “Alas! I am well repaid,” said she,
             “With a pain that stings like joy:
         For I feared, from his tenderness to me,
             That he was but a feeble boy.

        “Now I shall hold my head on high,
             The queen among my kind;
         If ye hear a sound, ‘tis only a sigh
             For a glory left behind.”

The first three times I sang these songs they both wept passionately.
But after the third time, they wept no more. Their eyes shone, and their
faces grew pale, but they never wept at any of my songs again.




CHAPTER XXI

        “I put my life in my hands.”--The Book of Judges.

At length, with much toil and equal delight, our armour was finished.
We armed each other, and tested the strength of the defence, with many
blows of loving force. I was inferior in strength to both my brothers,
but a little more agile than either; and upon this agility, joined to
precision in hitting with the point of my weapon, I grounded my hopes of
success in the ensuing combat. I likewise laboured to develop yet more
the keenness of sight with which I was naturally gifted; and, from the
remarks of my companions, I soon learned that my endeavours were not in
vain.

The morning arrived on which we had determined to make the attempt,
and succeed or perish--perhaps both. We had resolved to fight on foot;
knowing that the mishap of many of the knights who had made the attempt,
had resulted from the fright of their horses at the appearance of the
giants; and believing with Sir Gawain, that, though mare’s sons might
be false to us, the earth would never prove a traitor. But most of our
preparations were, in their immediate aim at least, frustrated.

We rose, that fatal morning, by daybreak. We had rested from all labour
the day before, and now were fresh as the lark. We bathed in cold
spring water, and dressed ourselves in clean garments, with a sense of
preparation, as for a solemn festivity. When we had broken our fast,
I took an old lyre, which I had found in the tower and had myself
repaired, and sung for the last time the two ballads of which I have
said so much already. I followed them with this, for a closing song:

        Oh, well for him who breaks his dream
             With the blow that ends the strife
         And, waking, knows the peace that flows
             Around the pain of life!

        We are dead, my brothers!  Our bodies clasp,
             As an armour, our souls about;
         This hand is the battle-axe I grasp,
             And this my hammer stout.

        Fear not, my brothers, for we are dead;
             No noise can break our rest;
         The calm of the grave is about the head,
             And the heart heaves not the breast.

         And our life we throw to our people back,
             To live with, a further store;
         We leave it them, that there be no lack
             In the land where we live no more.

         Oh, well for him who breaks his dream
             With the blow that ends the strife
          And, waking, knows the peace that flows
             Around the noise of life!

 As the last few tones of the instrument were following, like a
dirge, the death of the song, we all sprang to our feet. For, through
one of the little windows of the tower, towards which I had looked as
I sang, I saw, suddenly rising over the edge of the slope on which our
tower stood, three enormous heads. The brothers knew at once, by my
looks, what caused my sudden movement. We were utterly unarmed, and
there was no time to arm.

But we seemed to adopt the same resolution simultaneously; for each
caught up his favourite weapon, and, leaving his defence behind, sprang
to the door. I snatched up a long rapier, abruptly, but very finely
pointed, in my sword-hand, and in the other a sabre; the elder brother
seized his heavy battle-axe; and the younger, a great, two-handed sword,
which he wielded in one hand like a feather. We had just time to get
clear of the tower, embrace and say good-bye, and part to some little
distance, that we might not encumber each other’s motions, ere the
triple giant-brotherhood drew near to attack us. They were about twice
our height, and armed to the teeth. Through the visors of their helmets
their monstrous eyes shone with a horrible ferocity. I was in the middle
position, and the middle giant approached me. My eyes were busy with his
armour, and I was not a moment in settling my mode of attack. I saw that
his body-armour was somewhat clumsily made, and that the overlappings
in the lower part had more play than necessary; and I hoped that, in
a fortunate moment, some joint would open a little, in a visible and
accessible part. I stood till he came near enough to aim a blow at me
with the mace, which has been, in all ages, the favourite weapon of
giants, when, of course, I leaped aside, and let the blow fall upon the
spot where I had been standing. I expected this would strain the joints
of his armour yet more. Full of fury, he made at me again; but I kept
him busy, constantly eluding his blows, and hoping thus to fatigue him.
He did not seem to fear any assault from me, and I attempted none as
yet; but while I watched his motions in order to avoid his blows, I, at
the same time, kept equal watch upon those joints of his armour, through
some one of which I hoped to reach his life. At length, as if somewhat
fatigued, he paused a moment, and drew himself slightly up; I bounded
forward, foot and hand, ran my rapier right through to the armour of
his back, let go the hilt, and passing under his right arm, turned as
he fell, and flew at him with my sabre. At one happy blow I divided the
band of his helmet, which fell off, and allowed me, with a second cut
across the eyes, to blind him quite; after which I clove his head, and
turned, uninjured, to see how my brothers had fared. Both the giants
were down, but so were my brothers. I flew first to the one and then
to the other couple. Both pairs of combatants were dead, and yet locked
together, as in the death-struggle. The elder had buried his battle-axe
in the body of his foe, and had fallen beneath him as he fell. The giant
had strangled him in his own death-agonies. The younger had nearly hewn
off the left leg of his enemy; and, grappled with in the act, had,
while they rolled together on the earth, found for his dagger a passage
betwixt the gorget and cuirass of the giant, and stabbed him mortally in
the throat. The blood from the giant’s throat was yet pouring over the
hand of his foe, which still grasped the hilt of the dagger sheathed
in the wound. They lay silent. I, the least worthy, remained the sole
survivor in the lists.

As I stood exhausted amidst the dead, after the first worthy deed of my
life, I suddenly looked behind me, and there lay the Shadow, black in
the sunshine. I went into the lonely tower, and there lay the useless
armour of the noble youths--supine as they.

Ah, how sad it looked! It was a glorious death, but it was death. My
songs could not comfort me now. I was almost ashamed that I was alive,
when they, the true-hearted, were no more. And yet I breathed freer to
think that I had gone through the trial, and had not failed. And perhaps
I may be forgiven, if some feelings of pride arose in my bosom, when I
looked down on the mighty form that lay dead by my hand.

“After all, however,” I said to myself, and my heart sank, “it was only
skill. Your giant was but a blunderer.”

I left the bodies of friends and foes, peaceful enough when the
death-fight was over, and, hastening to the country below, roused the
peasants. They came with shouting and gladness, bringing waggons to
carry the bodies. I resolved to take the princes home to their father,
each as he lay, in the arms of his country’s foe. But first I searched
the giants, and found the keys of their castle, to which I repaired,
followed by a great company of the people. It was a place of wonderful
strength. I released the prisoners, knights and ladies, all in a sad
condition, from the cruelties and neglects of the giants. It humbled me
to see them crowding round me with thanks, when in truth the glorious
brothers, lying dead by their lonely tower, were those to whom the
thanks belonged. I had but aided in carrying out the thought born
in their brain, and uttered in visible form before ever I laid hold
thereupon. Yet I did count myself happy to have been chosen for their
brother in this great deed.

After a few hours spent in refreshing and clothing the prisoners, we all
commenced our journey towards the capital. This was slow at first; but,
as the strength and spirits of the prisoners returned, it became more
rapid; and in three days we reached the palace of the king. As we
entered the city gates, with the huge bulks lying each on a waggon drawn
by horses, and two of them inextricably intertwined with the dead bodies
of their princes, the people raised a shout and then a cry, and followed
in multitudes the solemn procession.

I will not attempt to describe the behaviour of the grand old king. Joy
and pride in his sons overcame his sorrow at their loss. On me he heaped
every kindness that heart could devise or hand execute. He used to sit
and question me, night after night, about everything that was in any
way connected with them and their preparations. Our mode of life,
and relation to each other, during the time we spent together, was a
constant theme. He entered into the minutest details of the construction
of the armour, even to a peculiar mode of riveting some of the plates,
with unwearying interest. This armour I had intended to beg of the king,
as my sole memorials of the contest; but, when I saw the delight he took
in contemplating it, and the consolation it appeared to afford him in
his sorrow, I could not ask for it; but, at his request, left my own,
weapons and all, to be joined with theirs in a trophy, erected in the
grand square of the palace. The king, with gorgeous ceremony, dubbed me
knight with his own old hand, in which trembled the sword of his youth.

During the short time I remained, my company was, naturally, much
courted by the young nobles. I was in a constant round of gaiety and
diversion, notwithstanding that the court was in mourning. For the
country was so rejoiced at the death of the giants, and so many of their
lost friends had been restored to the nobility and men of wealth, that
the gladness surpassed the grief. “Ye have indeed left your lives to
your people, my great brothers!” I said.

But I was ever and ever haunted by the old shadow, which I had not seen
all the time that I was at work in the tower. Even in the society of the
ladies of the court, who seemed to think it only their duty to make
my stay there as pleasant to me as possible, I could not help being
conscious of its presence, although it might not be annoying me at the
time. At length, somewhat weary of uninterrupted pleasure, and nowise
strengthened thereby, either in body or mind, I put on a splendid suit
of armour of steel inlaid with silver, which the old king had given
me, and, mounting the horse on which it had been brought to me, took my
leave of the palace, to visit the distant city in which the lady dwelt,
whom the elder prince had loved. I anticipated a sore task, in conveying
to her the news of his glorious fate: but this trial was spared me, in a
manner as strange as anything that had happened to me in Fairy Land.




CHAPTER XXII

        “No one has my form but the I.”
           Schoppe, in JEAN PAUL’S Titan.

                    “Joy’s a subtil elf.
         I think man’s happiest when he forgets himself.”
                        CYRIL TOURNEUR, The Revenger’s Tragedy.


On the third day of my journey, I was riding gently along a road,
apparently little frequented, to judge from the grass that grew upon
it. I was approaching a forest. Everywhere in Fairy Land forests are the
places where one may most certainly expect adventures. As I drew near, a
youth, unarmed, gentle, and beautiful, who had just cut a branch from a
yew growing on the skirts of the wood, evidently to make himself a bow,
met me, and thus accosted me:

“Sir knight, be careful as thou ridest through this forest; for it is
said to be strangely enchanted, in a sort which even those who have been
witnesses of its enchantment can hardly describe.”

I thanked him for his advice, which I promised to follow, and rode on.
But the moment I entered the wood, it seemed to me that, if enchantment
there was, it must be of a good kind; for the Shadow, which had been
more than usually dark and distressing, since I had set out on this
journey, suddenly disappeared. I felt a wonderful elevation of spirits,
and began to reflect on my past life, and especially on my combat
with the giants, with such satisfaction, that I had actually to remind
myself, that I had only killed one of them; and that, but for the
brothers, I should never have had the idea of attacking them, not to
mention the smallest power of standing to it. Still I rejoiced, and
counted myself amongst the glorious knights of old; having even the
unspeakable presumption--my shame and self-condemnation at the memory
of it are such, that I write it as the only and sorest penance I can
perform--to think of myself (will the world believe it?) as side by side
with Sir Galahad! Scarcely had the thought been born in my mind, when,
approaching me from the left, through the trees, I espied a resplendent
knight, of mighty size, whose armour seemed to shine of itself, without
the sun. When he drew near, I was astonished to see that this armour was
like my own; nay, I could trace, line for line, the correspondence of
the inlaid silver to the device on my own. His horse, too, was like mine
in colour, form, and motion; save that, like his rider, he was greater
and fiercer than his counterpart. The knight rode with beaver up. As he
halted right opposite to me in the narrow path, barring my way, I saw
the reflection of my countenance in the centre plate of shining steel on
his breastplate. Above it rose the same face--his face--only, as I have
said, larger and fiercer. I was bewildered. I could not help feeling
some admiration of him, but it was mingled with a dim conviction that he
was evil, and that I ought to fight with him.

“Let me pass,” I said.

“When I will,” he replied.

Something within me said: “Spear in rest, and ride at him! else thou art
for ever a slave.”

I tried, but my arm trembled so much, that I could not couch my lance.
To tell the truth, I, who had overcome the giant, shook like a coward
before this knight. He gave a scornful laugh, that echoed through the
wood, turned his horse, and said, without looking round, “Follow me.”

I obeyed, abashed and stupefied. How long he led, and how long I
followed, I cannot tell. “I never knew misery before,” I said to myself.
“Would that I had at least struck him, and had had my death-blow in
return! Why, then, do I not call to him to wheel and defend himself?
Alas! I know not why, but I cannot. One look from him would cow me like
a beaten hound.” I followed, and was silent.

At length we came to a dreary square tower, in the middle of a dense
forest. It looked as if scarce a tree had been cut down to make room for
it. Across the very door, diagonally, grew the stem of a tree, so large
that there was just room to squeeze past it in order to enter. One
miserable square hole in the roof was the only visible suggestion of a
window. Turret or battlement, or projecting masonry of any kind, it had
none. Clear and smooth and massy, it rose from its base, and ended with
a line straight and unbroken. The roof, carried to a centre from each of
the four walls, rose slightly to the point where the rafters met. Round
the base lay several little heaps of either bits of broken branches,
withered and peeled, or half-whitened bones; I could not distinguish
which. As I approached, the ground sounded hollow beneath my horse’s
hoofs. The knight took a great key from his pocket, and reaching past
the stem of the tree, with some difficulty opened the door. “Dismount,”
 he commanded. I obeyed. He turned my horse’s head away from the tower,
gave him a terrible blow with the flat side of his sword, and sent him
madly tearing through the forest.

“Now,” said he, “enter, and take your companion with you.”

I looked round: knight and horse had vanished, and behind me lay the
horrible shadow. I entered, for I could not help myself; and the shadow
followed me. I had a terrible conviction that the knight and he were
one. The door closed behind me.

Now I was indeed in pitiful plight. There was literally nothing in the
tower but my shadow and me. The walls rose right up to the roof; in
which, as I had seen from without, there was one little square opening.
This I now knew to be the only window the tower possessed. I sat down on
the floor, in listless wretchedness. I think I must have fallen asleep,
and have slept for hours; for I suddenly became aware of existence, in
observing that the moon was shining through the hole in the roof. As she
rose higher and higher, her light crept down the wall over me, till at
last it shone right upon my head. Instantaneously the walls of the tower
seemed to vanish away like a mist. I sat beneath a beech, on the edge
of a forest, and the open country lay, in the moonlight, for miles and
miles around me, spotted with glimmering houses and spires and towers. I
thought with myself, “Oh, joy! it was only a dream; the horrible narrow
waste is gone, and I wake beneath a beech-tree, perhaps one that loves
me, and I can go where I will.” I rose, as I thought, and walked about,
and did what I would, but ever kept near the tree; for always, and, of
course, since my meeting with the woman of the beech-tree far more than
ever, I loved that tree. So the night wore on. I waited for the sun to
rise, before I could venture to renew my journey. But as soon as the
first faint light of the dawn appeared, instead of shining upon me
from the eye of the morning, it stole like a fainting ghost through the
little square hole above my head; and the walls came out as the light
grew, and the glorious night was swallowed up of the hateful day. The
long dreary day passed. My shadow lay black on the floor. I felt no
hunger, no need of food. The night came. The moon shone. I watched her
light slowly descending the wall, as I might have watched, adown the
sky, the long, swift approach of a helping angel. Her rays touched me,
and I was free. Thus night after night passed away. I should have died
but for this. Every night the conviction returned, that I was free.
Every morning I sat wretchedly disconsolate. At length, when the course
of the moon no longer permitted her beams to touch me, the night was
dreary as the day.

When I slept, I was somewhat consoled by my dreams; but all the time I
dreamed, I knew that I was only dreaming. But one night, at length, the
moon, a mere shred of pallor, scattered a few thin ghostly rays upon me;
and I think I fell asleep and dreamed. I sat in an autumn night before
the vintage, on a hill overlooking my own castle. My heart sprang with
joy. Oh, to be a child again, innocent, fearless, without shame or
desire! I walked down to the castle. All were in consternation at my
absence. My sisters were weeping for my loss. They sprang up and clung
to me, with incoherent cries, as I entered. My old friends came flocking
round me. A gray light shone on the roof of the hall. It was the
light of the dawn shining through the square window of my tower.
More earnestly than ever, I longed for freedom after this dream; more
drearily than ever, crept on the next wretched day. I measured by the
sunbeams, caught through the little window in the trap of my tower, how
it went by, waiting only for the dreams of the night.

About noon, I started as if something foreign to all my senses and all
my experience, had suddenly invaded me; yet it was only the voice of
a woman singing. My whole frame quivered with joy, surprise, and the
sensation of the unforeseen. Like a living soul, like an incarnation of
Nature, the song entered my prison-house. Each tone folded its wings,
and laid itself, like a caressing bird, upon my heart. It bathed me like
a sea; inwrapt me like an odorous vapour; entered my soul like a long
draught of clear spring-water; shone upon me like essential sunlight;
soothed me like a mother’s voice and hand. Yet, as the clearest
forest-well tastes sometimes of the bitterness of decayed leaves, so to
my weary, prisoned heart, its cheerfulness had a sting of cold, and its
tenderness unmanned me with the faintness of long-departed joys. I wept
half-bitterly, half-luxuriously; but not long. I dashed away the tears,
ashamed of a weakness which I thought I had abandoned. Ere I knew, I had
walked to the door, and seated myself with my ears against it, in order
to catch every syllable of the revelation from the unseen outer world.
And now I heard each word distinctly. The singer seemed to be standing
or sitting near the tower, for the sounds indicated no change of place.
The song was something like this:

         The sun, like a golden knot on high,
         Gathers the glories of the sky,
         And binds them into a shining tent,
         Roofing the world with the firmament.
         And through the pavilion the rich winds blow,
         And through the pavilion the waters go.
         And the birds for joy, and the trees for prayer,
         Bowing their heads in the sunny air,
         And for thoughts, the gently talking springs,
         That come from the centre with secret things--
         All make a music, gentle and strong,
         Bound by the heart into one sweet song.
         And amidst them all, the mother Earth
         Sits with the children of her birth;
         She tendeth them all, as a mother hen
         Her little ones round her, twelve or ten:
         Oft she sitteth, with hands on knee,
         Idle with love for her family.
         Go forth to her from the dark and the dust,
         And weep beside her, if weep thou must;
         If she may not hold thee to her breast,
         Like a weary infant, that cries for rest
         At least she will press thee to her knee,
         And tell a low, sweet tale to thee,
         Till the hue to thy cheeky and the light to thine eye,
         Strength to thy limbs, and courage high
         To thy fainting heart, return amain,
         And away to work thou goest again.
         From the narrow desert, O man of pride,
         Come into the house, so high and wide.


Hardly knowing what I did, I opened the door. Why had I not done so
before? I do not know.

At first I could see no one; but when I had forced myself past the tree
which grew across the entrance, I saw, seated on the ground, and leaning
against the tree, with her back to my prison, a beautiful woman. Her
countenance seemed known to me, and yet unknown. She looked at me and
smiled, when I made my appearance.

“Ah! were you the prisoner there? I am very glad I have wiled you out.”

“Do you know me then?” “Do you not know me? But you hurt me, and that,
I suppose, makes it easy for a man to forget. You broke my globe. Yet
I thank you. Perhaps I owe you many thanks for breaking it. I took the
pieces, all black, and wet with crying over them, to the Fairy Queen.
There was no music and no light in them now. But she took them from me,
and laid them aside; and made me go to sleep in a great hall of white,
with black pillars, and many red curtains. When I woke in the morning,
I went to her, hoping to have my globe again, whole and sound; but she
sent me away without it, and I have not seen it since. Nor do I care for
it now. I have something so much better. I do not need the globe to play
to me; for I can sing. I could not sing at all before. Now I go about
everywhere through Fairy Land, singing till my heart is like to break,
just like my globe, for very joy at my own songs. And wherever I go, my
songs do good, and deliver people. And now I have delivered you, and I
am so happy.”

She ceased, and the tears came into her eyes.

All this time, I had been gazing at her; and now fully recognised the
face of the child, glorified in the countenance of the woman.

I was ashamed and humbled before her; but a great weight was lifted
from my thoughts. I knelt before her, and thanked her, and begged her to
forgive me.

“Rise, rise,” she said; “I have nothing to forgive; I thank you. But now
I must be gone, for I do not know how many may be waiting for me, here
and there, through the dark forests; and they cannot come out till I
come.”

She rose, and with a smile and a farewell, turned and left me. I dared
not ask her to stay; in fact, I could hardly speak to her. Between
her and me, there was a great gulf. She was uplifted, by sorrow and
well-doing, into a region I could hardly hope ever to enter. I watched
her departure, as one watches a sunset. She went like a radiance through
the dark wood, which was henceforth bright to me, from simply knowing
that such a creature was in it.

She was bearing the sun to the unsunned spots. The light and the music
of her broken globe were now in her heart and her brain. As she went,
she sang; and I caught these few words of her song; and the tones seemed
to linger and wind about the trees after she had disappeared:

             Thou goest thine, and I go mine--
             Many ways we wend;
             Many days, and many ways,
             Ending in one end.

             Many a wrong, and its curing song;
             Many a road, and many an inn;
             Room to roam, but only one home
             For all the world to win.
 And so she vanished.  With a sad heart, soothed by humility, and
the knowledge of her peace and gladness, I bethought me what now I
should do. First, I must leave the tower far behind me, lest, in some
evil moment, I might be once more caged within its horrible walls. But
it was ill walking in my heavy armour; and besides I had now no right
to the golden spurs and the resplendent mail, fitly dulled with long
neglect. I might do for a squire; but I honoured knighthood too highly,
to call myself any longer one of the noble brotherhood. I stripped off
all my armour, piled it under the tree, just where the lady had been
seated, and took my unknown way, eastward through the woods. Of all my
weapons, I carried only a short axe in my hand.

Then first I knew the delight of being lowly; of saying to myself, “I
am what I am, nothing more.” “I have failed,” I said, “I have lost
myself--would it had been my shadow.” I looked round: the shadow was
nowhere to be seen. Ere long, I learned that it was not myself, but
only my shadow, that I had lost. I learned that it is better, a
thousand-fold, for a proud man to fall and be humbled, than to hold up
his head in his pride and fancied innocence. I learned that he that will
be a hero, will barely be a man; that he that will be nothing but a doer
of his work, is sure of his manhood. In nothing was my ideal lowered, or
dimmed, or grown less precious; I only saw it too plainly, to set myself
for a moment beside it. Indeed, my ideal soon became my life; whereas,
formerly, my life had consisted in a vain attempt to behold, if not my
ideal in myself, at least myself in my ideal. Now, however, I took, at
first, what perhaps was a mistaken pleasure, in despising and degrading
myself. Another self seemed to arise, like a white spirit from a dead
man, from the dumb and trampled self of the past. Doubtless, this self
must again die and be buried, and again, from its tomb, spring a winged
child; but of this my history as yet bears not the record.

Self will come to life even in the slaying of self; but there is ever
something deeper and stronger than it, which will emerge at last from
the unknown abysses of the soul: will it be as a solemn gloom, burning
with eyes? or a clear morning after the rain? or a smiling child, that
finds itself nowhere, and everywhere?




CHAPTER XXIII

        “High erected thought, seated in a heart of courtesy.”
                                 SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.

            “A sweet attractive kinde of grace,
                 A full assurance given by lookes,
              Continuall comfort in a face,
                 The lineaments of Gospel bookes.”
                            MATTHEW ROYDON, on Sir Philip Sidney.


I had not gone far, for I had but just lost sight of the hated tower,
when a voice of another sort, sounding near or far, as the trees
permitted or intercepted its passage, reached me. It was a full, deep,
manly voice, but withal clear and melodious. Now it burst on the ear
with a sudden swell, and anon, dying away as suddenly, seemed to come to
me across a great space. Nevertheless, it drew nearer; till, at last, I
could distinguish the words of the song, and get transient glimpses of
the singer, between the columns of the trees. He came nearer, dawning
upon me like a growing thought. He was a knight, armed from head to
heel, mounted upon a strange-looking beast, whose form I could not
understand. The words which I heard him sing were like these:

          Heart be stout,
           And eye be true;
          Good blade out!
           And ill shall rue.

          Courage, horse!
           Thou lackst no skill;
          Well thy force
           Hath matched my will.

          For the foe
           With fiery breath,
          At a blow,
           Is still in death.

          Gently, horse!
           Tread fearlessly;
         ‘Tis his corse
           That burdens thee.

          The sun’s eye
           Is fierce at noon;
          Thou and I
           Will rest full soon.

          And new strength
           New work will meet;
          Till, at length,
           Long rest is sweet.

And now horse and rider had arrived near enough for me to see, fastened
by the long neck to the hinder part of the saddle, and trailing its
hideous length on the ground behind, the body of a great dragon. It was
no wonder that, with such a drag at his heels, the horse could make
but slow progress, notwithstanding his evident dismay. The horrid,
serpent-like head, with its black tongue, forked with red, hanging out
of its jaws, dangled against the horse’s side. Its neck was covered with
long blue hair, its sides with scales of green and gold. Its back was of
corrugated skin, of a purple hue. Its belly was similar in nature, but
its colour was leaden, dashed with blotches of livid blue. Its skinny,
bat-like wings and its tail were of a dull gray. It was strange to see
how so many gorgeous colours, so many curving lines, and such beautiful
things as wings and hair and scales, combined to form the horrible
creature, intense in ugliness.

The knight was passing me with a salutation; but, as I walked towards
him, he reined up, and I stood by his stirrup. When I came near him, I
saw to my surprise and pleasure likewise, although a sudden pain, like
a birth of fire, sprang up in my heart, that it was the knight of the
soiled armour, whom I knew before, and whom I had seen in the vision,
with the lady of the marble. But I could have thrown my arms around him,
because she loved him. This discovery only strengthened the resolution
I had formed, before I recognised him, of offering myself to the knight,
to wait upon him as a squire, for he seemed to be unattended. I made
my request in as few words as possible. He hesitated for a moment, and
looked at me thoughtfully. I saw that he suspected who I was, but that
he continued uncertain of his suspicion. No doubt he was soon convinced
of its truth; but all the time I was with him, not a word crossed his
lips with reference to what he evidently concluded I wished to leave
unnoticed, if not to keep concealed.

“Squire and knight should be friends,” said he: “can you take me by the
hand?” And he held out the great gauntleted right hand. I grasped it
willingly and strongly. Not a word more was said. The knight gave the
sign to his horse, which again began his slow march, and I walked beside
and a little behind.

We had not gone very far before we arrived at a little cottage; from
which, as we drew near, a woman rushed out with the cry:

“My child! my child! have you found my child?”

“I have found her,” replied the knight, “but she is sorely hurt. I was
forced to leave her with the hermit, as I returned. You will find her
there, and I think she will get better. You see I have brought you
a present. This wretch will not hurt you again.” And he undid the
creature’s neck, and flung the frightful burden down by the cottage
door.

The woman was now almost out of sight in the wood; but the husband stood
at the door, with speechless thanks in his face.

“You must bury the monster,” said the knight. “If I had arrived a moment
later, I should have been too late. But now you need not fear, for such
a creature as this very rarely appears, in the same part, twice during a
lifetime.”

“Will you not dismount and rest you, Sir Knight?” said the peasant, who
had, by this time, recovered himself a little.

“That I will, thankfully,” said he; and, dismounting, he gave the reins
to me, and told me to unbridle the horse, and lead him into the shade.
“You need not tie him up,” he added; “he will not run away.”

When I returned, after obeying his orders, and entered the cottage, I
saw the knight seated, without his helmet, and talking most familiarly
with the simple host. I stood at the open door for a moment, and, gazing
at him, inwardly justified the white lady in preferring him to me. A
nobler countenance I never saw. Loving-kindness beamed from every line
of his face. It seemed as if he would repay himself for the late arduous
combat, by indulging in all the gentleness of a womanly heart. But when
the talk ceased for a moment, he seemed to fall into a reverie. Then the
exquisite curves of the upper lip vanished. The lip was lengthened and
compressed at the same moment. You could have told that, within the
lips, the teeth were firmly closed. The whole face grew stern and
determined, all but fierce; only the eyes burned on like a holy
sacrifice, uplift on a granite rock.

The woman entered, with her mangled child in her arms. She was pale
as her little burden. She gazed, with a wild love and despairing
tenderness, on the still, all but dead face, white and clear from loss
of blood and terror.

The knight rose. The light that had been confined to his eyes, now shone
from his whole countenance. He took the little thing in his arms, and,
with the mother’s help, undressed her, and looked to her wounds. The
tears flowed down his face as he did so. With tender hands he bound them
up, kissed the pale cheek, and gave her back to her mother. When he went
home, all his tale would be of the grief and joy of the parents; while
to me, who had looked on, the gracious countenance of the armed man,
beaming from the panoply of steel, over the seemingly dead child, while
the powerful hands turned it and shifted it, and bound it, if possible
even more gently than the mother’s, formed the centre of the story.

After we had partaken of the best they could give us, the knight took
his leave, with a few parting instructions to the mother as to how she
should treat the child.

I brought the knight his steed, held the stirrup while he mounted, and
then followed him through the wood. The horse, delighted to be free
of his hideous load, bounded beneath the weight of man and armour, and
could hardly be restrained from galloping on. But the knight made him
time his powers to mine, and so we went on for an hour or two. Then
the knight dismounted, and compelled me to get into the saddle, saying:
“Knight and squire must share the labour.”

Holding by the stirrup, he walked along by my side, heavily clad as he
was, with apparent ease. As we went, he led a conversation, in which I
took what humble part my sense of my condition would permit me.

“Somehow or other,” said he, “notwithstanding the beauty of this country
of Faerie, in which we are, there is much that is wrong in it. If there
are great splendours, there are corresponding horrors; heights and
depths; beautiful women and awful fiends; noble men and weaklings. All
a man has to do, is to better what he can. And if he will settle it
with himself, that even renown and success are in themselves of no great
value, and be content to be defeated, if so be that the fault is not
his; and so go to his work with a cool brain and a strong will, he
will get it done; and fare none the worse in the end, that he was not
burdened with provision and precaution.”

“But he will not always come off well,” I ventured to say.

“Perhaps not,” rejoined the knight, “in the individual act; but the
result of his lifetime will content him.”

“So it will fare with you, doubtless,” thought I; “but for me---”

Venturing to resume the conversation after a pause, I said,
hesitatingly:

“May I ask for what the little beggar-girl wanted your aid, when she
came to your castle to find you?”

He looked at me for a moment in silence, and then said--

“I cannot help wondering how you know of that; but there is something
about you quite strange enough to entitle you to the privilege of the
country; namely, to go unquestioned. I, however, being only a man, such
as you see me, am ready to tell you anything you like to ask me, as far
as I can. The little beggar-girl came into the hall where I was sitting,
and told me a very curious story, which I can only recollect very
vaguely, it was so peculiar. What I can recall is, that she was sent to
gather wings. As soon as she had gathered a pair of wings for herself,
she was to fly away, she said, to the country she came from; but where
that was, she could give no information.

“She said she had to beg her wings from the butterflies and moths; and
wherever she begged, no one refused her. But she needed a great many of
the wings of butterflies and moths to make a pair for her; and so she
had to wander about day after day, looking for butterflies, and night
after night, looking for moths; and then she begged for their wings. But
the day before, she had come into a part of the forest, she said, where
there were multitudes of splendid butterflies flitting about, with wings
which were just fit to make the eyes in the shoulders of hers; and she
knew she could have as many of them as she liked for the asking; but as
soon as she began to beg, there came a great creature right up to her,
and threw her down, and walked over her. When she got up, she saw
the wood was full of these beings stalking about, and seeming to have
nothing to do with each other. As soon as ever she began to beg, one of
them walked over her; till at last in dismay, and in growing horror of
the senseless creatures, she had run away to look for somebody to help
her. I asked her what they were like. She said, like great men, made of
wood, without knee-or elbow-joints, and without any noses or mouths or
eyes in their faces. I laughed at the little maiden, thinking she was
making child’s game of me; but, although she burst out laughing too, she
persisted in asserting the truth of her story.”

“‘Only come, knight, come and see; I will lead you.’

“So I armed myself, to be ready for anything that might happen, and
followed the child; for, though I could make nothing of her story, I
could see she was a little human being in need of some help or other. As
she walked before me, I looked attentively at her. Whether or not it was
from being so often knocked down and walked over, I could not tell, but
her clothes were very much torn, and in several places her white skin
was peeping through. I thought she was hump-backed; but on looking more
closely, I saw, through the tatters of her frock--do not laugh at me--a
bunch on each shoulder, of the most gorgeous colours. Looking yet more
closely, I saw that they were of the shape of folded wings, and were
made of all kinds of butterfly-wings and moth-wings, crowded together
like the feathers on the individual butterfly pinion; but, like them,
most beautifully arranged, and producing a perfect harmony of colour and
shade. I could now more easily believe the rest of her story; especially
as I saw, every now and then, a certain heaving motion in the wings,
as if they longed to be uplifted and outspread. But beneath her scanty
garments complete wings could not be concealed, and indeed, from her own
story, they were yet unfinished.

“After walking for two or three hours (how the little girl found her
way, I could not imagine), we came to a part of the forest, the very
air of which was quivering with the motions of multitudes of resplendent
butterflies; as gorgeous in colour, as if the eyes of peacocks’ feathers
had taken to flight, but of infinite variety of hue and form, only that
the appearance of some kind of eye on each wing predominated. ‘There
they are, there they are!’ cried the child, in a tone of victory mingled
with terror. Except for this tone, I should have thought she referred
to the butterflies, for I could see nothing else. But at that moment
an enormous butterfly, whose wings had great eyes of blue surrounded by
confused cloudy heaps of more dingy colouring, just like a break in
the clouds on a stormy day towards evening, settled near us. The child
instantly began murmuring: ‘Butterfly, butterfly, give me your wings’;
when, the moment after, she fell to the ground, and began crying as if
hurt. I drew my sword and heaved a great blow in the direction in
which the child had fallen. It struck something, and instantly the most
grotesque imitation of a man became visible. You see this Fairy Land is
full of oddities and all sorts of incredibly ridiculous things, which a
man is compelled to meet and treat as real existences, although all the
time he feels foolish for doing so. This being, if being it could be
called, was like a block of wood roughly hewn into the mere outlines
of a man; and hardly so, for it had but head, body, legs, and arms--the
head without a face, and the limbs utterly formless. I had hewn off one
of its legs, but the two portions moved on as best they could, quite
independent of each other; so that I had done no good. I ran after
it, and clove it in twain from the head downwards; but it could not be
convinced that its vocation was not to walk over people; for, as soon as
the little girl began her begging again, all three parts came bustling
up; and if I had not interposed my weight between her and them, she
would have been trampled again under them. I saw that something else
must be done. If the wood was full of the creatures, it would be an
endless work to chop them so small that they could do no injury; and
then, besides, the parts would be so numerous, that the butterflies
would be in danger from the drift of flying chips. I served this one
so, however; and then told the girl to beg again, and point out the
direction in which one was coming. I was glad to find, however, that
I could now see him myself, and wondered how they could have been
invisible before. I would not allow him to walk over the child; but
while I kept him off, and she began begging again, another appeared; and
it was all I could do, from the weight of my armour, to protect her from
the stupid, persevering efforts of the two. But suddenly the right plan
occurred to me. I tripped one of them up, and, taking him by the legs,
set him up on his head, with his heels against a tree. I was delighted
to find he could not move. Meantime the poor child was walked over by
the other, but it was for the last time. Whenever one appeared, I
followed the same plan--tripped him up and set him on his head; and so
the little beggar was able to gather her wings without any trouble,
which occupation she continued for several hours in my company.”

“What became of her?” I asked.

“I took her home with me to my castle, and she told me all her story;
but it seemed to me, all the time, as if I were hearing a child talk in
its sleep. I could not arrange her story in my mind at all, although it
seemed to leave hers in some certain order of its own. My wife---”

Here the knight checked himself, and said no more. Neither did I urge
the conversation farther.

Thus we journeyed for several days, resting at night in such shelter
as we could get; and when no better was to be had, lying in the forest
under some tree, on a couch of old leaves.

I loved the knight more and more. I believe never squire served his
master with more care and joyfulness than I. I tended his horse; I
cleaned his armour; my skill in the craft enabled me to repair it when
necessary; I watched his needs; and was well repaid for all by the love
itself which I bore him.

“This,” I said to myself, “is a true man. I will serve him, and give him
all worship, seeing in him the imbodiment of what I would fain become.
If I cannot be noble myself, I will yet be servant to his nobleness.”
 He, in return, soon showed me such signs of friendship and respect, as
made my heart glad; and I felt that, after all, mine would be no lost
life, if I might wait on him to the world’s end, although no smile but
his should greet me, and no one but him should say, “Well done! he was
a good servant!” at last. But I burned to do something more for him than
the ordinary routine of a squire’s duty permitted.

One afternoon, we began to observe an appearance of roads in the wood.
Branches had been cut down, and openings made, where footsteps had worn
no path below. These indications increased as we passed on, till, at
length, we came into a long, narrow avenue, formed by felling the trees
in its line, as the remaining roots evidenced. At some little distance,
on both hands, we observed signs of similar avenues, which appeared to
converge with ours, towards one spot. Along these we indistinctly saw
several forms moving, which seemed, with ourselves, to approach the
common centre. Our path brought us, at last, up to a wall of yew-trees,
growing close together, and intertwining their branches so, that nothing
could be seen beyond it. An opening was cut in it like a door, and all
the wall was trimmed smooth and perpendicular. The knight dismounted,
and waited till I had provided for his horse’s comfort; upon which we
entered the place together.

It was a great space, bare of trees, and enclosed by four walls of yew,
similar to that through which we had entered. These trees grew to a very
great height, and did not divide from each other till close to the top,
where their summits formed a row of conical battlements all around the
walls. The space contained was a parallelogram of great length. Along
each of the two longer sides of the interior, were ranged three ranks
of men, in white robes, standing silent and solemn, each with a sword by
his side, although the rest of his costume and bearing was more priestly
than soldierly. For some distance inwards, the space between these
opposite rows was filled with a company of men and women and children,
in holiday attire. The looks of all were directed inwards, towards the
further end. Far beyond the crowd, in a long avenue, seeming to narrow
in the distance, went the long rows of the white-robed men. On what the
attention of the multitude was fixed, we could not tell, for the sun had
set before we arrived, and it was growing dark within. It grew darker
and darker. The multitude waited in silence. The stars began to shine
down into the enclosure, and they grew brighter and larger every moment.
A wind arose, and swayed the pinnacles of the tree-tops; and made a
strange sound, half like music, half like moaning, through the close
branches and leaves of the tree-walls. A young girl who stood beside me,
clothed in the same dress as the priests, bowed her head, and grew pale
with awe.

The knight whispered to me, “How solemn it is! Surely they wait to hear
the voice of a prophet. There is something good near!”

But I, though somewhat shaken by the feeling expressed by my master,
yet had an unaccountable conviction that here was something bad. So I
resolved to be keenly on the watch for what should follow.

Suddenly a great star, like a sun, appeared high in the air over the
temple, illuminating it throughout; and a great song arose from the men
in white, which went rolling round and round the building, now receding
to the end, and now approaching, down the other side, the place where we
stood. For some of the singers were regularly ceasing, and the next
to them as regularly taking up the song, so that it crept onwards with
gradations produced by changes which could not themselves be detected,
for only a few of those who were singing ceased at the same moment. The
song paused; and I saw a company of six of the white-robed men walk up
the centre of the human avenue, surrounding a youth gorgeously attired
beneath his robe of white, and wearing a chaplet of flowers on his
head. I followed them closely, with my keenest observation; and, by
accompanying their slow progress with my eyes, I was able to perceive
more clearly what took place when they arrived at the other end. I knew
that my sight was so much more keen than that of most people, that I had
good reason to suppose I should see more than the rest could, at such a
distance. At the farther end a throne stood upon a platform, high above
the heads of the surrounding priests. To this platform I saw the company
begin to ascend, apparently by an inclined plane or gentle slope. The
throne itself was elevated again, on a kind of square pedestal, to the
top of which led a flight of steps. On the throne sat a majestic-looking
figure, whose posture seemed to indicate a mixture of pride and
benignity, as he looked down on the multitude below. The company
ascended to the foot of the throne, where they all kneeled for some
minutes; then they rose and passed round to the side of the pedestal
upon which the throne stood. Here they crowded close behind the youth,
putting him in the foremost place, and one of them opened a door in the
pedestal, for the youth to enter. I was sure I saw him shrink back, and
those crowding behind pushed him in. Then, again, arose a burst of song
from the multitude in white, which lasted some time. When it ceased,
a new company of seven commenced its march up the centre. As they
advanced, I looked up at my master: his noble countenance was full of
reverence and awe. Incapable of evil himself, he could scarcely suspect
it in another, much less in a multitude such as this, and surrounded
with such appearances of solemnity. I was certain it was the really
grand accompaniments that overcame him; that the stars overhead, the
dark towering tops of the yew-trees, and the wind that, like an unseen
spirit, sighed through their branches, bowed his spirit to the belief,
that in all these ceremonies lay some great mystical meaning which, his
humility told him, his ignorance prevented him from understanding.

More convinced than before, that there was evil here, I could not endure
that my master should be deceived; that one like him, so pure and noble,
should respect what, if my suspicions were true, was worse than the
ordinary deceptions of priestcraft. I could not tell how far he might be
led to countenance, and otherwise support their doings, before he should
find cause to repent bitterly of his error. I watched the new procession
yet more keenly, if possible, than the former. This time, the central
figure was a girl; and, at the close, I observed, yet more indubitably,
the shrinking back, and the crowding push. What happened to the victims,
I never learned; but I had learned enough, and I could bear it no
longer. I stooped, and whispered to the young girl who stood by me, to
lend me her white garment. I wanted it, that I might not be entirely
out of keeping with the solemnity, but might have at least this help to
passing unquestioned. She looked up, half-amused and half-bewildered, as
if doubting whether I was in earnest or not. But in her perplexity, she
permitted me to unfasten it, and slip it down from her shoulders.

I easily got possession of it; and, sinking down on my knees in the
crowd, I rose apparently in the habit of one of the worshippers.

Giving my battle-axe to the girl, to hold in pledge for the return of
her stole, for I wished to test the matter unarmed, and, if it was a man
that sat upon the throne, to attack him with hands bare, as I supposed
his must be, I made my way through the crowd to the front, while the
singing yet continued, desirous of reaching the platform while it was
unoccupied by any of the priests. I was permitted to walk up the long
avenue of white robes unmolested, though I saw questioning looks in many
of the faces as I passed. I presume my coolness aided my passage; for
I felt quite indifferent as to my own fate; not feeling, after the
late events of my history, that I was at all worth taking care of; and
enjoying, perhaps, something of an evil satisfaction, in the revenge
I was thus taking upon the self which had fooled me so long. When I
arrived on the platform, the song had just ceased, and I felt as if all
were looking towards me. But instead of kneeling at its foot, I walked
right up the stairs to the throne, laid hold of a great wooden image
that seemed to sit upon it, and tried to hurl it from its seat. In this
I failed at first, for I found it firmly fixed. But in dread lest, the
first shock of amazement passing away, the guards would rush upon me
before I had effected my purpose, I strained with all my might; and,
with a noise as of the cracking, and breaking, and tearing of rotten
wood, something gave way, and I hurled the image down the steps. Its
displacement revealed a great hole in the throne, like the hollow of a
decayed tree, going down apparently a great way. But I had no time to
examine it, for, as I looked into it, up out of it rushed a great brute,
like a wolf, but twice the size, and tumbled me headlong with itself,
down the steps of the throne. As we fell, however, I caught it by the
throat, and the moment we reached the platform, a struggle commenced, in
which I soon got uppermost, with my hand upon its throat, and knee upon
its heart. But now arose a wild cry of wrath and revenge and rescue.
A universal hiss of steel, as every sword was swept from its scabbard,
seemed to tear the very air in shreds. I heard the rush of hundreds
towards the platform on which I knelt. I only tightened my grasp of the
brute’s throat. His eyes were already starting from his head, and his
tongue was hanging out. My anxious hope was, that, even after they had
killed me, they would be unable to undo my gripe of his throat, before
the monster was past breathing. I therefore threw all my will, and
force, and purpose, into the grasping hand. I remember no blow. A
faintness came over me, and my consciousness departed.




CHAPTER XXIV

        “We are ne’er like angels till our passions die.”
                                        DEKKER.

        “This wretched INN, where we scarce stay to bait,
                 We call our DWELLING-PLACE:
                 We call one STEP A RACE:
         But angels in their full enlightened state,
         Angels, who LIVE, and know what ‘tis to BE,
         Who all the nonsense of our language see,
         Who speak THINGS, and our WORDS,their ill-drawn
              PICTURES, scorn,
            When we, by a foolish figure, say,
            BEHOLD AN OLD MAN DEAD! then they
         Speak properly, and cry, BEHOLD A MAN-CHILD BORN!”
                                              COWLEY.

I was dead, and right content. I lay in my coffin, with my hands folded
in peace. The knight, and the lady I loved, wept over me.

Her tears fell on my face.

“Ah!” said the knight, “I rushed amongst them like a madman. I hewed
them down like brushwood. Their swords battered on me like hail, but
hurt me not. I cut a lane through to my friend. He was dead. But he had
throttled the monster, and I had to cut the handful out of its throat,
before I could disengage and carry off his body. They dared not molest
me as I brought him back.”

“He has died well,” said the lady.

My spirit rejoiced. They left me to my repose. I felt as if a cool hand
had been laid upon my heart, and had stilled it. My soul was like a
summer evening, after a heavy fall of rain, when the drops are yet
glistening on the trees in the last rays of the down-going sun, and the
wind of the twilight has begun to blow. The hot fever of life had gone
by, and I breathed the clear mountain-air of the land of Death. I had
never dreamed of such blessedness. It was not that I had in any way
ceased to be what I had been. The very fact that anything can die,
implies the existence of something that cannot die; which must either
take to itself another form, as when the seed that is sown dies, and
arises again; or, in conscious existence, may, perhaps, continue to
lead a purely spiritual life. If my passions were dead, the souls of
the passions, those essential mysteries of the spirit which had imbodied
themselves in the passions, and had given to them all their glory and
wonderment, yet lived, yet glowed, with a pure, undying fire. They rose
above their vanishing earthly garments, and disclosed themselves angels
of light. But oh, how beautiful beyond the old form! I lay thus for
a time, and lived as it were an unradiating existence; my soul a
motionless lake, that received all things and gave nothing back;
satisfied in still contemplation, and spiritual consciousness.

Ere long, they bore me to my grave. Never tired child lay down in his
white bed, and heard the sound of his playthings being laid aside for
the night, with a more luxurious satisfaction of repose than I knew,
when I felt the coffin settle on the firm earth, and heard the sound of
the falling mould upon its lid. It has not the same hollow rattle within
the coffin, that it sends up to the edge of the grave. They buried me
in no graveyard. They loved me too much for that, I thank them; but they
laid me in the grounds of their own castle, amid many trees; where, as
it was spring-time, were growing primroses, and blue-bells, and all the
families of the woods

Now that I lay in her bosom, the whole earth, and each of her many
births, was as a body to me, at my will. I seemed to feel the great
heart of the mother beating into mine, and feeding me with her own life,
her own essential being and nature. I heard the footsteps of my friends
above, and they sent a thrill through my heart. I knew that the helpers
had gone, and that the knight and the lady remained, and spoke low,
gentle, tearful words of him who lay beneath the yet wounded sod. I rose
into a single large primrose that grew by the edge of the grave,
and from the window of its humble, trusting face, looked full in the
countenance of the lady. I felt that I could manifest myself in the
primrose; that it said a part of what I wanted to say; just as in the
old time, I had used to betake myself to a song for the same end. The
flower caught her eye. She stooped and plucked it, saying, “Oh, you
beautiful creature!” and, lightly kissing it, put it in her bosom. It
was the first kiss she had ever given me. But the flower soon began to
wither, and I forsook it.

It was evening. The sun was below the horizon; but his rosy beams yet
illuminated a feathery cloud, that floated high above the world. I
arose, I reached the cloud; and, throwing myself upon it, floated with
it in sight of the sinking sun. He sank, and the cloud grew gray; but
the grayness touched not my heart. It carried its rose-hue within;
for now I could love without needing to be loved again. The moon came
gliding up with all the past in her wan face. She changed my couch into
a ghostly pallor, and threw all the earth below as to the bottom of a
pale sea of dreams. But she could not make me sad. I knew now, that it
is by loving, and not by being loved, that one can come nearest the soul
of another; yea, that, where two love, it is the loving of each other,
and not the being loved by each other, that originates and perfects and
assures their blessedness. I knew that love gives to him that loveth,
power over any soul beloved, even if that soul know him not, bringing
him inwardly close to that spirit; a power that cannot be but for good;
for in proportion as selfishness intrudes, the love ceases, and the
power which springs therefrom dies. Yet all love will, one day, meet
with its return. All true love will, one day, behold its own image in
the eyes of the beloved, and be humbly glad. This is possible in the
realms of lofty Death. “Ah! my friends,” thought I, “how I will tend
you, and wait upon you, and haunt you with my love.”

“My floating chariot bore me over a great city. Its faint dull sound
steamed up into the air--a sound--how composed?” How many hopeless
cries,” thought I, “and how many mad shouts go to make up the tumult,
here so faint where I float in eternal peace, knowing that they will
one day be stilled in the surrounding calm, and that despair dies into
infinite hope, and the seeming impossible there, is the law here!

“But, O pale-faced women, and gloomy-browed men, and forgotten children,
how I will wait on you, and minister to you, and, putting my arms about
you in the dark, think hope into your hearts, when you fancy no one is
near! Soon as my senses have all come back, and have grown accustomed to
this new blessed life, I will be among you with the love that healeth.”

With this, a pang and a terrible shudder went through me; a writhing
as of death convulsed me; and I became once again conscious of a more
limited, even a bodily and earthly life.




CHAPTER XXV

        “Our life is no dream; but it ought to become one,
          and perhaps will.”--NOVALIS.

            “And on the ground, which is my modres gate,
            I knocke with my staf; erlich and late,
            And say to hire, Leve mother, let me in.”
                        CHAUCER, The Pardoneres Tale.

Sinking from such a state of ideal bliss, into the world of shadows
which again closed around and infolded me, my first dread was, not
unnaturally, that my own shadow had found me again, and that my torture
had commenced anew. It was a sad revulsion of feeling. This, indeed,
seemed to correspond to what we think death is, before we die. Yet I
felt within me a power of calm endurance to which I had hitherto been
a stranger. For, in truth, that I should be able if only to think such
things as I had been thinking, was an unspeakable delight. An hour of
such peace made the turmoil of a lifetime worth striving through.

I found myself lying in the open air, in the early morning, before
sunrise. Over me rose the summer heaven, expectant of the sun. The
clouds already saw him, coming from afar; and soon every dewdrop would
rejoice in his individual presence within it.

I lay motionless for a few minutes; and then slowly rose and looked
about me. I was on the summit of a little hill; a valley lay beneath,
and a range of mountains closed up the view upon that side. But, to my
horror, across the valley, and up the height of the opposing mountains,
stretched, from my very feet, a hugely expanding shade. There it lay,
long and large, dark and mighty. I turned away with a sick despair; when
lo! I beheld the sun just lifting his head above the eastern hill,
and the shadow that fell from me, lay only where his beams fell not. I
danced for joy. It was only the natural shadow, that goes with every man
who walks in the sun. As he arose, higher and higher, the shadow-head
sank down the side of the opposite hill, and crept in across the valley
towards my feet.

Now that I was so joyously delivered from this fear, I saw and
recognised the country around me. In the valley below, lay my own
castle, and the haunts of my childhood were all about me hastened home.
My sisters received me with unspeakable joy; but I suppose they observed
some change in me, for a kind of respect, with a slight touch of awe in
it, mingled with their joy, and made me ashamed. They had been in great
distress about me. On the morning of my disappearance, they had found
the floor of my room flooded; and, all that day, a wondrous and nearly
impervious mist had hung about the castle and grounds. I had been gone,
they told me, twenty-one days. To me it seemed twenty-one years. Nor
could I yet feel quite secure in my new experiences. When, at night, I
lay down once more in my own bed, I did not feel at all sure that when I
awoke, I should not find myself in some mysterious region of Fairy Land.
My dreams were incessant and perturbed; but when I did awake, I saw
clearly that I was in my own home.

My mind soon grew calm; and I began the duties of my new position,
somewhat instructed, I hoped, by the adventures that had befallen me in
Fairy Land. Could I translate the experience of my travels there, into
common life? This was the question. Or must I live it all over again,
and learn it all over again, in the other forms that belong to the world
of men, whose experience yet runs parallel to that of Fairy Land? These
questions I cannot answer yet. But I fear.

Even yet, I find myself looking round sometimes with anxiety, to see
whether my shadow falls right away from the sun or no. I have never yet
discovered any inclination to either side. And if I am not unfrequently
sad, I yet cast no more of a shade on the earth, than most men who have
lived in it as long as I. I have a strange feeling sometimes, that I am
a ghost, sent into the world to minister to my fellow men, or, rather,
to repair the wrongs I have already done.

May the world be brighter for me, at least in those portions of it,
where my darkness falls not.

Thus I, who set out to find my Ideal, came back rejoicing that I had
lost my Shadow.

When the thought of the blessedness I experienced, after my death in
Fairy Land, is too high for me to lay hold upon it and hope in it,
I often think of the wise woman in the cottage, and of her solemn
assurance that she knew something too good to be told. When I am
oppressed by any sorrow or real perplexity, I often feel as if I had
only left her cottage for a time, and would soon return out of the
vision, into it again. Sometimes, on such occasions, I find myself,
unconsciously almost, looking about for the mystic mark of red, with
the vague hope of entering her door, and being comforted by her wise
tenderness. I then console myself by saying: “I have come through the
door of Dismay; and the way back from the world into which that has led
me, is through my tomb. Upon that the red sign lies, and I shall find it
one day, and be glad.”

I will end my story with the relation of an incident which befell me a
few days ago. I had been with my reapers, and, when they ceased their
work at noon, I had lain down under the shadow of a great, ancient
beech-tree, that stood on the edge of the field. As I lay, with my eyes
closed, I began to listen to the sound of the leaves overhead. At first,
they made sweet inarticulate music alone; but, by-and-by, the sound
seemed to begin to take shape, and to be gradually moulding itself into
words; till, at last, I seemed able to distinguish these, half-dissolved
in a little ocean of circumfluent tones: “A great good is coming--is
coming--is coming to thee, Anodos;” and so over and over again. I
fancied that the sound reminded me of the voice of the ancient woman, in
the cottage that was four-square. I opened my eyes, and, for a moment,
almost believed that I saw her face, with its many wrinkles and its
young eyes, looking at me from between two hoary branches of the beech
overhead. But when I looked more keenly, I saw only twigs and leaves,
and the infinite sky, in tiny spots, gazing through between. Yet I know
that good is coming to me--that good is always coming; though few have
at all times the simplicity and the courage to believe it. What we
call evil, is the only and best shape, which, for the person and his
condition at the time, could be assumed by the best good. And so,
FAREWELL.

