




THE LIGHT PRINCESS






I. WHAT! NO CHILDREN?


Once upon a time, so long ago that I have quite forgotten the date,
there lived a king and queen who had no children.

And the king said to himself, "All the queens of my acquaintance have
children, some three, some seven, and some as many as twelve; and my
queen has not one. I feel ill-used." So he made up his mind to be cross
with his wife about it. But she bore it all like a good patient queen
as she was. Then the king grew very cross indeed. But the queen
pretended to take it all as a joke, and a very good one too.

"Why don't you have any daughters, at least?" said he. "I don't say
_sons_; that might be too much to expect."

"I am sure, dear king, I am very sorry," said the queen.

"So you ought to be," retorted the king; "you are not going to make a
virtue of _that_, surely."

But he was not an ill-tempered king, and in any matter of less moment
would have let the queen have her own way with all his heart. This,
however, was an affair of state.

The queen smiled.

"You must have patience with a lady, you know, dear king," said she.

She was, indeed, a very nice queen, and heartily sorry that she could
not oblige the king immediately.

The king tried to have patience, but he succeeded very badly. It was
more than he deserved, therefore, when, at last, the queen gave him a
daughter--as lovely a little princess as ever cried.






II. WON'T I, JUST?


The day drew near when the infant must be christened. The king wrote
all the invitations with his own hand. Of course somebody was
forgotten.

Now it does not generally matter if somebody _is_ forgotten, only you
must mind who. Unfortunately, the king forgot without intending to
forget; and so the chance fell upon the Princess Makemnoit, which was
awkward. For the princess was the king's own sister; and he ought not
to have forgotten her. But she had made herself so disagreeable to the
old king, their father, that he had forgotten her in making his will;
and so it was no wonder that her brother forgot her in writing his
invitations. But poor relations don't do anything to keep you in mind
of them. Why don't they? The king could not see into the garret she
lived in, could he?

She was a sour, spiteful creature. The wrinkles of contempt crossed the
wrinkles of peevishness, and made her face as full of wrinkles as a pat
of butter. If ever a king could be justified in forgetting anybody,
this king was justified in forgetting his sister, even at a
christening. She looked very odd, too. Her forehead was as large as all
the rest of her face, and projected over it like a precipice. When she
was angry her little eyes flashed blue. When she hated anybody, they
shone yellow and green. What they looked like when she loved anybody, I
do not know; for I never heard of her loving anybody but herself, and I
do not think she could have managed that if she had not somehow got
used to herself. But what made it highly imprudent in the king to
forget her was--that she was awfully clever. In fact, she was a witch;
and when she bewitched anybody, he very soon had enough of it; for she
beat all the wicked fairies in wickedness, and all the clever ones in
cleverness. She despised all the modes we read of in history, in which
offended fairies and witches have taken their revenges; and therefore,
after waiting and waiting in vain for an invitation, she made up her
mind at last to go without one, and make the whole family miserable,
like a princess as she was.

So she put on her best gown, went to the palace, was kindly received by
the happy monarch, who forgot that he had forgotten her, and took her
place in the procession to the royal chapel. When they were all
gathered about the font, she contrived to get next to it, and throw
something into the water; after which she maintained a very respectful
demeanour till the water was applied to the child's face. But at that
moment she turned round in her place three times, and muttered the
following words, loud enough for those beside her to hear:--

  "Light of spirit, by my charms,
    Light of body, every part,
   Never weary human arms--
    Only crush thy parents' heart!"

They all thought she had lost her wits, and was repeating some foolish
nursery rhyme; but a shudder went through the whole of them
notwithstanding. The baby, on the contrary, began to laugh and crow;
while the nurse gave a start and a smothered cry, for she thought she
was struck with paralysis: she could not feel the baby in her arms. But
she clasped it tight and said nothing.

The mischief was done.






III. SHE CAN'T BE OURS


Her atrocious aunt had deprived the child of all her gravity. If you
ask me how this was effected, I answer, "In the easiest way in the
world. She had only to destroy gravitation." For the princess was a
philosopher, and knew all the _ins_ and _outs_ of the laws of
gravitation as well as the _ins_ and _outs_ of her boot-lace. And being
a witch as well, she could abrogate those laws in a moment; or at least
so clog their wheels and rust their bearings, that they would not work
at all. But we have more to do with what followed than with how it was
done.

The first awkwardness that resulted from this unhappy privation was,
that the moment the nurse began to float the baby up and down, she flew
from her arms towards the ceiling. Happily, the resistance of the air
brought her ascending career to a close within a foot of it. There she
remained, horizontal as when she left her nurse's arms, kicking and
laughing amazingly. The nurse in terror flew to the bell, and begged
the footman, who answered it, to bring up the house-steps directly.
Trembling in every limb, she climbed upon the steps, and had to stand
upon the very top, and reach up, before she could catch the floating
tail of the baby's long clothes.

When the strange fact came to be known, there was a terrible commotion
in the palace. The occasion of its discovery by the king was naturally
a repetition of the nurse's experience. Astonished that he felt no
weight when the child was laid in his arms, he began to wave her up
and--not down, for she slowly ascended to the ceiling as before, and
there remained floating in perfect comfort and satisfaction, as was
testified by her peals of tiny laughter. The king stood staring up in
speechless amazement, and trembled so that his beard shook like grass
in the wind. At last, turning to the queen, who was just as
horror-struck as himself, he said, gasping, staring, and stammering,--

"She _can't_ be ours, queen!"

Now the queen was much cleverer than the king, and had begun already to
suspect that "this effect defective came by cause."

"I am sure she is ours," answered she. "But we ought to have taken
better care of her at the christening. People who were never invited
ought not to have been present."

"Oh, ho!" said the king, tapping his forehead with his forefinger, "I
have it all. I've found her out. Don't you see it, queen? Princess
Makemnoit has bewitched her."

"That's just what I say," answered the queen.

"I beg your pardon, my love; I did not hear you.--John! bring the steps
I get on my throne with."

For he was a little king with a great throne, like many other kings.

The throne-steps were brought, and set upon the dining-table, and John
got upon the top of them. But he could not reach the little princess,
who lay like a baby-laughter-cloud in the air, exploding continuously.

"Take the tongs, John," said his Majesty; and getting up on the table,
he handed them to him.

John could reach the baby now, and the little princess was handed down
by the tongs.






IV. WHERE IS SHE?


One fine summer day, a month after these her first adventures, during
which time she had been very carefully watched, the princess was lying
on the bed in the queen's own chamber, fast asleep. One of the windows
was open, for it was noon, and the day so sultry that the little girl
was wrapped in nothing less ethereal than slumber itself. The queen
came into the room, and not observing that the baby was on the bed,
opened another window. A frolicsome fairy wind, which had been watching
for a chance of mischief, rushed in at the one window, and taking its
way over the bed where the child was lying, caught her up, and rolling
and floating her along like a piece of flue, or a dandelion-seed,
carried her with it through the opposite window, and away. The queen
went down-stairs, quite ignorant of the loss she had herself
occasioned.

When the nurse returned, she supposed that her Majesty had carried her
off, and, dreading a scolding, delayed making inquiry about her. But
hearing nothing, she grew uneasy, and went at length to the queen's
boudoir, where she found her Majesty.

"Please, your Majesty, shall I take the baby?" said she.

"Where is she?" asked the queen.

"Please forgive me. I know it was wrong."

"What do you mean?" said the queen, looking grave.

"Oh! don't frighten me, your Majesty!" exclaimed the nurse, clasping
her hands.

The queen saw that something was amiss, and fell down in a faint. The
nurse rushed about the palace, screaming, "My baby! my baby!"

Every one ran to the queen's room. But the queen could give no orders.
They soon found out, however, that the princess was missing, and in a
moment the palace was like a beehive in a garden; and in one minute
more the queen was brought to herself by a great shout and a clapping
of hands. They had found the princess fast asleep under a rose-bush, to
which the elvish little wind-puff had carried her, finishing its
mischief by shaking a shower of red rose-leaves all over the little
white sleeper. Startled by the noise the servants made, she woke, and,
furious with glee, scattered the rose-leaves in all directions, like a
shower of spray in the sunset.

She was watched more carefully after this, no doubt; yet it would be
endless to relate all the odd incidents resulting from this peculiarity
of the young princess. But there never was a baby in a house, not to
say a palace, that kept the household in such constant good-humour, at
least below-stairs. If it was not easy for her nurses to hold her, at
least she made neither their arms nor their hearts ache. And she was so
nice to play at ball with! There was positively no danger of letting
her fall. They might throw her down, or knock her down, or push her
down, but couldn't _let_ her down. It is true, they might let her fly
into the fire or the coal-hole, or through the window; but none of
these accidents had happened as yet. If you heard peals of laughter
resounding from some unknown region, you might be sure enough of the
cause. Going down into the kitchen, or _the room_, you would find Jane
and Thomas, and Robert and Susan, all and sum, playing at ball with the
little princess. She was the ball herself, and did not enjoy it the
less for that. Away she went, flying from one to another, screeching
with laughter. And the servants loved the ball itself better even than
the game. But they had to take some care how they threw her, for if she
received an upward direction, she would never come down again without
being fetched.






V. WHAT IS TO BE DONE?


But above-stairs it was different. One day, for instance, after
breakfast, the king went into his counting-house, and counted out his
money.

The operation gave him no pleasure.

"To think," said he to himself, "that every one of these gold
sovereigns weighs a quarter of an ounce, and my real, live,
flesh-and-blood princess weighs nothing at all!"

And he hated his gold sovereigns, as they lay with a broad smile of
self-satisfaction all over their yellow faces.

The queen was in the parlour, eating bread and honey. But at the second
mouthful she burst out crying, and could not swallow it. The king heard
her sobbing. Glad of anybody, but especially of his queen, to quarrel
with, he clashed his gold sovereigns into his money-box, clapped his
crown on his head, and rushed into the parlour.

"What is all this about?" exclaimed he. "What are you crying for,
queen?"

"I can't eat it," said the queen, looking ruefully at the honey-pot.

"No wonder!" retorted the king. "You've just eaten your breakfast--two
turkey eggs, and three anchovies."

"Oh, that's not it!" sobbed her Majesty. "It's my child, my child!"

"Well, what's the matter with your child? She's neither up the chimney
nor down the draw-well. Just hear her laughing."

Yet the king could not help a sigh, which he tried to turn into a
cough, saying--

"It is a good thing to be light-hearted, I am sure, whether she be ours
or not."

"It is a bad thing to be light-headed," answered the queen, looking
with prophetic soul far into the future.

"'Tis a good thing to be light-handed," said the king.

"'Tis a bad thing to be light-fingered," answered the queen.

"'Tis a good thing to be light-footed," said the king.

"'Tis a bad thing--" began the queen; but the king interrupted her.

"In fact," said he, with the tone of one who concludes an argument in
which he has had only imaginary opponents, and in which, therefore, he
has come off triumphant--"in fact, it is a good thing altogether to be
light-bodied."

"But it is a bad thing altogether to be light-minded," retorted the
queen, who was beginning to lose her temper.

This last answer quite discomfited his Majesty, who turned on his heel,
and betook himself to his counting-house again. But he was not half-way
towards it, when the voice of his queen overtook him.

"And it's a bad thing to be light-haired," screamed she, determined to
have more last words, now that her spirit was roused.

The queen's hair was black as night; and the king's had been, and his
daughter's was, golden as morning. But it was not this reflection on
his hair that arrested him; it was the double use of the word _light_.
For the king hated all witticisms, and punning especially. And besides,
he could not tell whether the queen meant light-_haired_ or
light-_heired_; for why might she not aspirate her vowels when she was
ex-asperated herself?

He turned upon his other heel, and rejoined her. She looked angry
still, because she knew that she was guilty, or, what was much the
same, knew that he thought so.

"My dear queen," said he, "duplicity of any sort is exceedingly
objectionable between married people of any rank, not to say kings and
queens; and the most objectionable form duplicity can assume is that of
punning."

"There!" said the queen, "I never made a jest, but I broke it in the
making. I am the most unfortunate woman in the world!"

She looked so rueful, that the king took her in his arms; and they sat
down to consult.

"Can you bear this?" said the king.

"No, I can't," said the queen.

"Well, what's to be done?" said the king.

"I'm sure I don't know," said the queen. "But might you not try an
apology?"

"To my old sister, I suppose you mean?" said the king.

"Yes," said the queen.

"Well, I don't mind," said the king.

So he went the next morning to the house of the princess, and, making a
very humble apology, begged her to undo the spell. But the princess
declared, with a grave face, that she knew nothing at all about it. Her
eyes, however, shone pink, which was a sign that she was happy. She
advised the king and queen to have patience, and to mend their ways.
The king returned disconsolate. The queen tried to comfort him.

"We will wait till she is older. She may then be able to suggest
something herself. She will know at least how she feels, and explain
things to us."

"But what if she should marry?" exclaimed the king, in sudden
consternation at the idea.

"Well, what of that?" rejoined the queen. "Just think! If she were to
have children! In the course of a hundred years the air might be as
full of floating children as of gossamers in autumn."

"That is no business of ours," replied the queen. "Besides, by that
time they will have learned to take care of themselves."

A sigh was the king's only answer.

He would have consulted the court physicians; but he was afraid they
would try experiments upon her.






VI. SHE LAUGHS TOO MUCH.


Meantime, notwithstanding awkward occurrences, and griefs that she
brought upon her parents, the little princess laughed and grew--not
fat, but plump and tall. She reached the age of seventeen, without
having fallen into any worse scrape than a chimney; by rescuing her
from which, a little bird-nesting urchin got fame and a black face.
Nor, thoughtless as she was, had she committed anything worse than
laughter at everybody and everything that came in her way. When she was
told, for the sake of experiment, that General Clanrunfort was cut to
pieces with all his troops, she laughed; when she heard that the enemy
was on his way to besiege her papa's capital, she laughed hugely; but
when she was told that the city would certainly be abandoned to the
mercy of the enemy's soldiery--why, then she laughed immoderately. She
never could be brought to see the serious side of anything. When her
mother cried, she said,--

"What queer faces mamma makes! And she squeezes water out of her
cheeks? Funny mamma!"

And when her papa stormed at her, she laughed, and danced round and
round him, clapping her hands, and crying,--

"Do it again, papa. Do it again! It's such fun! Dear, funny papa!"

And if he tried to catch her, she glided from him in an instant, not in
the least afraid of him, but thinking it part of the game not to be
caught. With one push of her foot, she would be floating in the air
above his head; or she would go dancing backwards and forwards and
sideways, like a great butterfly. It happened several times, when her
father and mother were holding a consultation about her in private,
that they were interrupted by vainly repressed outbursts of laughter
over their heads; and looking up with indignation, saw her floating at
full length in the air above them, whence she regarded them with the
most comical appreciation of the position.

One day an awkward accident happened. The princess had come out upon
the lawn with one of her attendants, who held her by the hand. Spying
her father at the other side of the lawn, she snatched her hand from
the maid's, and sped across to him. Now when she wanted to run alone,
her custom was to catch up a stone in each hand, so that she might come
down again after a bound. Whatever she wore as part of her attire had
no effect in this way: even gold, when it thus became as it were a part
of herself, lost all its weight for the time. But whatever she only
held in her hands retained its downward tendency. On this occasion she
could see nothing to catch up but a huge toad, that was walking across
the lawn as if he had a hundred years to do it in. Not knowing what
disgust meant, for this was one of her peculiarities, she snatched up
the toad and bounded away. She had almost reached her father, and he
was holding out his arms to receive her, and take from her lips the
kiss which hovered on them like a butterfly on a rosebud, when a puff
of wind blew her aside into the arms of a young page, who had just been
receiving a message from his Majesty. Now it was no great peculiarity
in the princess that, once she was set agoing, it always cost her time
and trouble to check herself. On this occasion there was no time. She
_must_ kiss--and she kissed the page. She did not mind it much; for she
had no shyness in her composition; and she knew, besides, that she
could not help it. So she only laughed, like a musical box. The poor
page fared the worst. For the princess, trying to correct the
unfortunate tendency of the kiss, put out her hands to keep her off the
page; so that, along with the kiss, he received, on the other cheek, a
slap with the huge black toad, which she poked right into his eye. He
tried to laugh, too, but the attempt resulted in such an odd contortion
of countenance, as showed that there was no danger of his pluming
himself on the kiss. As for the king, his dignity was greatly hurt, and
he did not speak to the page for a whole month.

I may here remark that it was very amusing to see her run, if her mode
of progression could properly be called running. For first she would
make a bound; then, having alighted, she would run a few steps, and
make another bound. Sometimes she would fancy she had reached the
ground before she actually had, and her feet would go backwards and
forwards, running upon nothing at all, like those of a chicken on its
back. Then she would laugh like the very spirit of fun; only in her
laugh there was something missing. What it was, I find myself unable to
describe. I think it was a certain tone, depending upon the possibility
of sorrow--_morbidezza_, perhaps. She never smiled.






VII. TRY METAPHYSICS.


After a long avoidance of the painful subject, the king and queen
resolved to hold a council of three upon it; and so they sent for the
princess. In she came, sliding and flitting and gliding from one piece
of furniture to another, and put herself at last in an armchair, in a
sitting posture. Whether she could be said to _sit_, seeing she
received no support from the seat of the chair, I do not pretend to
determine.

"My dear child," said the king, "you must be aware by this time that
you are not exactly like other people."

"Oh, you dear funny papa! I have got a nose, and two eyes, and all the
rest. So have you. So has mamma."

"Now be serious, my dear, for once," said the queen.

"No, thank you, mamma; I had rather not."

"Would you not like to be able to walk like other people?" said the
king. "No indeed, I should think not. You only crawl. You are such slow
coaches!"

"How do you feel, my child?" he resumed, after a pause of discomfiture.

"Quite well, thank you."

"I mean, what do you feel like?"

"Like nothing at all, that I know of."

"You must feel like something."

"I feel like a princess with such a funny papa, and such a dear pet of
a queen-mamma!"

"Now really!" began the queen; but the princess interrupted her.

"Oh yes," she added, "I remember. I have a curious feeling sometimes,
as if I were the only person that had any sense in the whole world."

She had been trying to behave herself with dignity; but now she burst
into a violent fit of laughter, threw herself backwards over the chair,
and went rolling about the floor in an ecstasy of enjoyment. The king
picked her up easier than one does a down quilt, and replaced her in
her former relation to the chair. The exact preposition expressing this
relation I do not happen to know.

"Is there nothing you wish for?" resumed the king, who had learned by
this time that it was quite useless to be angry with her.

"Oh, you dear papa!--yes," answered she.

"What is it, my darling?"

"I have been longing for it--oh, such a time! Ever since last night."

"Tell me what it is."

"Will you promise to let me have it?"

The king was on the point of saying _Yes_, but the wiser queen checked
him with a single motion of her head.

"Tell me what it is first," said he.

"No no. Promise first."

"I dare not. What is it?"

"Mind, I hold you to your promise.--It is--to be tied to the end of a
string--a very long string indeed, and be flown like a kite. Oh, such
fun! I would rain rose-water, and hail sugar-plums, and snow
whipped-cream, and--and--and--"

A fit of laughing checked her; and she would have been off again over
the floor, had not the king started up and caught her just in time.
Seeing nothing but talk could be got out of her, he rang the bell, and
sent her away with two of her ladies-in-waiting.

"Now, queen," he said, turning to her Majesty, "what _is_ to be done?"

"There is but one thing left," answered she. "Let us consult the
college of Metaphysicians."

"Bravo!" cried the king; "we will."

Now at the head of this college were two very wise Chinese
philosophers--by name, Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck. For them the king sent;
and straightway they came. In a long speech he communicated to them
what they knew very well already--as who did not?--namely, the peculiar
condition of his daughter in relation to the globe on which she dwelt;
and requested them to consult together as to what might be the cause
and probable cure of her _infirmity_. The king laid stress upon the
word, but failed to discover his own pun. The queen laughed; but
Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck heard with humility and retired in silence.

The consultation consisted chiefly in propounding and supporting, for
the thousandth time, each his favourite theories. For the condition of
the princess afforded delightful scope for the discussion of every
question arising from the division of thought--in fact, of all the
Metaphysics of the Chinese Empire. But it is only justice to say that
they did not altogether neglect the discussion of the practical
question, _what was to be done_.

Hum-Drum was a Materialist, and Kopy-Keck was a spiritualist. The
former was slow and sententious; the latter was quick and flighty: the
latter had generally the first word; the former the last.

"I reassert my former assertion," began Kopy-Keck, with a plunge.
"There is not a fault in the princess, body or soul; only they are
wrong put together. Listen to me now, Hum-Drum, and I will tell you in
brief what I think. Don't speak. Don't answer me. I _won't_ hear you
till I have done.-- At that decisive moment, when souls seek their
appointed habitations, two eager souls met, struck, rebounded, lost
their way, and arrived each at the wrong place. The soul of the
princess was one of those, and she went far astray. She does not belong
by rights to this world at all, but to some other planet, probably
Mercury. Her proclivity to her true sphere destroys all the natural
influence which this orb would otherwise possess over her corporeal
frame. She cares for nothing here. There is no relation between her and
this world.

"She must therefore be taught, by the sternest compulsion, to take an
interest in the earth as the earth. She must study every department of
its history--its animal history; its vegetable history; its mineral
history; its social history; its moral history; its political history;
its scientific history; its literary history; its musical history; its
artistical history; above all, its metaphysical history. She must begin
with the Chinese dynasty and end with Japan. But first of all she must
study geology, and especially the history of the extinct races of
animals--their natures, their habits, their loves, their hates, their
revenges. She must--"

"Hold, h-o-o-old!" roared Hum-Drum. "It is certainly my turn now. My
rooted and insubvertible conviction is, that the causes of the
anomalies evident in the princess's condition are strictly and solely
physical. But that is only tantamount to acknowledging that they exist.
Hear my opinion.--From some cause or other, of no importance to our
inquiry, the motion of her heart has been reversed. That remarkable
combination of the suction and the force-pump works the wrong way--I
mean in the case of the princess: it draws in where it should force
out, and forces out where it should draw in. The offices of the
auricles and the ventricles are subverted. The blood is sent forth by
the veins, and returns by the arteries. Consequently it is running the
wrong way through all her corporeal organism--lungs and all. Is it then
at all mysterious, seeing that such is the case, that on the other
particular of gravitation as well, she should differ from normal
humanity? My proposal for the cure is this:--

"Phlebotomize until she is reduced to the last point of safety. Let it
be affected, if necessary, in a warm bath. When she is reduced to a
state of perfect asphyxy, apply a ligature to the left ankle, drawing
it as tight as the bone will bear. Apply, at the same moment, another
of equal tension around the right wrist. By means of plates constructed
for the purpose, place the other foot and hand under the receivers of
two air-pumps. Exhaust the receivers. Exhibit a pint of French brandy,
and await the result."

"Which would presently arrive in the form of grim death," said
Kopy-Keck.

"If it should, she would yet die in doing our duty," retorted Hum-Drum.

But their Majesties had too much tenderness for their volatile
offspring to subject her to either of the schemes of the equally
unscrupulous philosophers. Indeed, the most complete knowledge of the
laws of nature would have been unserviceable in her case; for it was
impossible to classify her. She was a fifth imponderable body, sharing
all the other properties of the ponderable.






VIII. TRY A DROP OF WATER.


Perhaps the best thing for the princess would have been to fall in
love. But how a princess who had no gravity could fall into anything is
a difficulty--perhaps _the_ difficulty. As for her own feelings on the
subject, she did not even know that there was such a beehive of honey
and stings to be fallen into. But now I come to mention another curious
fact about her.

The palace was built on the shore of the loveliest lake in the world;
and the princess loved this lake more than father or mother. The root
of this preference no doubt, although the princess did not recognize it
as such, was, that the moment she got into it, she recovered the
natural right of which she had been so wickedly deprived--namely,
gravity. Whether this was owing to the fact that water had been
employed as the means of conveying the injury, I do not know. But it is
certain that she could swim and dive like the duck that her old nurse
said she was. The manner in which this alleviation of her misfortune
was discovered was as follows:--

One summer evening, during the carnival of the country, she had been
taken upon the lake by the king and queen, in the royal barge. They
were accompanied by many of the courtiers in a fleet of little boats.
In the middle of the lake she wanted to get into the lord chancellor's
barge, for his daughter, who was a great favourite with her, was in it
with her father. Now though the old king rarely condescended to make
light of his misfortune, yet, happening on this occasion to be in a
particularly good humour, as the barges approached each other, he
caught up the princess to throw her into the chancellor's barge. He
lost his balance, however, and, dropping into the bottom of the barge,
lost his hold of his daughter; not, however, before imparting to her
the downward tendency of his own person, though in a somewhat different
direction; for, as the king fell into the boat, she fell into the
water. With a burst of delightful laughter she disappeared in the lake.
A cry of horror ascended from the boats. They had never seen the
princess go down before. Half the men were under water in a moment; but
they had all, one after another, come up to the surface again for
breath, when--tinkle, tinkle, babble, and gush! came the princess's
laugh over the water from far away. There she was, swimming like a
swan. Nor would she come out for king or queen, chancellor or daughter.
She was perfectly obstinate.

But at the same time she seemed more sedate than usual. Perhaps that
was because a great pleasure spoils laughing. At all events, after
this, the passion of her life was to get into the water, and she was
always the better behaved and the more beautiful the more she had of
it. Summer and winter it was quite the same; only she could not stay so
long in the water when they had to break the ice to let her in. Any
day, from morning till evening in summer, she might be descried--a
streak of white in the blue water--lying as still as the shadow of a
cloud, or shooting along like a dolphin; disappearing, and coming up
again far off, just where one did not expect her. She would have been
in the lake of a night, too, if she could have had her way; for the
balcony of her window overhung a deep pool in it; and through a shallow
reedy passage she could have swum out into the wide wet water, and no
one would have been any the wiser. Indeed, when she happened to wake in
the moonlight she could hardly resist the temptation. But there was the
sad difficulty of getting into it. She had as great a dread of the air
as some children have of the water. For the slightest gust of wind
would blow her away; and a gust might arise in the stillest moment. And
if she gave herself a push towards the water and just failed of
reaching it, her situation would be dreadfully awkward, irrespective of
the wind; for at best there she would have to remain, suspended in her
night-gown, till she was seen and angled for by someone from the
window.

"Oh! if I had my gravity," thought she, contemplating the water, "I
would flash off this balcony like a long white sea-bird, headlong into
the darling wetness. Heigh-ho!"

This was the only consideration that made her wish to be like other
people.

Another reason for her being fond of the water was that in it alone she
enjoyed any freedom. For she could not walk out without a _cort�ge_,
consisting in part of a troop of light horse, for fear of the liberties
which the wind might take with her. And the king grew more apprehensive
with increasing years, till at last he would not allow her to walk
abroad at all without some twenty silken cords fastened to as many
parts of her dress, and held by twenty noblemen. Of course horseback
was out of the question. But she bade good-bye to all this ceremony
when she got into the water.

And so remarkable were its effects upon her, especially in restoring
her for the time to the ordinary human gravity, that Hum-Drum and
Kopy-Keck agreed in recommending the king to bury her alive for three
years; in the hope that, as the water did her so much good, the earth
would do her yet more. But the king had some vulgar prejudices against
the experiment, and would not give his consent. Foiled in this, they
yet agreed in another recommendation; which, seeing that the one
imported his opinions from China and the other from Thibet, was very
remarkable indeed. They argued that, if water of external origin and
application could be so efficacious, water from a deeper source might
work a perfect cure; in short, that if the poor afflicted princess
could by any means be made to cry, she might recover her lost gravity.

But how was this to be brought about? Therein lay all the
difficulty--to meet which the philosophers were not wise enough. To
make the princess cry was as impossible as to make her weigh. They sent
for a professional beggar; commanded him to prepare his most touching
oracle of woe; helped him, out of the court charade-box, to whatever he
wanted for dressing up, and promised great rewards in the event of his
success. But it was all in vain. She listened to the mendicant artist's
story, and gazed at his marvellous make-up, till she could contain
herself no longer, and went into the most undignified contortions for
relief, shrieking, positively screeching with laughter.

When she had a little recovered herself, she ordered her attendants to
drive him away, and not give him a single copper; whereupon his look of
mortified discomfiture wrought her punishment and his revenge, for it
sent her into violent hysterics, from which she was with difficulty
recovered.

But so anxious was the king that the suggestion should have a fair
trial, that he put himself in a rage one day, and, rushing up to her
room, gave her an awful whipping. Yet not a tear would flow. She looked
grave, and her laughing sounded uncommonly like screaming--that was
all. The good old tyrant, though he put on his best gold spectacles to
look, could not discover the smallest cloud in the serene blue of her
eyes.






IX. PUT ME IN AGAIN.


It must have been about this time that the son of a king, who lived a
thousand miles from Lagobel, set out to look for the daughter of a
queen. He travelled far and wide, but as sure as he found a princess,
he found some fault in her. Of course he could not marry a mere woman,
however beautiful; and there was no princess to be found worthy of him.
Whether the prince was so near perfection that he had a right to demand
perfection itself, I cannot pretend to say. All I know is, that he was
a fine, handsome, brave, generous, well-bred, and well-behaved youth,
as all princes are.

In his wanderings he had come across some reports about our princess;
but as everybody said she was bewitched, he never dreamed that she
could bewitch him. For what indeed could a prince do with a princess
that had lost her gravity? Who could tell what she might not lose next?
She might lose her visibility, or her tangibility; or, in short, the
power of making impressions upon the radical sensorium; so that he
should never be able to tell whether she was dead or alive. Of course
he made no further inquiries about her.

One day he lost sight of his retinue in a great forest. These forests
are very useful in delivering princes from their courtiers, like a
sieve that keeps back the bran. Then the princes get away to follow
their fortunes. In this they have the advantage of the princesses, who
are forced to marry before they have had a bit of fun. I wish our
princesses got lost in a forest sometimes.

One lovely evening, after wandering about for many days, he found that
he was approaching the outskirts of this forest; for the trees had got
so thin that he could see the sunset through them; and he soon came
upon a kind of heath. Next he came upon signs of human neighbourhood;
but by this time it was getting late, and there was nobody in the
fields to direct him.

After travelling for another hour, his horse, quite worn out with long
labour and lack of food, fell, and was unable to rise again. So he
continued his journey on foot. At length he entered another wood--not a
wild forest, but a civilized wood, through which a footpath led him to
the side of a lake. Along this path the prince pursued his way through
the gathering darkness. Suddenly he paused, and listened. Strange
sounds came across the water. It was, in fact, the princess laughing.
Now there was something odd in her laugh, as I have already hinted, for
the hatching of a real hearty laugh requires the incubation of gravity;
and perhaps this was how the prince mistook the laughter for screaming.
Looking over the lake, he saw something white in the water; and, in an
instant, he had torn off his tunic, kicked off his sandals, and plunged
in. He soon reached the white object, and found that it was a woman.
There was not light enough to show that she was a princess, but quite
enough to show that she was a lady, for it does not want much light to
see that.

Now I cannot tell how it came about,--whether she pretended to be
drowning, or whether he frightened her, or caught her so as to
embarrass her,--but certainly he brought her to shore in a fashion
ignominious to a swimmer, and more nearly drowned than she had ever
expected to be; for the water had got into her throat as often as she
had tried to speak.

At the place to which he bore her, the bank was only a foot or two
above the water, so he gave her a strong lift out of the water, to lay
her on the bank. But, her gravitation ceasing the moment she left the
water, away she went up into the air, scolding and screaming.

"You naughty, _naughty_, NAUGHTY, NAUGHTY man!" she cried.

No one had ever succeeded in putting her into a passion before.--When
the prince saw her ascend, he thought he must have been bewitched, and
have mistaken a great swan for a lady. But the princess caught hold of
the topmost cone upon a lofty fir. This came off; but she caught at
another, and, in fact, stopped herself by gathering cones, dropping
them as the stocks gave way. The prince, meantime, stood in the water,
staring, and forgetting to get out. But the princess disappearing, he
scrambled on shore, and went in the direction of the tree. There he
found her climbing down one of the branches towards the stem. But in
the darkness of the wood, the prince continued in some bewilderment as
to what the phenomenon could be; until, reaching the ground, and seeing
him standing there, she caught hold of him, and said,--

"I'll tell papa."

"Oh no, you won't!" returned the prince.

"Yes, I will," she persisted. "What business had you to pull me down
out of the water, and throw me to the bottom of the air? I never did
you any harm."

"Pardon me. I did not mean to hurt you."

"I don't believe you have any brains; and that is a worse loss that
your wretched gravity. I pity you."

The prince now saw that he had come upon the bewitched princess, and
had already offended her. But before he could think what to say next,
she burst out angrily, giving a stamp with her foot that would have
sent her aloft again but for the hold she had of his arm,--

"Put me up directly."

"Put you up where, you beauty?" asked the prince.

He had fallen in love with her almost, already; for her anger made her
more charming than any one else had ever beheld her; and, as far as he
could see, which certainly was not far, she had not a single fault
about her, except, of course, that she had not any gravity. No prince,
however, would judge of a princess by weight. The loveliness of her
foot he would hardly estimate by the depth of the impression it could
make in the mud.

"Put you up where, you beauty?" asked the prince.

"In the water, you stupid!" answered the princess.

"Come, then," said the prince.

The condition of her dress, increasing her usual difficulty in walking,
compelled her to cling to him; and he could hardly persuade himself
that he was not in a delightful dream, notwithstanding the torrent of
musical abuse with which she overwhelmed him. The prince being
therefore in no hurry, they came upon the lake at quite another part,
where the bank was twenty-five feet high at least; and when they had
reached the edge, he turned towards the princess, and said,--

"How am I to put you in?"

"That is your business," she answered, quite snappishly. "You took me
out--put me in again."

"Very well," said the prince; and, catching her up in his arms, he
sprang with her from the rock. The princess had just time to give one
delighted shriek of laughter before the water closed over them. When
they came to the surface, she found that, for a moment or two, she
could not even laugh, for she had gone down with such a rush, that it
was with difficulty she recovered her breath. The instant they reached
the surface--

"How do you like falling in?" said the prince.

After some effort the princess panted out,--

"Is that what you call _falling in_?"

"Yes," answered the prince, "I should think it a very tolerable
specimen."

"It seemed to me like going up," rejoined she.

"My feeling was certainly one of elevation too," the prince conceded.

The princess did not appear to understand him, for she retorted his
question:--

"How do _you_ like falling in?" said the princess.

"Beyond everything," answered he; "for I have fallen in with the only
perfect creature I ever saw."

"No more of that: I am tired of it," said the princess.

Perhaps she shared her father's aversion to punning.

"Don't you like falling in, then?" said the prince.

"It is the most delightful fun I ever had in my life," answered she. "I
never fell before. I wish I could learn. To think I am the only person
in my father's kingdom that can't fall!"

Here the poor princess looked almost sad.

"I shall be most happy to fall in with you any time you like," said the
prince, devotedly.

"Thank you. I don't know. Perhaps it would not be proper. But I don't
care. At all events, as we have fallen in, let us have a swim
together."

"With all my heart," responded the prince.

And away they went, swimming, and diving, and floating, until at last
they heard cries along the shore, and saw lights glancing in all
directions. It was now quite late, and there was no moon.

"I must go home," said the princess. "I am very sorry, for this is
delightful."

"So am I," returned the prince. "But I am glad I haven't a home to go
to--at least, I don't exactly know where it is."

"I wish I hadn't one either," rejoined the princess; "it is so stupid!
I have a great mind," she continued, "to play them all a trick. Why
couldn't they leave me alone? They won't trust me in the lake for a
single night!--You see where that green light is burning? That is the
window of my room. Now if you would just swim there with me very
quietly, and when we are all but under the balcony, give me such a
push--_up_ you call it--as you did a little while ago, I should be able
to catch hold of the balcony, and get in at the window; and then they
may look for me till to-morrow morning!"

"With more obedience than pleasure," said the prince, gallantly; and
away they swam, very gently.

"Will you be in the lake to-morrow night?" the prince ventured to ask.

"To be sure I will. I don't think so. Perhaps," was the princess's
somewhat strange answer.

But the prince was intelligent enough not to press her further; and
merely whispered, as he gave her the parting lift, "Don't tell." The
only answer the princess returned was a roguish look. She was already a
yard above his head. The look seemed to say, "Never fear. It is too
good fun to spoil that way."

So perfectly like other people had she been in the water, that even yet
the prince could scarcely believe his eyes when he saw her ascend
slowly, grasp the balcony, and disappear through the window. He turned,
almost expecting to see her still by his side. But he was alone in the
water. So he swam away quietly, and watched the lights roving about the
shore for hours after the princess was safe in her chamber. As soon as
they disappeared, he landed in search of his tunic and sword, and,
after some trouble, found them again. Then he made the best of his way
round the lake to the other side. There the wood was wilder, and the
shore steeper--rising more immediately towards the mountains which
surrounded the lake on all sides, and kept sending it messages of
silvery streams from morning to night, and all night long. He soon
found a spot whence he could see the green light in the princess's
room, and where, even in the broad daylight, he would be in no danger
of being discovered from the opposite shore. It was a sort of cave in
the rock, where he provided himself a bed of withered leaves, and lay
down too tired for hunger to keep him awake. All night long he dreamed
that he was swimming with the princess.






X. LOOK AT THE MOON.


Early the next morning the prince set out to look for something to eat,
which he soon found at a forester's hut, where for many following days
he was supplied with all that a brave prince could consider necessary.
And having plenty to keep him alive for the present, he would not think
of wants not yet in existence. Whenever Care intruded, this prince
always bowed him out in the most princely manner.

When he returned from his breakfast to his watch-cave, he saw the
princess already floating about in the lake, attended by the king or
queen--whom he knew by their crowns--and a great company in lovely
little boats, with canopies of all the colours of the rainbow, and
flags and streamers of a great many more. It was a very bright day, and
soon the prince, burned up with the heat, began to long for the cold
water and the cool princess. But he had to endure till twilight; for
the boats had provisions on board, and it was not till the sun went
down that the gay party began to vanish. Boat after boat drew away to
the shore, following that of the king and queen, till only one,
apparently the princess's own boat, remained. But she did not want to
go home even yet, and the prince thought he saw her order the boat to
the shore without her. At all events, it rowed away; and now, of all
the radiant company, only one white speck remained. Then the prince
began to sing.

And this is what he sang:--

   "Lady fair,
    Swan-white,
    Lift thine eyes
    Banish night
    By the might
    Of thine eyes.

    Snowy arms,
    Oars of snow,
    Oar her hither,
    Plashing low.
    Soft and slow,
    Oar her hither.

    Stream behind her
    O'er the lake,
    Radiant whiteness!
    In her wake
    Following, following for her sake,
    Radiant whiteness!

    Cling about her,
    Waters blue;
    Part not from her,
    But renew
    Cold and true
    Kisses round her.

    Lap me round,
    Waters sad
    That have left her;
    Make me glad,
    For ye had
    Kissed her ere ye left her."

Before he had finished his song, the princess was just under the place
where he sat, and looking up to find him. Her ears had led her truly.

"Would you like a fall, princess?" said the prince, looking down.

"Ah! there you are! Yes, if you please, prince," said the princess,
looking up.

"How do you know I am a prince, princess?" said the prince.

"Because you are a very nice young man, prince," said the princess.

"Come up then, princess."

"Fetch me, prince."

The prince took off his scarf, then his sword-belt, then his tunic, and
tied them all together, and let them down. But the line was far too
short. He unwound his turban, and added it to the rest, when it was all
but long enough; and his purse completed it. The princess just managed
to lay hold of the knot of money, and was beside him in a moment. This
rock was much higher than the other, and the splash and the dive were
tremendous. The princess was in ecstasies of delight, and their swim
was delicious.

Night after night they met, and swam about in the dark clear lake;
where such was the prince's gladness, that (whether the princess's way
of looking at things infected him, or he was actually getting
light-headed) he often fancied that he was swimming in the sky instead
of the lake. But when he talked about being in heaven, the princess
laughed at him dreadfully.

When the moon came, she brought them fresh pleasure. Everything looked
strange and new in her light, with an old, withered, yet unfading
newness. When the moon was nearly full, one of their great delights
was, to dive deep in the water, and then, turning round, look up
through it at the great blot of light close above them, shimmering and
trembling and wavering, spreading and contracting, seeming to melt
away, and again grow solid. Then they would shoot up through the blot;
and lo! there was the moon, far off, clear and steady and cold, and
very lovely, at the bottom of a deeper and bluer lake than theirs, as
the princess said.

The prince soon found out that while in the water the princess was very
like other people. And besides this, she was not so forward in her
questions or pert in her replies at sea as on shore. Neither did she
laugh so much; and when she did laugh, it was more gently. She seemed
altogether more modest and maidenly in the water than out of it. But
when the prince, who had really fallen in love when he fell in the
lake, began to talk to her about love, she always turned her head
towards him and laughed. After a while she began to look puzzled, as if
she were trying to understand what he meant, but could not--revealing a
notion that he meant something. But as soon as ever she left the lake,
she was so altered, that the prince said to himself, "If I marry her, I
see no help for it: we must turn merman and mermaid, and go out to sea
at once."






XI. HISS!


The princess's pleasure in the lake had grown to a passion, and she
could scarcely bear to be out of it for an hour. Imagine then her
consternation, when, diving with the prince one night, a sudden
suspicion seized her that the lake was not so deep as it used to be.
The prince could not imagine what had happened. She shot to the
surface, and, without a word, swam at full speed towards the higher
side of the lake. He followed, begging to know if she was ill, or what
was the matter. She never turned her head, or took the smallest notice
of his question. Arrived at the shore, she coasted the rocks with
minute inspection. But she was not able to come to a conclusion, for
the moon was very small, and so she could not see well. She turned
therefore and swam home, without saying a word to explain her conduct
to the prince, of whose presence she seemed no longer conscious. He
withdrew to his cave, in great perplexity and distress.

Next day she made many observations, which, alas! strengthened her
fears. She saw that the banks were too dry; and that the grass on the
shore, and the trailing plants on the rocks, were withering away. She
caused marks to be made along the borders, and examined them, day after
day, in all directions of the wind; till at last the horrible idea
became a certain fact--that the surface of the lake was slowly sinking.

The poor princess nearly went out of the little mind she had. It was
awful to her to see the lake, which she loved more than any living
thing, lie dying before her eyes. It sank away, slowly vanishing. The
tops of rocks that had never been seen till now, began to appear far
down in the clear water. Before long they were dry in the sun. It was
fearful to think of the mud that would soon lie there baking and
festering, full of lovely creatures dying, and ugly creatures coming to
life, like the unmaking of a world. And how hot the sun would be
without any lake! She could not bear to swim in it any more, and began
to pine away. Her life seemed bound up with it; and ever as the lake
sank, she pined. People said she would not live an hour after the lake
was gone.

But she never cried.

Proclamation was made to all the kingdom, that whosoever should
discover the cause of the lake's decrease, would be rewarded after a
princely fashion. Hum-Drum and Kopy-Keck applied themselves to their
physics and metaphysics; but in vain. Not even they could suggest a
cause.

Now the fact was that the old princess was at the root of the mischief.
When she heard that her niece found more pleasure in the water than
anyone else out of it, she went into a rage, and cursed herself for her
want of foresight.

"But," said she, "I will soon set all right. The king and the people
shall die of thirst; their brains shall boil and frizzle in their
skulls before I will lose my revenge."

And she laughed a ferocious laugh, that made the hairs on the back of
her black cat stand erect with terror.

Then she went to an old chest in the room, and opening it, took out
what looked like a piece of dried seaweed. This she threw into a tub of
water. Then she threw some powder into the water, and stirred it with
her bare arm, muttering over it words of hideous sound, and yet more
hideous import. Then she set the tub aside, and took from the chest a
huge bunch of a hundred rusty keys, that clattered in her shaking
hands. Then she sat down and proceeded to oil them all. Before she had
finished, out from the tub, the water of which had kept on a slow
motion ever since she had ceased stirring it, came the head and half
the body of a huge gray snake. But the witch did not look round. It
grew out of the tub, waving itself backwards and forwards with a slow
horizontal motion, till it reached the princess, when it laid its head
upon her shoulder, and gave a low hiss in her ear. She started--but
with joy; and seeing the head resting on her shoulder, drew it towards
her and kissed it. Then she drew it all out of the tub, and wound it
round her body. It was one of those dreadful creatures which few have
ever beheld--the White Snakes of Darkness.

Then she took the keys and went down to her cellar; and as she unlocked
the door she said to herself,--

"This _is_ worth living for!"

Locking the door behind her, she descended a few steps into the cellar,
and crossing it, unlocked another door into a dark, narrow passage. She
locked this also behind her, and descended a few more steps. If anyone
had followed the witch-princess, he would have heard her unlock exactly
one hundred doors, and descend a few steps after unlocking each. When
she had unlocked the last, she entered a vast cave, the roof of which
was supported by huge natural pillars of rock. Now this roof was the
under side of the bottom of the lake.

She then untwined the snake from her body, and held it by the tail high
above her. The hideous creature stretched up its head towards the roof
of the cavern, which it was just able to reach. It then began to move
its head backwards and forwards, with a slow oscillating motion, as if
looking for something. At the same moment the witch began to walk round
and round the cavern, coming nearer to the centre every circuit; while
the head of the snake described the same path over the roof that she
did over the floor, for she kept holding it up. And still it kept
slowly oscillating. Round and round the cavern they went, ever
lessening the circuit, till at last the snake made a sudden dart, and
clung to the roof with its mouth.

"That's right, my beauty!" cried the princess; "drain it dry."

She let it go, left it hanging, and sat down on a great stone, with her
black cat, which had followed her all round the cave, by her side. Then
she began to knit and mutter awful words. The snake hung like a huge
leech, sucking at the stone; the cat stood with his back arched, and
his tail like a piece of cable, looking up at the snake; and the old
woman sat and knitted and muttered. Seven days and seven nights they
remained thus; when suddenly the serpent dropped from the roof as if
exhausted, and shrivelled up till it was again like a piece of dried
seaweed. The witch started to her feet, picked it up, put it in her
pocket, and looked up at the roof. One drop of water was trembling on
the spot where the snake had been sucking. As soon as she saw that, she
turned and fled, followed by her cat. Shutting the door in a terrible
hurry, she locked it, and having muttered some frightful words, sped to
the next, which also she locked and muttered over; and so with all the
hundred doors, till she arrived in her own cellar. There she sat down
on the floor ready to faint, but listening with malicious delight to
the rushing of the water, which she could hear distinctly through all
the hundred doors.

But this was not enough. Now that she had tasted revenge, she lost her
patience. Without further measures, the lake would be too long in
disappearing. So the next night, with the last shred of the dying old
moon rising, she took some of the water in which she had revived the
snake, put it in a bottle, and set out, accompanied by her cat. Before
morning she had made the entire circuit of the lake, muttering fearful
words as she crossed every stream, and casting into it some of the
water out of her bottle. When she had finished the circuit she muttered
yet again, and flung a handful of water towards the moon. Thereupon
every spring in the country ceased to throb and bubble, dying away like
the pulse of a dying man. The next day there was no sound of falling
water to be heard along the borders of the lake. The very courses were
dry; and the mountains showed no silvery streaks down their dark sides.
And not alone had the fountains of mother Earth ceased to flow; for all
the babies throughout the country were crying dreadfully--only without
tears.






XII. WHERE IS THE PRINCE?


Never since the night when the princess left him so abruptly had the
prince had a single interview with her. He had seen her once or twice
in the lake; but as far as he could discover, she had not been in it
any more at night. He had sat and sung, and looked in vain for his
Nereid; while she, like a true Nereid, was wasting away with her lake,
sinking as it sank, withering as it dried. When at length he discovered
the change that was taking place in the level of the water, he was in
great alarm and perplexity. He could not tell whether the lake was
dying because the lady had forsaken it; or whether the lady would not
come because the lake had begun to sink. But he resolved to know so
much at least.

He disguised himself, and, going to the palace, requested to see the
lord chamberlain. His appearance at once gained his request; and the
lord chamberlain, being a man of some insight, perceived that there was
more in the prince's solicitation than met the ear. He felt likewise
that no one could tell whence a solution of the present difficulties
might arise. So he granted the prince's prayer to be made shoe-black to
the princess. It was rather cunning in the prince to request such an
easy post, for the princess could not possibly soil as many shoes as
other princesses. He soon learned all that could be learned about the
princess. He went nearly distracted; but after roaming about the lake
for days, and diving in every depth that remained, all that he could do
was to put an extra polish on the dainty pair of boots that was never
called for.

For the princess kept her room, with the curtains drawn to shut out the
dying lake. But she could not shut it out of her mind for a moment. It
haunted her imagination so that she felt as if the lake were her soul,
drying up within her, first to mud, then to madness and death. She thus
brooded over the change, with all its dreadful accompaniments, till she
was nearly distracted. As for the prince, she had forgotten him.
However much she had enjoyed his company in the water, she did not care
for him without it. But she seemed to have forgotten her father and
mother too. The lake went on sinking. Small slimy spots began to
appear, which glittered steadily amidst the changeful shine of the
water. These grew to broad patches of mud, which widened and spread,
with rocks here and there, and floundering fishes and crawling eels
swarming. The people went everywhere catching these, and looking for
anything that might have dropped from the royal boats.

At length the lake was all but gone, only a few of the deepest pools
remaining unexhausted.

It happened one day that a party of youngsters found themselves on the
brink of one of these pools in the very centre of the lake. It was a
rocky basin of considerable depth. Looking in, they saw at the bottom
something that shone yellow in the sun. A little boy jumped in and
dived for it. It was a plate of gold covered with writing. They carried
it to the king.

On one side of it stood these words:--

   "Death alone from death can save.
    Love is death, and so is brave.
    Love can fill the deepest grave.
    Love loves on beneath the wave."

Now this was enigmatical enough to the king and courtiers. But the
reverse of the plate explained it a little. Its writing amounted to
this:--

"If the lake should disappear, they must find the hole through which
the water ran. But it would be useless to try to stop it by any
ordinary means. There was but one effectual mode.--The body of a living
man could alone stanch the flow. The man must give himself of his own
will; and the lake must take his life as it filled. Otherwise the
offering would be of no avail. If the nation could not provide one
hero, it was time it should perish."






XIII. HERE I AM.


This was a very disheartening revelation to the king--not that he was
unwilling to sacrifice a subject, but that he was hopeless of finding a
man willing to sacrifice himself. No time was to be lost, however, for
the princess was lying motionless on her bed, and taking no nourishment
but lake-water, which was now none of the best. Therefore the king
caused the contents of the wonderful plate of gold to be published
throughout the country.

No one, however, came forward.

The prince, having gone several days' journey into the forest, to
consult a hermit whom he had met there on his way to Lagobel, knew
nothing of the oracle till his return.

When he had acquainted himself with all the particulars, he sat down
and thought,--

"She will die if I don't do it, and life would be nothing to me without
her; so I shall lose nothing by doing it. And life will be as pleasant
to her as ever, for she will soon forget me. And there will be so much
more beauty and happiness in the world!--To be sure, I shall not see
it." (Here the poor prince gave a sigh.) "How lovely the lake will be
in the moonlight, with that glorious creature sporting in it like a
wild goddess!--It is rather hard to be drowned by inches, though. Let
me see--that will be seventy inches of me to drown." (Here he tried to
laugh, but could not.) "The longer the better, however," he resumed,
"for can I not bargain that the princess shall be beside me all the
time? So I shall see her once more, kiss her, perhaps,--who knows? and
die looking in her eyes. It will be no death. At least, I shall not
feel it. And to see the lake filling for the beauty again!--All right!
I am ready."

He kissed the princess's boot, laid it down, and hurried to the king's
apartment. But feeling, as he went, that anything sentimental would be
disagreeable, he resolved to carry off the whole affair with
nonchalance. So he knocked at the door of the king's counting-house,
where it was all but a capital crime to disturb him.

When the king heard the knock he started up, and opened the door in a
rage. Seeing only the shoeblack, he drew his sword. This, I am sorry to
say, was his usual mode of asserting his regality, when he thought his
dignity was in danger. But the prince was not in the least alarmed.

"Please your majesty, I'm your butler," said he.

"My butler! you lying rascal? What do you mean?"

"I mean, I will cork your big bottle."

"Is the fellow mad?" bawled the king, raising the point of his sword.

"I will put a stopper--plug--what you call it, in your leaky lake,
grand monarch," said the prince.

The king was in such a rage that before he could speak he had time to
cool, and to reflect that it would be great waste to kill the only man
who was willing to be useful in the present emergency, seeing that in
the end the insolent fellow would be as dead as if he had died by his
majesty's own hand. "Oh!" said he at last, putting up his sword with
difficulty, it was so long; "I am obliged to you, you young fool! Take
a glass of wine?"

"No, thank you," replied the prince.

"Very well," said the king. "Would you like to run and see your parents
before you make your experiment?"

"No, thank you," said the prince.

"Then we will go and look for the hole at once," said his majesty, and
proceeded to call some attendants.

"Stop, please your majesty; I have a condition to make," interposed the
prince.

"What!" exclaimed the king, "a condition! and with me! How dare you?"

"As you please," returned the prince coolly. "I wish your majesty a
good morning."

"You wretch! I will have you put in a sack, and stuck in the hole."

"Very well, your majesty," replied the prince, becoming a little more
respectful, lest the wrath of the king should deprive him of the
pleasure of dying for the princess. "But what good will that do your
majesty? Please to remember that the oracle says the victim must offer
himself."

"Well, you _have_ offered yourself," retorted the king.

"Yes, upon one condition."

"Condition again!" roared the king, once more drawing his sword.
"Begone! Somebody else will be glad enough to take the honour off your
shoulders."

"Your majesty knows it will not be easy to get another to take my
place."

"Well, what is your condition?" growled the king, feeling that the
prince was right.

"Only this," replied the prince: "that, as I must on no account die
before I am fairly drowned, and the waiting will be rather wearisome,
the princess, your daughter, shall go with me, feed me with her own
hands, and look at me now and then, to comfort me; for you must confess
it _is_ rather hard. As soon as the water is up to my eyes, she may go
and be happy, and forget her poor shoeblack."

Here the prince's voice faltered, and he very nearly grew sentimental,
in spite of his resolution.

"Why didn't you tell me before what your condition was? Such a fuss
about nothing!" exclaimed the king.

"Do you grant it?" persisted the prince.

"Of course I do," replied the king.

"Very well. I am ready."

"Go and have some dinner, then, while I set my people to find the
place."

The king ordered out his guards, and gave directions to the officers to
find the hole in the lake at once. So the bed of the lake was marked
out in divisions and thoroughly examined, and in an hour or so the hole
was discovered. It was in the middle of a stone, near the centre of the
lake, in the very pool where the golden plate had been found. It was a
three-cornered hole of no great size. There was water all round the
stone, but very little was flowing through the hole.






XIV. THIS IS VERY KIND OF YOU.


The prince went to dress for the occasion, for he was resolved to die
like a prince.

When the princess heard that a man had offered to die for her, she was
so transported that she jumped off the bed, feeble as she was, and
danced about the room for joy. She did not care who the man was; that
was nothing to her. The hole wanted stopping; and if only a man would
do, why, take one. In an hour or two more everything was ready. Her
maid dressed her in haste, and they carried her to the side of the
lake. When she saw it she shrieked, and covered her face with her
hands. They bore her across to the stone, where they had already placed
a little boat for her. The water was not deep enough to float it, but
they hoped it would be, before long. They laid her on cushions, placed
in the boat wines and fruits and other nice things, and stretched a
canopy over all.

In a few minutes the prince appeared. The princess recognized him at
once, but did not think it worth while to acknowledge him.

"Here I am," said the prince. "Put me in."

"They told me it was a shoeblack," said the princess.

"So I am," said the prince. "I blacked your little boots three times a
day, because they were all I could get of you. Put me in."

The courtiers did not resent his bluntness, except by saying to each
other that he was taking it out in impudence.

But how was he to be put in? The golden plate contained no instructions
on this point. The prince looked at the hole, and saw but one way. He
put both his legs into it, sitting on the stone, and, stooping forward,
covered the corner that remained open with his two hands. In this
uncomfortable position he resolved to abide his fate, and turning to
the people, said,--

"Now you can go."

The king had already gone home to dinner.

"Now you can go," repeated the princess after him, like a parrot.

The people obeyed her and went.

Presently a little wave flowed over the stone, and wetted one of the
prince's knees. But he did not mind it much. He began to sing, and the
song he sung was this:--

   "As a world that has no well,
    Darkly bright in forest dell;
    As a world without the gleam
    Of the downward-going stream;
    As a world without the glance
    Of the ocean's fair expanse;
    As a world where never rain
    Glittered on the sunny plain;--
    Such, my heart, thy world would be,
    If no love did flow in thee.

   "As a world without the sound
    Of the rivulets underground;
    Or the bubbling of the spring
    Out of darkness wandering;
    Or the mighty rush and flowing
    Of the river's downward going;
    Or the music-showers that drop
    On the outspread beech's top;
    Or the ocean's mighty voice,
    When his lifted waves rejoice;--
    Such, my soul, thy world would be,
    If no love did sing in thee.

   "Lady, keep thy world's delight;
    Keep the waters in thy sight.
    Love hath made me strong to go,
    For thy sake, to realms below,
    Where the water's shine and hum
    Through the darkness never come:
    Let, I pray, one thought of me
    Spring, a little well, in thee;
    Lest thy loveless soul be found
    Like a dry and thirsty ground."

"Sing again, prince. It makes it less tedious," said the princess.

But the prince was too much overcome to sing any more, and a long pause
followed.

"This is very kind of you, prince," said the princess at last, quite
coolly, as she lay in the boat with her eyes shut.

"I am sorry I can't return the compliment," thought the prince; "but
you are worth dying for, after all."

Again a wavelet, and another, and another flowed over the stone, and
wetted both the prince's knees; but he did not speak or move.
Two--three--four hours passed in this way, the princess apparently
asleep, and the prince very patient. But he was much disappointed in
his position, for he had none of the consolation he had hoped for.

At last he could bear it no longer.

"Princess!" said he.

But at the moment up started the princess, crying,--

"I'm afloat! I'm afloat!"

And the little boat bumped against the stone.

"Princess!" repeated the prince, encouraged by seeing her wide awake
and looking eagerly at the water.

"Well?" said she, without looking round.

"Your papa promised that you should look at me, and you haven't looked
at me once."

"Did he? Then I suppose I must. But I am so sleepy!"

"Sleep then, darling, and don't mind me," said the poor prince.

"Really, you are very good," replied the princess. "I think I will go
to sleep again."

"Just give me a glass of wine and a biscuit first," said the prince,
very humbly.

"With all my heart," said the princess, and gaped as she said it.

She got the wine and the biscuit, however, and leaning over the side of
the boat towards him, was compelled to look at him.

"Why, prince," she said, "you don't look well! Are you sure you don't
mind it?"

"Not a bit," answered he, feeling very faint in deed. "Only I shall die
before it is of any use to you, unless I have something to eat."

"There, then," said she, holding out the wine to him.

"Ah! you must feed me. I dare not move my hands. The water would run
away directly."

"Good gracious!" said the princess; and she began at once to feed him
with bits of biscuit and sips of wine.

As she fed him, he contrived to kiss the tips of her fingers now and
then. She did not seem to mind it, one way or the other. But the prince
felt better.

"Now for your own sake, princess," said he, "I cannot let you go to
sleep. You must sit and look at me, else I shall not be able to keep
up."

"Well, I will do anything I can to oblige you," answered she, with
condescension; and, sitting down, she did look at him, and kept looking
at him with wonderful steadiness, considering all things.

The sun went down, and the moon rose, and, gush after gush, the waters
were rising up the prince's body. They were up to his waist now.

"Why can't we go and have a swim?" said the princess. "There seems to
be water enough just about here."

"I shall never swim more," said the prince.

"Oh, I forgot," said the princess, and was silent.

So the water grew and grew, and rose up and up on the prince. And the
princess sat and looked at him. She fed him now and then. The night
wore on. The waters rose and rose. The moon rose likewise higher and
higher, and shone full on the face of the dying prince. The water was
up to his neck.

"Will you kiss me, princess?" said he, feebly. The nonchalance was all
gone now.

"Yes, I will," answered the princess, and kissed him with a long,
sweet, cold kiss.

"Now," said he, with a sigh of content, "I die happy."

He did not speak again. The princess gave him some wine for the last
time: he was past eating. Then she sat down again, and looked at him.
The water rose and rose. It touched his chin. It touched his lower lip.
It touched between his lips. He shut them hard to keep it out. The
princess began to feel strange. It touched his upper lip. He breathed
through his nostrils. The princess looked wild. It covered his
nostrils. Her eyes looked scared, and shone strange in the moonlight.
His head fell back; the water closed over it, and the bubbles of his
last breath bubbled up through the water. The princess gave a shriek,
and sprang into the lake.

She laid hold first of one leg, and then of the other, and pulled and
tugged, but she could not move either. She stopped to take breath, and
that made her think that he could not get any breath. She was frantic.
She got hold of him, and held his head above the water, which was
possible now his hands were no longer on the hole. But it was of no
use, for he was past breathing.

Love and water brought back all her strength. She got under the water,
and pulled and pulled with her whole might, till at last she got one
leg out. The other easily followed. How she got him into the boat she
never could tell; but when she did, she fainted away. Coming to
herself, she seized the oars, kept herself steady as best she could,
and rowed and rowed, though she had never rowed before. Round rocks,
and over shallows, and through mud she rowed, till she got to the
landing-stairs of the palace. By this time her people were on the
shore, for they had heard her shriek. She made them carry the prince to
her own room, and lay him in her bed, and light a fire, and send for
the doctors.

"But the lake, your highness!" said the chamberlain, who, roused by the
noise, came in, in his nightcap.

"Go and drown yourself in it!" she said.

This was the last rudeness of which the princess was ever guilty; and
one must allow that she had good cause to feel provoked with the lord
chamberlain.

Had it been the king himself, he would have fared no better. But both
he and the queen were fast asleep. And the chamberlain went back to his
bed. Somehow, the doctors never came. So the princess and her old nurse
were left with the prince. But the old nurse was a wise woman, and knew
what to do.

They tried everything for a long time without success. The princess was
nearly distracted between hope and fear, but she tried on and on, one
thing after another, and everything over and over again.

At last, when they had all but given it up, just as the sun rose, the
prince opened his eyes.






XV. LOOK AT THE RAIN!


The princess burst into a passion of tears, and _fell_ on the floor.
There she lay for an hour and her tears never ceased. All the pent-up
crying of her life was spent now. And a rain came on, such as had never
been seen in that country. The sun shone all the time, and the great
drops, which fell straight to the earth, shone likewise. The palace was
in the heart of a rainbow. It was a rain of rubies, and sapphires, and
emeralds, and topazes. The torrents poured from the mountains like
molten gold; and if it had not been for its subterraneous outlet, the
lake would have overflowed and inundated the country. It was full from
shore to shore.

But the princess did not heed the lake. She lay on the floor and wept.
And this rain within doors was far more wonderful than the rain out of
doors. For when it abated a little, and she proceeded to rise, she
found, to her astonishment, that she could not. At length, after many
efforts, she succeeded in getting upon her feet. But she tumbled down
again directly. Hearing her fall, her old nurse uttered a yell of
delight, and ran to her, screaming,--

"My darling child! she's found her gravity!"

"Oh, that's it! is it?" said the princess, rubbing her shoulder and her
knee alternately. "I consider it very unpleasant. I feel as if I should
be crushed to pieces."

"Hurrah!" cried the prince from the bed. "If you've come round,
princess, so have I. How's the lake?"

"Brimful," answered the nurse.

"Then we're all happy."

"That we are indeed!" answered the princess, sobbing.

And there was rejoicing all over the country that rainy day. Even the
babies forgot their past troubles, and danced and crowed amazingly. And
the king told stories, and the queen listened to them. And he divided
the money in his box, and she the honey in her pot, to all the
children. And there was such jubilation as was never heard of before.

Of course the prince and princess were betrothed at once. But the
princess had to learn to walk, before they could be married with any
propriety. And this was not so easy at her time of life, for she could
walk no more than a baby. She was always falling down and hurting
herself.

"Is this the gravity you used to make so much of?" said she one day to
the prince, as he raised her from the floor. "For my part, I was a
great deal more comfortable without it."

"No, no, that's not it. This is it," replied the prince, as he took her
up, and carried her about like a baby, kissing her all the time. "This
is gravity."

"That's better," said she. "I don't mind that so much."

And she smiled the sweetest, loveliest smile in the prince's face. And
she gave him one little kiss in return for all his; and he thought them
overpaid, for he was beside himself with delight. I fear she complained
of her gravity more than once after this, notwithstanding.

It was a long time before she got reconciled to walking. But the pain
of learning it was quite counterbalanced by two things, either of which
would have been sufficient consolation. The first was, that the prince
himself was her teacher; and the second, that she could tumble into the
lake as often as she pleased. Still, she preferred to have the prince
jump in with her; and the splash they made before was nothing to the
splash they made now.

The lake never sank again. In process of time, it wore the roof of the
cavern quite through, and was twice as deep as before.

The only revenge the princess took upon her aunt was to tread pretty
hard on her gouty toe the next time she saw her. But she was sorry for
it the very next day, when she heard that the water had undermined her
house, and that it had fallen in the night, burying her in its ruins;
whence no one ever ventured to dig up her body. There she lies to this
day.

So the prince and princess lived and were happy; and had crowns of
gold, and clothes of cloth, and shoes of leather, and children of boys
and girls, not one of whom was ever known, on the most critical
occasion, to lose the smallest atom of his or her due proportion of
gravity.






THE GIANT'S HEART.






There was once a giant who lived on the borders of Giantland where it
touched on the country of common people.

Everything in Giantland was so big that the common people saw only a
mass of awful mountains and clouds; and no living man had ever come
from it, as far as anybody knew, to tell what he had seen in it.

Somewhere near these borders, on the other side, by the edge of a great
forest, lived a labourer with his wife and a great many children. One
day Tricksey-Wee, as they called her, teased her brother Buffy-Bob,
till he could not bear it any longer, and gave her a box on the ear.
Tricksey-Wee cried; and Buffy-Bob was so sorry and so ashamed of
himself that he cried too, and ran off into the wood. He was so long
gone that Tricksey-Wee began to be frightened, for she was very fond of
her brother; and she was so distressed that she had first teased him
and then cried, that at last she ran into the wood to look for him,
though there was more chance of losing herself than of finding him.
And, indeed, so it seemed likely to turn out; for, running on without
looking, she at length found herself in a valley she knew nothing
about. And no wonder; for what she thought was a valley with round,
rocky sides, was no other than the space between two of the roots of a
great tree that grew on the borders of Giantland. She climbed over the
side of it, and went towards what she took for a black, round-topped
mountain, far away; but which she soon discovered to be close to her,
and to be a hollow place so great that she could not tell what it was
hollowed out of. Staring at it, she found that it was a doorway; and
going nearer and staring harder, she saw the door, far in, with a
knocker of iron upon it, a great many yards above her head, and as
large as the anchor of a big ship. Now, nobody had ever been unkind to
Tricksey-Wee, and therefore she was not afraid of anybody. For
Buffy-Bob's box on the ear she did not think worth considering. So
spying a little hole at the bottom of the door which had been nibbled
by some giant mouse, she crept through it, and found herself in an
enormous hall. She could not have seen the other end of it at all,
except for the great fire that was burning there, diminished to a spark
in the distance. Towards this fire she ran as fast as she could, and
was not far from it when something fell before her with a great
clatter, over which she tumbled, and went rolling on the floor. She was
not much hurt however, and got up in a moment. Then she saw that what
she had fallen over was not unlike a great iron bucket. When she
examined it more closely, she discovered that it was a thimble; and
looking up to see who had dropped it, beheld a huge face, with
spectacles as big as the round windows in a church, bending over her,
and looking everywhere for the thimble. Tricksey-Wee immediately laid
hold of it in both her arms, and lifted it about an inch nearer to the
nose of the peering giantess. This movement made the old lady see where
it was, and, her finger popping into it, it vanished from the eyes of
Tricksey-Wee, buried in the folds of a white stocking like a cloud in
the sky, which Mrs. Giant was busy darning. For it was Saturday night,
and her husband would wear nothing but white stockings on Sunday. To be
sure he did eat little children, but only _very_ little ones; and if
ever it crossed his mind that it was wrong to do so, he always said to
himself that he wore whiter stockings on Sunday than any other giant in
all Giantland.

At the same instant Tricksey-Wee heard a sound like the wind in a tree
full of leaves, and could not think what it could be; till, looking up,
she found that it was the giantess whispering to her; and when she
tried very hard she could hear what she said well enough.

"Run away, dear little girl," she said, "as fast as you can; for my
husband will be home in a few minutes."

"But I've never been naughty to your husband," said Tricksey-Wee,
looking up in the giantess's face.

"That doesn't matter. You had better go. He is fond of little children,
particularly little girls."

"Oh, then he won't hurt me."

"I am not sure of that. He is so fond of them that he eats them up; and
I am afraid he couldn't help hurting you a little. He's a very good man
though."

"Oh! then--" began Tricksey-Wee, feeling rather frightened; but before
she could finish her sentence she heard the sound of footsteps very far
apart and very heavy. The next moment, who should come running towards
her, full speed, and as pale as death, but Buffy-Bob. She held out her
arms, and he ran into them. But when she tried to kiss him, she only
kissed the back of his head; for his white face and round eyes were
turned to the door.

"Run, children; run and hide!" said the giantess.

"Come, Buffy," said Tricksey; "yonder's a great brake; we'll hide in
it."

The brake was a big broom; and they had just got into the bristles of
it when they heard the door open with a sound of thunder, and in
stalked the giant. You would have thought you saw the whole earth
through the door when he opened it, so wide was it; and when he closed
it, it was like nightfall.

"Where is that little boy?" he cried, with a voice like the bellowing
of a cannon. "He looked a very nice boy indeed. I am almost sure he
crept through the mousehole at the bottom of the door. Where is he, my
dear?"

"I don't know," answered the giantess.

"But you know it is wicked to tell lies; don't you, my dear?" retorted
the giant.

"Now, you ridiculous old Thunderthump!" said his wife, with a smile as
broad as the sea in the sun, "how can I mend your white stockings and
look after little boys? You have got plenty to last you over Sunday, I
am sure. Just look what good little boys they are!"

Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob peered through the bristles, and discovered
a row of little boys, about a dozen, with very fat faces and goggle
eyes, sitting before the fire, and looking stupidly into it.
Thunderthump intended the most of these for pickling, and was feeding
them well before salting them. Now and then, however, he could not keep
his teeth off them, and would eat one by the bye, without salt.

He strode up to the wretched children. Now, what made them very
wretched indeed was, that they knew if they could only keep from
eating, and grow thin, the giant would dislike them, and turn them out
to find their way home; but notwithstanding this, so greedy were they,
that they ate as much as ever they could hold. The giantess, who fed
them, comforted herself with thinking that they were not real boys and
girls, but only little pigs pretending to be boys and girls.

"Now tell me the truth," cried the giant, bending his face down over
them. They shook with terror, and every one hoped it was somebody else
the giant liked best. "Where is the little boy that ran into the hall
just now? Whoever tells me a lie shall be instantly boiled."

"He's in the broom," cried one dough-faced boy. "He's in there, and a
little girl with him."

"The naughty children," cried the giant, "to hide from _me_!" And he
made a stride towards the broom.

"Catch hold of the bristles, Bobby. Get right into a tuft, and hold
on," cried Tricksey-Wee, just in time.

The giant caught up the broom, and seeing nothing under it, set it down
again with a force that threw them both on the floor. He then made two
strides to the boys, caught the dough-faced one by the neck, took the
lid off a great pot that was boiling on the fire, popped him in as if
he had been a trussed chicken, put the lid on again, and saying,
"There, boys! See what comes of lying!" asked no more questions; for,
as he always kept his word, he was afraid he might have to do the same
to them all; and he did not like boiled boys. He like to eat them
crisp, as radishes, whether forked or not, ought to be eaten. He then
sat down, and asked his wife if his supper was ready. She looked into
the pot, and throwing the boy out with the ladle, as if he had been a
black beetle that had tumbled in and had had the worst of it, answered
that she thought it was. Whereupon he rose to help her; and taking the
pot from the fire, poured the whole contents, bubbling and splashing,
into a dish like a vat. Then they sat down to supper. The children in
the broom could not see what they had; but it seemed to agree with
them, for the giant talked like thunder, and the giantess answered like
the sea, and they grew chattier and chattier. At length the giant
said,--

"I don't feel quite comfortable about that heart of mine." And as he
spoke, instead of laying his hand on his bosom, he waved it away
towards the corner where the children were peeping from the
broom-bristles, like frightened little mice.

"Well, you know, my darling Thunderthump," answered his wife, "I always
thought it ought to be nearer home. But you know best, of course."

"Ha! ha! You don't know where it is, wife. I moved it a month ago."

"What a man you are, Thunderthump! You trust any creature alive rather
than your wife."

Here the giantess gave a sob which sounded exactly like a wave going
flop into the mouth of a cave up to the roof.

"Where have you got it now?" she resumed, checking her emotion.

"Well, Doodlem, I don't mind telling _you_," answered the giant,
soothingly. "The great she-eagle has got it for a nest egg. She sits on
it night and day, and thinks she will bring the greatest eagle out of
it that ever sharpened his beak on the rocks of Mount Skycrack. I can
warrant no one else will touch it while she has got it. But she is
rather capricious, and I confess I am not easy about it; for the least
scratch of one of her claws would do for me at once. And she
_has_ claws."

I refer anyone who doubts this part of my story to certain chronicles
of Giantland preserved among the Celtic nations. It was quite a common
thing for a giant to put his heart out to nurse, because he did not
like the trouble and responsibility of doing it himself; although I
must confess it was a dangerous sort of plan to take, especially with
such a delicate viscus as the heart.

All this time Buffy-Bob and Tricksey-Wee were listening with long ears.

"Oh!" thought Tricksey-Wee, "if I could but find the giant's cruel
heart, wouldn't I give it a squeeze!"

The giant and giantess went on talking for a long time. The giantess
kept advising the giant to hide his heart somewhere in the house; but
he seemed afraid of the advantage it would give her over him.

"You could hide it at the bottom of the flour-barrel," said she.

"That would make me feel chokey," answered he.

"Well, in the coal-cellar. Or in the dust-hole--that's the place! No
one would think of looking for your heart in the dust-hole."

"Worse and worse!" cried the giant.

"Well, the water-butt," suggested she.

"No, no; it would grow spongy there," said he.

"Well, what _will_ you do with it?"

"I will leave it a month longer where it is, and then I will give it to
the Queen of the Kangaroos, and she will carry it in her pouch for me.
It is best to change its place, you know, lest my enemies should scent
it out. But, dear Doodlem, it's a fretting care to have a heart of
one's own to look after. The responsibility is too much for me. If it
were not for a bite of a radish now and then, I never could bear it."

Here the giant looked lovingly towards the row of little boys by the
fire, all of whom were nodding, or asleep on the floor.

"Why don't you trust it to me, dear Thunderthump?" said his wife. "I
would take the best possible care of it."

"I don't doubt it, my love. But the responsibility would be too much
for _you_. You would no longer be my darling, light-hearted, airy,
laughing Doodlem. It would transform you into a heavy, oppressed woman,
weary of life--as I am."

The giant closed his eyes and pretended to go to sleep. His wife got
his stockings, and went on with her darning. Soon the giant's pretence
became reality, and the giantess began to nod over her work.

"Now, Buffy," whispered Tricksey-Wee, "now's our time. I think it's
moonlight, and we had better be off. There's a door with a hole for the
cat just behind us."

"All right," said Bob; "I'm ready."

So they got out of the broom-brake and crept to the door. But to their
great disappointment, when they got through it, they found themselves
in a sort of shed. It was full of tubs and things, and, though it was
built of wood only, they could not find a crack.

"Let us try this hole," said Tricksey; for the giant and giantess were
sleeping behind them, and they dared not go back.

"All right," said Bob.

He seldom said anything else than _All right_.

Now this hole was in a mound that came in through the wall of the shed,
and went along the floor for some distance. They crawled into it, and
found it very dark. But groping their way along, they soon came to a
small crack, through which they saw grass, pale in the moonshine. As
they crept on, they found the hole began to get wider and lead upwards.

"What is that noise of rushing?" said Buffy-Bob.

"I can't tell," replied Tricksey; "for, you see, I don't know what we
are in."

The fact was, they were creeping along a channel in the heart of a
giant tree; and the noise they heard was the noise of the sap rushing
along in its wooden pipes. When they laid their ears to the wall, they
heard it gurgling along with a pleasant noise.

"It sounds kind and good," said Tricksey. "It is water running. Now it
must be running from somewhere to somewhere. I think we had better go
on, and we shall come somewhere."

It was now rather difficult to go on, for they had to climb as if they
were climbing a hill; and now the passage was wide. Nearly worn out,
they saw light overhead at last, and creeping through a crack into the
open air, found themselves on the fork of a huge tree. A great, broad,
uneven space lay around them, out of which spread boughs in every
direction, the smallest of them as big as the biggest tree in the
country of common people. Overhead were leaves enough to supply all the
trees they had ever seen. Not much moonlight could come through, but
the leaves would glimmer white in the wind at times. The tree was full
of giant birds. Every now and then, one would sweep through, with a
great noise. But, except an occasional chirp, sounding like a shrill
pipe in a great organ, they made no noise. All at once an owl began to
hoot. He thought he was singing. As soon as he began, other birds
replied, making rare game of him. To their astonishment, the children
found they could understand every word they sang. And what they sang
was something like this:--

  "I will sing a song.
    I'm the Owl."
  "Sing a song, you Sing-song
    Ugly fowl!
   What will you sing about,
   Night in and Day out?"

  "Sing about the night;
    I'm the Owl."
  "You could not see for the light,
    Stupid fowl."
  "Oh! the Moon! and the Dew!
   And the Shadows!--tu-whoo!"

The owl spread out his silent, soft, sly wings, and lighting between
Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob, nearly smothered them, closing up one under
each wing. It was like being buried in a down bed. But the owl did not
like anything between his sides and his wings, so he opened his wings
again, and the children made haste to get out. Tricksey-Wee immediately
went in front of the bird, and looking up into his huge face, which was
as round as the eyes of the giantess's spectacles, and much bigger,
dropped a pretty courtesy, and said,--"Please, Mr. Owl, I want to
whisper to you."

"Very well, small child," answered the owl, looking important, and
stooping his ear towards her. "What is it?"

"Please tell me where the eagle lives that sits on the giant's heart."

"Oh, you naughty child! That's a secret. For shame!"

And with a great hiss that terrified them, the owl flew into the tree.
All birds are fond of secrets; but not many of them can keep them so
well as the owl.

So the children went on because they did not know what else to do. They
found the way very rough and difficult, the tree was so full of humps
and hollows. Now and then they plashed into a pool of rain; now and
then they came upon twigs growing out of the trunk where they had no
business, and they were as large as full-grown poplars. Sometimes they
came upon great cushions of soft moss, and on one of them they lay down
and rested. But they had not lain long before they spied a large
nightingale sitting on a branch, with its bright eyes looking up at the
moon. In a moment more he began to sing, and the birds about him began
to reply, but in a different tone from that in which they had replied
to the owl. Oh, the birds did call the nightingale such pretty names!
The nightingale sang, and the birds replied like this:--

  "I will sing a song.
    I'm the nightingale."
  "Sing a song, long, long,
    Little Neverfail!
   What will you sing about,
    Light in or light out?"

  "Sing about the light
    Gone away;
   Down, away, and out of sight--
    Poor lost Day!
   Mourning for the Day dead,
    O'er his dim bed."

The nightingale sang so sweetly, that the children would have fallen
asleep but for fear of losing any of the song. When the nightingale
stopped they got up and wandered on. They did not know where they were
going, but they thought it best to keep going on, because then they
might come upon something or other. They were very sorry they had
forgotten to ask the nightingale about the eagle's nest, but his music
had put everything else out of their heads. They resolved, however, not
to forget the next time they had a chance. So they went on and on, till
they were both tired, and Tricksey-Wee said at last, trying to laugh,--

"I declare my legs feel just like a Dutch doll's."

"Then here's the place to go to bed in," said Buffy-Bob.

They stood at the edge of a last year's nest, and looked down with
delight into the round, mossy cave. Then they crept gently in, and,
lying down in each other's arms, found it so deep, and warm, and
comfortable, and soft, that they were soon fast asleep.

Now, close beside them, in a hollow, was another nest, in which lay a
lark and his wife; and the children were awakened, very early in the
morning, by a dispute between Mr. and Mrs. Lark.

"Let me up," said the lark.

"It is not time," said the lark's wife.

"It is," said the lark, rather rudely. "The darkness is quite thin. I
can almost see my own beak."

"Nonsense!" said the lark's wife. "You know you came home yesterday
morning quite worn out--you had to fly so very high before you saw him.
I am sure he would not mind if you took it a little easier. Do be quiet
and go to sleep again."

"That's not it at all," said the lark. "He doesn't want me. I want him.
Let me up, I say."

He began to sing; and Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob, having now learned
the way, answered him:--

  "I will sing a song.
    I'm the Lark."
  "Sing, sing, Throat-strong,
    Little Kill-the-dark.
   What will you sing about,
   Now the night is out?"

  "I can only call;
    I can't think.
   Let me up--that's all.
    Let me drink!
   Thirsting all the long night
   For a drink of light."

By this time the lark was standing on the edge of his nest and looking
at the children.

"Poor little things! You can't fly," said the lark.

"No; but we can look up," said Tricksey.

"Ah, you don't know what it is to see the very first of the sun."

"But we know what it is to wait till he comes. He's no worse for your
seeing him first, is he?"

"Oh no, certainly not," answered the lark, with condescension, and
then, bursting into his _Jubilate_, he sprang aloft, clapping his wings
like a clock running down.

"Tell us where--" began Buffy-Bob.

But the lark was out of sight. His song was all that was left of him.
That was everywhere, and he was nowhere.

"Selfish bird!" said Buffy. "It's all very well for larks to go hunting
the sun, but they have no business to despise their neighbours, for all
that."

"Can I be of any use to you?" said a sweet bird-voice out of the nest.

This was the lark's wife, who stayed at home with the young larks while
her husband went to church.

"Oh! thank you. If you please," answered Tricksey-Wee.

And up popped a pretty brown head; and then up came a brown feathery
body; and last of all came the slender legs on to the edge of the nest.
There she turned, and, looking down into the nest, from which came a
whole litany of chirpings for breakfast, said, "Lie still, little
ones." Then she turned to the children.

"My husband is King of the Larks," she said.

Buffy-Bob took off his cap, and Tricksey-Wee courtesied very low.

"Oh, it's not me," said the bird, looking very shy. "I am only his
wife. It's my husband." And she looked up after him into the sky,
whence his song was still falling like a shower of musical hailstones.
Perhaps _she_ could see him.

"He's a splendid bird," said Buffy-Bob; "only you know he _will_ get up
a little too early."

"Oh, no! he doesn't. It's only his way, you know. But tell me what I
can do for you."

"Tell us, please, Lady Lark, where the she-eagle lives that sits on
Giant Thunderthump's heart."

"Oh! that is a secret."

"Did you promise not to tell?"

"No; but larks ought to be discreet. They see more than other birds."

"But you don't fly up high like your husband, do you?"

"Not often. But it's no matter. I come to know things for all that."

"Do tell me, and I will sing you a song," said Tricksey-Wee.

"Can you sing too?--You have got no wings!"

"Yes. And I will sing you a song I learned the other day about a lark
and his wife."

"Please do," said the lark's wife. "Be quiet, children, and listen."

Tricksey-Wee was very glad she happened to know a song which would
please the lark's wife, at least, whatever the lark himself might have
thought of it, if he had heard it. So she sang,--

  "'Good morrow, my lord!' in the sky alone,
   Sang the lark, as the sun ascended his throne.
   'Shine on me, my lord; I only am come,
   Of all your servants, to welcome you home.
   I have flown a whole hour, right up, I swear,
   To catch the first shine of your golden hair!'

  "'Must I thank you, then,' said the king, 'Sir Lark,
   For flying so high, and hating the dark?
   You ask a full cup for half a thirst:
   Half is love of me, and half love to be first.
   There's many a bird that makes no haste,
   But waits till I come. That's as much to my taste.

  "And the king hid his head in a turban of cloud;
   And the lark stopped singing, quite vexed and cowed.
   But he flew up higher, and thought, 'Anon,
   The wrath of the king will be over and gone,
   And his crown, shining out of its cloudy fold,
   Will change my brown feathers to a glory of gold.'

  "So he flew, with the strength of a lark he flew.
   But as he rose, the cloud rose too;
   And not a gleam of the golden hair
   Came through the depth of the misty air;
   Till, weary with flying, with sighing sore,
   The strong sun-seeker could do no more.

  "His wings had had no chrism of gold,
   And his feathers felt withered and worn and old;
   So he quivered and sank, and dropped like a stone.
   And there on his nest, where he left her, alone,
   Sat his little wife on her little eggs,
   Keeping them warm with wings and legs.

  "Did I say alone? Ah, no such thing!
   Full in her face was shining the king.
   'Welcome, Sir Lark! You look tired,' said he.
   '_Up_ is not always the best way to me.
   While you have been singing so high and away,
   I've been shining to your little wife all day.'

  "He had set his crown all about the nest,
   And out of the midst shone her little brown breast;
   And so glorious was she in russet gold,
   That for wonder and awe Sir Lark grew cold.
   He popped his head under her wing, and lay
   As still as a stone, till the king was away."

As soon as Tricksey-Wee had finished her song, the lark's wife began a
low, sweet, modest little song of her own; and after she had piped away
for two or three minutes, she said,--

"You dear children, what can I do for you?"

"Tell us where the she-eagle lives, please," said Tricksey-Wee.

"Well, I don't think there can be much harm in telling such wise, good
children," said Lady Lark; "I am sure you don't want to do any
mischief."

"Oh, no; quite the contrary," said Buffy-Bob.

"Then I'll tell you. She lives on the very topmost peak of Mount
Skycrack; and the only way to get up is to climb on the spiders' webs
that cover it from top to bottom."

"That's rather serious," said Tricksey-Wee.

"But you don't want to go up, you foolish little thing! You can't go.
And what do you want to go up for?"

"That is a secret," said Tricksey-Wee.

"Well, it's no business of mine," rejoined Lady Lark, a little
offended, and quite vexed that she had told them. So she flew away to
find some breakfast for her little ones, who by this time were chirping
very impatiently. The children looked at each other, joined hands, and
walked off.

In a minute more the sun was up, and they soon reached the outside of
the tree. The bark was so knobby and rough, and full of twigs, that
they managed to get down, though not without great difficulty. Then,
far away to the north, they saw a huge peak, like the spire of a
church, going right up into the sky. They thought this must be Mount
Skycrack, and turned their faces towards it. As they went on, they saw
a giant or two, now and then, striding about the fields or through the
woods, but they kept out of their way. Nor were they in much danger;
for it was only one or two of the border giants that were so very fond
of children.

At last they came to the foot of Mount Skycrack. It stood in a plain
alone, and shot right up, I don't know how many thousand feet, into the
air, a long, narrow, spearlike mountain. The whole face of it, from top
to bottom, was covered with a network of spiders' webs, with threads of
various sizes, from that of silk to that of whipcord. The webs shook
and quivered, and waved in the sun, glittering like silver. All about
ran huge greedy spiders, catching huge silly flies, and devouring them.

Here they sat down to consider what could be done. The spiders did not
heed them, but ate away at the flies.--Now, at the foot of the
mountain, and all round it, was a ring of water, not very broad, but
very deep. As they sat watching them, one of the spiders, whose web was
woven across this water, somehow or other lost his hold, and fell in on
his back. Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob ran to his assistance, and laying
hold each of one of his legs, succeeded, with the help of the other
legs, which struggled spiderfully, in getting him out upon dry land. As
soon as he had shaken himself, and dried himself a little, the spider
turned to the children, saying,--

"And now, what can I do for you?"

"Tell us, please," said they, "how we can get up the mountain to the
she-eagle's nest."

"Nothing is easier," answered the spider. "Just run up there, and tell
them all I sent you, and nobody will mind you."

"But we haven't got claws like you, Mr. Spider," said Buffy.

"Ah! no more you have, poor unprovided creatures! Still, I think we can
manage it. Come home with me."

"You won't eat us, will you?" said Buffy.

"My dear child," answered the spider, in a tone of injured dignity, "I
eat nothing but what is mischievous or useless. You have helped me, and
now I will help you."

The children rose at once, and climbing as well as they could, reached
the spider's nest in the centre of the web. Nor did they find it very
difficult; for whenever too great a gap came, the spider spinning a
strong cord stretched it just where they would have chosen to put their
feet next. He left them in his nest, after bringing them two enormous
honey-bags, taken from bees that he had caught; but presently about six
of the wisest of the spiders came back with him. It was rather horrible
to look up and see them all round the mouth of the nest, looking down
on them in contemplation, as if wondering whether they would be nice
eating. At length one of them said,--"Tell us truly what you want with
the eagle, and we will try to help you."

Then Tricksey-Wee told them that there was a giant on the borders who
treated little children no better than radishes, and that they had
narrowly escaped being eaten by him; that they had found out that the
great she-eagle of Mount Skycrack was at present sitting on his heart;
and that, if they could only get hold of the heart, they would soon
teach the giant better behaviour.

"But," said their host, "if you get at the heart of the giant, you will
find it as large as one of your elephants. What can you do with it?"

"The least scratch will kill it," replied Buffy-Bob.

"Ah! but you might do better than that," said the spider.--"Now we have
resolved to help you. Here is a little bag of spider-juice. The giants
cannot bear spiders, and this juice is dreadful poison to them. We are
all ready to go up with you, and drive the eagle away. Then you must
put the heart into this other bag, and bring it down with you; for then
the giant will be in your power."

"But how can we do that?" said Buffy. "The bag is not much bigger than
a pudding-bag."

"But it is as large as you will be able to carry."

"Yes; but what are we to do with the heart?"

"Put it in the bag, to be sure. Only, first, you must squeeze a drop
out of the other bag upon it. You will see what will happen."

"Very well; we will do as you tell us," said Tricksey-Wee. "And now, if
you please, how shall we go?"

"Oh, that's our business," said the first spider. "You come with me,
and my grandfather will take your brother. Get up."

So Tricksey-Wee mounted on the narrow part of the spider's back, and
held fast. And Buffy-Bob got on the grandfather's back. And up they
scrambled, over one web after another, up and up--so fast! And every
spider followed; so that, when Tricksey-Wee looked back, she saw a
whole army of spiders scrambling after them.

"What can we want with so many?" she thought; but she said nothing.

The moon was now up, and it was a splendid sight below and around them.
All Giantland was spread out under them, with its great hills, lakes,
trees, and animals. And all above them was the clear heaven, and Mount
Skycrack rising into it, with its endless ladders of spider-webs,
glittering like cords made of moonbeams. And up the moonbeams went,
crawling, and scrambling, and racing, a huge army of huge spiders.

At length they reached all but the very summit, where they stopped.
Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob could see above them a great globe of
feathers, that finished off the mountain like an ornamental knob.

"But how shall we drive her off?" said Buffy.

"We'll soon manage that," answered the grandfather-spider. "Come on
you, down there."

Up rushed the whole army, past the children, over the edge of the nest,
on to the she-eagle, and buried themselves in her feathers. In a moment
she became very restless, and went pecking about with her beak. All at
once she spread out her wings, with a sound like a whirlwind, and flew
off to bathe in the sea; and then the spiders began to drop from her in
all directions on their gossamer wings. The children had to hold fast
to keep the wind of the eagle's flight from blowing them off. As soon
as it was over, they looked into the nest, and there lay the giant's
heart--an awful and ugly thing.

"Make haste, child!" said Tricksey's spider.

So Tricksey took her bag, and squeezed a drop out of it upon the heart.
She thought she heard the giant give a far-off roar of pain, and she
nearly fell from her seat with terror. The heart instantly began to
shrink. It shrunk and shrivelled till it was nearly gone; and Buffy-Bob
caught it up and put it into his bag. Then the two spiders turned and
went down again as fast as they could. Before they got to the bottom,
they heard the shrieks of the she-eagle over the loss of her egg; but
the spiders told them not to be alarmed, for her eyes were too big to
see them.--By the time they reached the foot of the mountain, all the
spiders had got home, and were busy again catching flies, as if nothing
had happened.

After renewed thanks to their friends, the children set off, carrying
the giant's heart with them.

"If you should find it at all troublesome, just give it a little more
spider-juice directly," said the grandfather, as they took their leave.

Now, the giant had given an awful roar of pain the moment they anointed
his heart, and had fallen down in a fit, in which he lay so long that
all the boys might have escaped if they had not been so fat. One did,
and got home in safety. For days the giant was unable to speak. The
first words he uttered were,--

"Oh, my heart! my heart!"

"Your heart is safe enough, dear Thunderstump," said his wife. "Really,
a man of your size ought not to be so nervous and apprehensive. I am
ashamed of you."

"You have no heart, Doodlem," answered he. "I assure you that at this
moment mine is in the greatest danger. It has fallen into the hands of
foes, though who they are I cannot tell."

Here he fainted again; for Tricksey-Wee, finding the heart begin to
swell a little, had given it the least touch of spider-juice.

Again he recovered, and said,--

"Dear Doodlem, my heart is coming back to me. It is coming nearer and
nearer."

After lying silent for hours, he exclaimed,--

"It is in the house, I know!"

And he jumped up and walked about, looking in every corner.

As he rose, Tricksey-Wee and Buffy-Bob came out of the hole in the
tree-root, and through the cat-hole in the door, and walked boldly
towards the giant. Both kept their eyes busy watching him. Led by the
love of his own heart, the giant soon spied them, and staggered
furiously towards them.

"I will eat you, you vermin!" he cried. "Here with my heart!"

Tricksey gave the heart a sharp pinch. Down fell the giant on his
knees, blubbering, and crying, and begging for his heart.

"You shall have it, if you behave yourself properly," said Tricksey.

"How shall I behave myself properly?" asked he, whimpering.

"Take all those boys and girls, and carry them home at once."

"I'm not able; I'm too ill. I should fall down."

"Take them up directly."

"I can't, till you give me my heart."

"Very well!" said Tricksey; and she gave the heart another pinch.

The giant jumped to his feet, and catching up all the children, thrust
some into his waistcoat pockets, some into his breast pocket, put two
or three into his hat, and took a bundle of them under each arm. Then
he staggered to the door.

All this time poor Doodlem was sitting in her arm-chair, crying, and
mending a white stocking.

The giant led the way to the borders. He could not go so fast but that
Buffy and Tricksey managed to keep up with him. When they reached the
borders, they thought it would be safer to let the children find their
own way home. So they told him to set them down. He obeyed.

"Have you put them all down, Mr. Thunderthump?" asked Tricksey-Wee.

"Yes," said the giant.

"That's a lie!" squeaked a little voice; and out came a head from his
waistcoat pocket.

Tricksey-Wee pinched the heart till the giant roared with pain.

"You're not a gentleman. You tell stories," she said.

"He was the thinnest of the lot," said Thunderthump, crying.

"Are you all there now, children?" asked Tricksey.

"Yes, ma'am," returned they, after counting themselves very carefully,
and with some difficulty; for they were all stupid children.

"Now," said Tricksey-Wee to the giant, "will you promise to carry off
no more children, and never to eat a child again all you life?"

"Yes, yes! I promise," answered Thunderthump, sobbing.

"And you will never cross the borders of Giantland?"

"Never."

"And you shall never again wear white stockings on a Sunday, all your
life long.--Do you promise?"

The giant hesitated at this, and began to expostulate; but
Tricksey-Wee, believing it would be good for his morals, insisted;
and the giant promised.

Then she required of him, that, when she gave him back his heart, he
should give it to his wife to take care of for him for ever after.

The poor giant fell on his knees, and began again to beg. But
Tricksey-Wee giving the heart a slight pinch, he bawled out,--

"Yes, yes! Doodlem shall have it, I swear. Only she must not put it in
the flour-barrel, or in the dust-hole."

"Certainly not. Make your own bargain with her.--And you promise not to
interfere with my brother and me, or to take any revenge for what we
have done?"

"Yes, yes, my dear children; I promise everything. Do, pray, make haste
and give me back my poor heart."

"Wait there, then, till I bring it to you."

"Yes, yes. Only make haste, for I feel very faint."

Tricksey-Wee began to undo the mouth of the bag. But Buffy-Bob, who had
got very knowing on his travels, took out his knife with the pretence
of cutting the string; but, in reality, to be prepared for any
emergency.

No sooner was the heart out of the bag, than it expanded to the size of
a bullock; and the giant, with a yell of rage and vengeance, rushed on
the two children, who had stepped sideways from the terrible heart. But
Buffy-Bob was too quick for Thunderthump. He sprang to the heart, and
buried his knife in it, up to the hilt. A fountain of blood spouted
from it; and with a dreadful groan the giant fell dead at the feet of
little Tricksey-Wee, who could not help being sorry for him after all.






THE GOLDEN KEY.






There was a boy who used to sit in the twilight and listen to his
great-aunt's stories.

She told him that if he could reach the place where the end of the
rainbow stands he would find there a golden key.

"And what is the key for?" the boy would ask. "What is it the key of?
What will it open?"

"That nobody knows," his aunt would reply. "He has to find that out."

"I suppose, being gold," the boy once said, thoughtfully, "that I could
get a good deal of money for it if I sold it."

"Better never find it than sell it," returned his aunt. And then the
boy went to bed and dreamed about the golden key.

Now, all that his great-aunt told the boy about the golden key would
have been nonsense, had it not been that their little house stood on
the borders of Fairyland. For it is perfectly well known that out of
Fairyland nobody ever can find where the rainbow stands. The creature
takes such good care of its golden key, always flitting from place to
place, lest anyone should find it! But in Fairyland it is quite
different. Things that look real in this country look very thin indeed
in Fairyland, while some of the things that here cannot stand still for
a moment, will not move there. So it was not in the least absurd of the
old lady to tell her nephew such things about the golden key.

"Did you ever know anybody find it?" he asked one evening.

"Yes. Your father, I believe, found it."

"And what did he do with it, can you tell me?"

"He never told me."

"What was it like?"

"He never showed it to me."

"How does a new key come there always?"

"I don't know. There it is."

"Perhaps it is the rainbow's egg."

"Perhaps it is. You will be a happy boy if you find the nest."

"Perhaps it comes tumbling down the rainbow from the sky."

"Perhaps it does."

One evening, in summer, he went into his own room, and stood at the
lattice-window, and gazed into the forest which fringed the outskirts
of Fairyland. It came close up to his great-aunt's garden, and, indeed,
sent some straggling trees into it. The forest lay to the east, and the
sun, which was setting behind the cottage, looked straight into the
dark wood with his level red eye. The trees were all old, and had few
branches below, so that the sun could see a great way into the forest;
and the boy, being keen-sighted, could see almost as far as the sun.
The trunks stood like rows of red columns in the shine of the red sun,
and he could see down aisle after aisle in the vanishing distance. And
as he gazed into the forest he began to feel as if the trees were all
waiting for him, and had something they could not go on with till he
came to them. But he was hungry, and wanted his supper. So he lingered.

Suddenly, far among the trees, as far as the sun could shine, he saw a
glorious thing. It was the end of a rainbow, large and brilliant. He
could count all the seven colours, and could see shade after shade
beyond the violet; while before the red stood a colour more gorgeous
and mysterious still. It was a colour he had never seen before. Only
the spring of the rainbow-arch was visible. He could see nothing of it
above the trees.

"The golden key!" he said to himself, and darted out of the house, and
into the wood.

He had not gone far before the sun set. But the rainbow only glowed the
brighter: for the rainbow of Fairyland is not dependent upon the sun as
ours is. The trees welcomed him. The bushes made way for him. The
rainbow grew larger and brighter; and at length he found himself within
two trees of it.

It was a grand sight, burning away there in silence, with its gorgeous,
its lovely, its delicate colours, each distinct, all combining. He
could now see a great deal more of it. It rose high into the blue
heavens, but bent so little that he could not tell how high the crown
of the arch must reach. It was still only a small portion of a huge
bow.

He stood gazing at it till he forgot himself with delight--even forgot
the key which he had come to seek. And as he stood it grew more
wonderful still. For in each of the colours, which was as large as the
column of a church, he could faintly see beautiful forms slowly
ascending as if by the steps of a winding stair. The forms appeared
irregularly--now one, now many, now several, now none--men and women
and children--all different, all beautiful.

He drew nearer to the rainbow. It vanished. He started back a step in
dismay. It was there again, as beautiful as ever. So he contented
himself with standing as near it as he might, and watching the forms
that ascended the glorious colours towards the unknown height of the
arch, which did not end abruptly, but faded away in the blue air, so
gradually that he could not say where it ceased.

When the thought of the golden key returned, the boy very wisely
proceeded to mark out in his mind the space covered by the foundation
of the rainbow, in order that he might know where to search, should the
rainbow disappear. It was based chiefly upon a bed of moss.

Meantime it had grown quite dark in the wood. The rainbow alone was
visible by its own light. But the moment the moon rose the rainbow
vanished. Nor could any change of place restore the vision to the boy's
eyes. So he threw himself down upon the mossy bed, to wait till the
sunlight would give him a chance of finding the key. There he fell fast
asleep.

When he woke in the morning the sun was looking straight into his eyes.
He turned away from it, and the same moment saw a brilliant little
thing lying on the moss within a foot of his face. It was the golden
key. The pipe of it was of plain gold, as bright as gold could be. The
handle was curiously wrought and set with sapphires. In a terror of
delight he put out his hand and took it, and had it.

He lay for a while, turning it over and over, and feeding his eyes upon
its beauty. Then he jumped to his feet, remembering that the pretty
thing was of no use to him yet. Where was the lock to which the key
belonged? It must be somewhere, for how could anybody be so silly as
make a key for which there was no lock? Where should he go to look for
it? He gazed about him, up into the air, down to the earth, but saw no
keyhole in the clouds, in the grass, or in the trees.

Just as he began to grow disconsolate, however, he saw something
glimmering in the wood. It was a mere glimmer that he saw, but he took
it for a glimmer of rainbow, and went towards it.--And now I will go
back to the borders of the forest.

Not far from the house where the boy had lived there was another house,
the owner of which was a merchant, who was much away from home. He had
lost his wife some years before, and had only one child, a little girl,
whom he left to the charge of two servants, who were very idle and
careless. So she was neglected and left untidy, and was sometimes
ill-used besides.

Now, it is well known that the little creatures commonly called
fairies, though there are many different kinds of fairies in Fairyland,
have an exceeding dislike to untidiness. Indeed, they are quite
spiteful to slovenly people. Being used to all the lovely ways of the
trees and flowers, and to the neatness of the birds and all woodland
creatures, it makes them feel miserable, even in their deep woods and
on their grassy carpets, to think that within the same moonlight lies a
dirty, uncomfortable, slovenly house. And this makes them angry with
the people that live in it, and they would gladly drive them out of the
world if they could. They want the whole earth nice and clean. So they
pinch the maids black and blue, and play them all manner of
uncomfortable tricks.

But this house was quite a shame, and the fairies in the forest could
not endure it. They tried everything on the maids without effect, and
at last resolved upon making a clean riddance, beginning with the
child. They ought to have known that it was not her fault, but they
have little principle and much mischief in them, and they thought that
if they got rid of her the maids would be sure to be turned away.

So one evening, the poor little girl having been put to bed early,
before the sun was down, the servants went off to the village, locking
the door behind them. The child did not know she was alone, and lay
contentedly looking out of her window towards the forest, of which,
however, she could not see much, because of the ivy and other creeping
plants which had straggled across her window. All at once she saw an
ape making faces at her out of the mirror, and the heads carved upon a
great old wardrobe grinning fearfully. Then two old spider-legged
chairs came forward into the middle of the room, and began to dance a
queer, old-fashioned dance. This set her laughing, and she forgot the
ape and the grinning heads. So the fairies saw they had made a mistake,
and sent the chairs back to their places. But they knew that she had
been reading the story of Silverhair all day. So the next moment she
heard the voices of the three bears upon the stair, big voice, middle
voice, and little voice, and she heard their soft, heavy tread, as if
they had had stockings over their boots, coming nearer and nearer to
the door of her room, till she could bear it no longer. She did just as
Silverhair did, and as the fairies wanted her to do: she darted to the
window, pulled it open, got upon the ivy, and so scrambled to the
ground. She then fled to the forest as fast as she could run.

Now, although she did not know it, this was the very best way she could
have gone; for nothing is ever so mischievous in its own place as it is
out of it; and, besides, these mischievous creatures were only the
children of Fairyland, as it were, and there are many other beings
there as well; and if a wanderer gets in among them, the good ones will
always help him more than the evil ones will be able to hurt him.

The sun was now set, and the darkness coming on, but the child thought
of no danger but the bears behind her. If she had looked round,
however, she would have seen that she was followed by a very different
creature from a bear. It was a curious creature, made like a fish, but
covered, instead of scales, with feathers of all colours, sparkling
like those of a humming-bird. It had fins, not wings, and swam through
the air as a fish does through the water. Its head was like the head of
a small owl.

After running a long way, and as the last of the light was
disappearing, she passed under a tree with drooping branches. It
dropped its branches to the ground all about her, and caught her as in
a trap. She struggled to get out, but the branches pressed her closer
and closer to the trunk. She was in great terror and distress, when the
air-fish, swimming into the thicket of branches, began tearing them
with its beak. They loosened their hold at once, and the creature went
on attacking them, till at length they let the child go. Then the
air-fish came from behind her, and swam on in front, glittering and
sparkling all lovely colours; and she followed.

It led her gently along till all at once it swam in at a cottage-door.
The child followed still. There was a bright fire in the middle of the
floor, upon which stood a pot without a lid, full of water that boiled
and bubbled furiously. The air-fish swam straight to the pot and into
the boiling water, where it lay quiet. A beautiful woman rose from the
opposite side of the fire and came to meet the girl. She took her up in
her arms, and said,--

"Ah, you are come at last! I have been looking for you a long time."

She sat down with her on her lap, and there the girl sat staring at
her. She had never seen anything so beautiful. She was tall and strong,
with white arms and neck, and a delicate flush on her face. The child
could not tell what was the colour of her hair, but could not help
thinking it had a tinge of dark green. She had not one ornament upon
her, but she looked as if she had just put off quantities of diamonds
and emeralds. Yet here she was in the simplest, poorest little cottage,
where she was evidently at home. She was dressed in shining green.

The girl looked at the lady, and the lady looked at the girl.

"What is your name?" asked the lady.

"The servants always call me Tangle."

"Ah, that was because your hair was so untidy. But that was their
fault, the naughty women! Still it is a pretty name, and I will call
you Tangle too. You must not mind my asking you questions, for you may
ask me the same questions, every one of them, and any others that you
like. How old are you?"

"Ten," answered Tangle.

"You don't look like it," said the lady.

"How old are you, please?" returned Tangle.

"Thousands of years old," answered the lady.

"You don't look like it," said Tangle.

"Don't I? I think I do. Don't you see how beautiful I am?"

And her great blue eyes looked down on the little Tangle, as if all the
stars in the sky were melted in them to make their brightness.

"Ah! but," said Tangle, "when people live long they grow old. At least
I always thought so."

"I have no time to grow old," said the lady. "I am too busy for that.
It is very idle to grow old.--But I cannot have my little girl so
untidy. Do you know I can't find a clean spot on your face to kiss?"

"Perhaps," suggested Tangle, feeling ashamed, but not too much so to
say a word for herself--"perhaps that is because the tree made me cry
so."

"My poor darling!" said the lady, looking now as if the moon were
melted in her eyes, and kissing her little face, dirty as it was, "the
naughty tree must suffer for making a girl cry."

"And what is your name, please?" asked Tangle.

"Grandmother," answered the lady.

"Is it really?"

"Yes, indeed. I never tell stories, even in fun."

"How good of you!"

"I couldn't if I tried. It would come true if I said it, and then I
should be punished enough." And she smiled like the sun through a
summer-shower.

"But now," she went on, "I must get you washed and dressed, and then we
shall have some supper."

"Oh! I had supper long ago," said Tangle.

"Yes, indeed you had," answered the lady--"three years ago. You don't
know that it is three years since you ran away from the bears. You are
thirteen and more now."

Tangle could only stare. She felt quite sure it was true.

"You will not be afraid of anything I do with you--will you?" said the
lady.

"I will try very hard not to be; but I can't be certain, you know,"
replied Tangle.

"I like your saying so, and I shall be quite satisfied," answered the
lady.

She took off the girl's night-gown, rose with her in her arms, and
going to the wall of the cottage, opened a door. Then Tangle saw a deep
tank, the sides of which were filled with green plants, which had
flowers of all colours. There was a roof over it like the roof of the
cottage. It was filled with beautiful clear water, in which swam a
multitude of such fishes as the one that had led her to the cottage. It
was the light their colours gave that showed the place in which they
were.

The lady spoke some words Tangle could not understand, and threw her
into the tank.

The fishes came crowding about her. Two or three of them got under her
head and kept it up. The rest of them rubbed themselves all over her,
and with their wet feathers washed her quite clean. Then the lady, who
had been looking on all the time, spoke again; whereupon some thirty or
forty of the fishes rose out of the water underneath Tangle, and so
bore her up to the arms the lady held out to take her. She carried her
back to the fire, and, having dried her well, opened a chest, and
taking out the finest linen garments, smelling of grass and lavender,
put them upon her, and over all a green dress, just like her own,
shining like hers, and soft like hers, and going into just such lovely
folds from the waist, where it was tied with a brown cord, to her bare
feet.

"Won't you give me a pair of shoes too, Grandmother?" said Tangle.

"No, my dear; no shoes. Look here. I wear no shoes."

So saying she lifted her dress a little, and there were the loveliest
white feet, but no shoes. Then Tangle was content to go without shoes
too. And the lady sat down with her again, and combed her hair, and
brushed it, and then left it to dry while she got the supper.

First she got bread out of one hole in the wall; then milk out of
another; then several kinds of fruit out of a third; and then she went
to the pot on the fire, and took out the fish, now nicely cooked, and,
as soon as she had pulled off its feathered skin, ready to be eaten.

"But," exclaimed Tangle. And she stared at the fish, and could say no
more.

"I know what you mean," returned the lady. "You do not like to eat the
messenger that brought you home. But it is the kindest return you can
make. The creature was afraid to go until it saw me put the pot on, and
heard me promise it should be boiled the moment it returned with you.
Then it darted out of the door at once. You saw it go into the pot of
itself the moment it entered, did you not?"

"I did," answered Tangle, "and I thought it very strange; but then I
saw you, and forgot all about the fish."

"In Fairyland," resumed the lady, as they sat down to the table, "the
ambition of the animals is to be eaten by the people; for that is their
highest end in that condition. But they are not therefore destroyed.
Out of that pot comes something more than the dead fish, you will see."

Tangle now remarked that the lid was on the pot. But the lady took no
further notice of it till they had eaten the fish, which Tangle found
nicer than any fish she had ever tasted before. It was as white as
snow, and as delicate as cream. And the moment she had swallowed a
mouthful of it, a change she could not describe began to take place in
her. She heard a murmuring all about her, which became more and more
articulate, and at length, as she went on eating, grew intelligible. By
the time she had finished her share, the sounds of all the animals in
the forest came crowding through the door to her ears; for the door
still stood wide open, though it was pitch dark outside; and they were
no longer sounds only; they were speech, and speech that she could
understand. She could tell what the insects in the cottage were saying
to each other too. She had even a suspicion that the trees and flowers
all about the cottage were holding midnight communications with each
other; but what they said she could not hear.

As soon as the fish was eaten, the lady went to the fire and took the
lid off the pot. A lovely little creature in human shape, with large
white wings, rose out of it, and flew round and round the roof of the
cottage; then dropped, fluttering, and nestled in the lap of the lady.
She spoke to it some strange words, carried it to the door, and threw
it out into the darkness. Tangle heard the flapping of its wings die
away in the distance.

"Now have we done the fish any harm?" she said, returning.

"No," answered Tangle, "I do not think we have. I should not mind
eating one every day."

"They must wait their time, like you and me too, my little Tangle."

And she smiled a smile which the sadness in it made more lovely.

"But," she continued, "I think we may have one for supper to-morrow."

So saying she went to the door of the tank, and spoke; and now Tangle
understood her perfectly.

"I want one of you," she said,--"the wisest."

Thereupon the fishes got together in the middle of the tank, with their
heads forming a circle above the water, and their tails a larger circle
beneath it. They were holding a council, in which their relative wisdom
should be determined. At length one of them flew up into the lady's
hand, looking lively and ready.

"You know where the rainbow stands?" she asked.

"Yes, Mother, quite well," answered the fish.

"Bring home a young man you will find there, who does not know where to
go."

The fish was out of the door in a moment. Then the lady told Tangle it
was time to go to bed; and, opening another door in the side of the
cottage, showed her a little arbour, cool and green, with a bed of
purple heath growing in it, upon which she threw a large wrapper made
of the feathered skins of the wise fishes, shining gorgeous in the
firelight.

Tangle was soon lost in the strangest, loveliest dreams. And the
beautiful lady was in every one of her dreams.

In the morning she woke to the rustling of leaves over her head, and
the sound of running water. But, to her surprise, she could find no
door--nothing but the moss-grown wall of the cottage. So she crept
through an opening in the arbour, and stood in the forest. Then she
bathed in a stream that ran merrily through the trees, and felt
happier; for having once been in her grandmother's pond, she must be
clean and tidy ever after; and, having put on her green dress, felt
like a lady.

She spent that day in the wood, listening to the birds and beasts and
creeping things. She understood all that they said, though she could
not repeat a word of it; and every kind had a different language, while
there was a common though more limited understanding between all the
inhabitants of the forest. She saw nothing of the beautiful lady, but
she felt that she was near her all the time; and she took care not to
go out of sight of the cottage. It was round, like a snow-hut or a
wigwam; and she could see neither door nor window in it. The fact was,
it had no windows; and though it was full of doors, they all opened
from the inside, and could not even be seen from the outside.

She was standing at the foot of a tree in the twilight, listening to a
quarrel between a mole and a squirrel, in which the mole told the
squirrel that the tail was the best of him, and the squirrel called the
mole Spade-fists, when, the darkness having deepened around her, she
became aware of something shining in her face, and looking round, saw
that the door of the cottage was open, and the red light of the fire
flowing from it like a river through the darkness. She left Mole and
Squirrel to settle matters as they might, and darted off to the
cottage. Entering, she found the pot boiling on the fire, and the
grand, lovely lady sitting on the other side of it.

"I've been watching you all day," said the lady. "You shall have
something to eat by and by, but we must wait till our supper comes
home."

She took Tangle on her knee, and began to sing to her--such songs as
made her wish she could listen to them for ever. But at length in
rushed the shining fish, and snuggled down in the pot. It was followed
by a youth who had outgrown his worn garments. His face was ruddy with
health, and in his hand he carried a little jewel, which sparkled in
the firelight.

The first words the lady said were,--

"What is that in your hand, Mossy?"

Now Mossy was the name his companions had given him, because he had a
favourite stone covered with moss, on which he used to sit whole days
reading; and they said the moss had begun to grow upon him too.

Mossy held out his hand. The moment the lady saw that it was the golden
key, she rose from her chair, kissed Mossy on the forehead, made him
sit down on her seat, and stood before him like a servant. Mossy could
not bear this, and rose at once. But the lady begged him, with tears in
her beautiful eyes, to sit, and let her wait on him.

"But you are a great, splendid, beautiful lady," said Mossy.

"Yes, I am. But I work all day long--that is my pleasure; and you will
have to leave me so soon!"

"How do you know that, if you please, madam?" asked Mossy.

"Because you have got the golden key."

"But I don't know what it is for. I can't find the key-hole. Will you
tell me what to do?"

"You must look for the key-hole. That is your work. I cannot help you.
I can only tell you that if you look for it you will find it."

"What kind of box will it open? What is there inside?"

"I do not know. I dream about it, but I know nothing."

"Must I go at once?"

"You may stop here to-night, and have some of my supper. But you must
go in the morning. All I can do for you is to give you clothes. Here is
a girl called Tangle, whom you must take with you."

"That _will_ be nice," said Mossy.

"No, no!" said Tangle. "I don't want to leave you, please,
Grandmother."

"You must go with him, Tangle. I am sorry to lose you, but it will be
the best thing for you. Even the fishes, you see, have to go into the
pot, and then out into the dark. If you fall in with the Old Man of the
Sea, mind you ask him whether he has not got some more fishes ready for
me. My tank is getting thin."

So saying, she took the fish from the pot, and put the lid on as
before. They sat down and ate the fish, and then the winged creature
rose from the pot, circled the roof, and settled on the lady's lap. She
talked to it, carried it to the door, and threw it out into the dark.
They heard the flap of its wings die away in the distance.

The lady then showed Mossy into just such another chamber as that of
Tangle; and in the morning he found a suit of clothes laid beside him.
He looked very handsome in them. But the wearer of Grandmother's
clothes never thinks about how he or she looks, but thinks always how
handsome other people are.

Tangle was very unwilling to go.

"Why should I leave you? I don't know the young man," she said to the
lady.

"I am never allowed to keep my children long. You need not go with him
except you please, but you must go some day; and I should like you to
go with him, for he has the golden key. No girl need be afraid to go
with a youth that has the golden key. You will take care of her, Mossy,
will you not?"

"That I will," said Mossy.

And Tangle cast a glance at him, and thought she should like to go with
him.

"And," said the lady, "if you should lose each other as you go through
the--the--I never can remember the name of that country,--do not be
afraid, but go on and on."

She kissed Tangle on the mouth and Mossy on the forehead, led them to
the door, and waved her hand eastward. Mossy and Tangle took each
other's hand and walked away into the depth of the forest. In his right
hand Mossy held the golden key.

They wandered thus a long way, with endless amusement from the talk of
the animals. They soon learned enough of their language to ask them
necessary questions. The squirrels were always friendly, and gave them
nuts out of their own hoards; but the bees were selfish and rude,
justifying themselves on the ground that Tangle and Mossy were not
subjects of their queen, and charity must begin at home, though indeed
they had not one drone in their poorhouse at the time. Even the
blinking moles would fetch them an earth-nut or a truffle now and then,
talking as if their mouths, as well as their eyes and ears, were full
of cotton wool, or their own velvety fur. By the time they got out of
the forest they were very fond of each other, and Tangle was not in the
least sorry that her grandmother had sent her away with Mossy.

At length the trees grew smaller, and stood farther apart, and the
ground began to rise, and it got more and more steep, till the trees
were all left behind, and the two were climbing a narrow path with
rocks on each side. Suddenly they came upon a rude doorway, by which
they entered a narrow gallery cut in the rock. It grew darker and
darker, till it was pitch-dark, and they had to feel their way. At
length the light began to return, and at last they came out upon a
narrow path on the face of a lofty precipice. This path went winding
down the rock to a wide plain, circular in shape, and surrounded on all
sides by mountains. Those opposite to them were a great way off, and
towered to an awful height, shooting up sharp, blue, ice-enamelled
pinnacles. An utter silence reigned where they stood. Not even the
sound of water reached them.

Looking down, they could not tell whether the valley below was a grassy
plain or a great still lake. They had never seen any space look like
it. The way to it was difficult and dangerous, but down the narrow path
they went, and reached the bottom in safety. They found it composed of
smooth, light-coloured sandstone, undulating in parts, but mostly
level. It was no wonder to them now that they had not been able to tell
what it was, for this surface was everywhere crowded with shadows. The
mass was chiefly made up of the shadows of leaves innumerable, of all
lovely and imaginative forms, waving to and fro, floating and quivering
in the breath of a breeze whose motion was unfelt, whose sound was
unheard. No forests clothed the mountain-sides, no trees were anywhere
to be seen, and yet the shadows of the leaves, branches, and stems of
all various trees covered the valley as far as their eyes could reach.
They soon spied the shadows of flowers mingled with those of the
leaves, and now and then the shadow of a bird with open beak, and
throat distended with song. At times would appear the forms of strange,
graceful creatures, running up and down the shadow-boles and along the
branches, to disappear in the wind-tossed foliage. As they walked they
waded knee-deep in the lovely lake. For the shadows were not merely
lying on the surface of the ground, but heaped up above it like
substantial forms of darkness, as if they had been cast upon a thousand
different planes of the air. Tangle and Mossy often lifted their heads
and gazed upwards to discry whence the shadows came; but they could see
nothing more than a bright mist spread above them, higher than the tops
of the mountains, which stood clear against it. No forests, no leaves,
no birds were visible.

After a while, they reached more open spaces, where the shadows were
thinner; and came even to portions over which shadows only flitted,
leaving them clear for such as might follow. Now a wonderful form, half
bird-like half human, would float across on outspread sailing pinions.
Anon an exquisite shadow group of gambolling children would be followed
by the loveliest female form, and that again by the grand stride of a
Titanic shape, each disappearing in the surrounding press of shadowy
foliage. Sometimes a profile of unspeakable beauty or grandeur would
appear for a moment and vanish. Sometimes they seemed lovers that
passed linked arm in arm, sometimes father and son, sometimes brothers
in loving contest, sometimes sisters entwined in gracefullest community
of complex form. Sometimes wild horses would tear across, free, or
bestrode by noble shadows of ruling men. But some of the things which
pleased them most they never knew how to describe.

About the middle of the plain they sat down to rest in the heart of a
heap of shadows. After sitting for a while, each, looking up, saw the
other in tears: they were each longing after the country whence the
shadows fell.

"We _must_ find the country from which the shadows come," said Mossy.

"We must, dear Mossy," responded Tangle. "What if your golden key
should be the key to _it_?"

"Ah! that would be grand," returned Mossy.--"But we must rest here for
a little, and then we shall be able to cross the plain before night."

So he lay down on the ground, and about him on every side, and over his
head, was the constant play of the wonderful shadows. He could look
through them, and see the one behind the other, till they mixed in a
mass of darkness. Tangle, too, lay admiring, and wondering, and longing
after the country whence the shadows came. When they were rested they
rose and pursued their journey.

How long they were in crossing this plain I cannot tell; but before
night Mossy's hair was streaked with gray, and Tangle had got wrinkles
on her forehead.

As evening grew on, the shadows fell deeper and rose higher. At length
they reached a place where they rose above their heads, and made all
dark around them. Then they took hold of each other's hand, and walked
on in silence and in some dismay. They felt the gathering darkness, and
something strangely solemn besides, and the beauty of the shadows
ceased to delight them. All at once Tangle found that she had not a
hold of Mossy's hand, though when she lost it she could not tell.

"Mossy, Mossy!" she cried aloud in terror.

But no Mossy replied.

A moment after, the shadows sank to her feet, and down under her feet,
and the mountains rose before her. She turned towards the gloomy region
she had left, and called once more upon Mossy. There the gloom lay
tossing and heaving, a dark, stormy, foamless sea of shadows, but no
Mossy rose out of it, or came climbing up the hill on which she stood.
She threw herself down and wept in despair.

Suddenly she remembered that the beautiful lady had told them, if they
lost each other in a country of which she could not remember the name,
they were not to be afraid, but to go straight on.

"And besides," she said to herself, "Mossy has the golden key, and so
no harm will come to him, I do believe."

She rose from the ground, and went on.

Before long she arrived at a precipice, in the face of which a stair
was cut. When she had ascended half-way, the stair ceased, and the path
led straight into the mountain. She was afraid to enter, and turning
again towards the stair, grew giddy at sight of the depth beneath her,
and was forced to throw herself down in the mouth of the cave.

When she opened her eyes, she saw a beautiful little figure with wings
standing beside her, waiting.

"I know you," said Tangle. "You are my fish."

"Yes. But I am a fish no longer. I am an a�ranth now."

"What is that?" asked Tangle.

"What you see I am," answered the shape. "And I am come to lead you
through the mountain."

"Oh! thank you, dear fish--a�ranth, I mean," returned Tangle, rising.

Thereupon the a�ranth took to his wings, and flew on through the long,
narrow passage, reminding Tangle very much of the way he had swum on
before her when he was a fish. And the moment his white wings moved,
they began to throw off a continuous shower of sparks of all colours,
which lighted up the passage before them.--All at once he vanished, and
Tangle heard a low, sweet sound, quite different from the rush and
crackle of his wings. Before her was an open arch, and through it came
light, mixed with the sound of sea-waves.

She hurried out, and fell, tired and happy, upon the yellow sand of the
shore. There she lay, half asleep with weariness and rest, listening to
the low plash and retreat of the tiny waves, which seemed ever enticing
the land to leave off being land, and become sea. And as she lay, her
eyes were fixed upon the foot of a great rainbow standing far away
against the sky on the other side of the sea. At length she fell fast
asleep.

When she awoke, she saw an old man with long white hair down to his
shoulders, leaning upon a stick covered with green buds, and so bending
over her.

"What do you want here, beautiful woman?" he said.

"Am I beautiful? I am so glad!" said Tangle, rising. "My grandmother is
beautiful."

"Yes. But what do you want?" he repeated, kindly.

"I think I want you. Are not you the Old Man of the Sea?"

"I am."

"Then Grandmother says, have you any more fishes ready for her?"

"We will go and see, my dear," answered the old man, speaking yet more
kindly than before. "And I can do something for you, can I not?"

"Yes--show me the way up to the country from which the shadows fall,"
said Tangle.

For there she hoped to find Mossy again.

"Ah! indeed, that would be worth doing," said the old man. "But I
cannot, for I do not know the way myself. But I will send you to the
Old Man of the Earth. Perhaps he can tell you. He is much older than I
am."

Leaning on his staff, he conducted her along the shore to a steep rock,
that looked like a petrified ship turned upside down. The door of it
was the rudder of a great vessel, ages ago at the bottom of the sea.
Immediately within the door was a stair in the rock, down which the old
man went, and Tangle followed. At the bottom the old man had his house,
and there he lived.

As soon as she entered it, Tangle heard a strange noise, unlike
anything she had ever heard before. She soon found that it was the
fishes talking. She tried to understand what they said; but their
speech was so old-fashioned, and rude, and undefined, that she could
not make much of it.

"I will go and see about those fishes for my daughter," said the Old
Man of the Sea.

And moving a slide in the wall of his house, he first looked out, and
then tapped upon a thick piece of crystal that filled the round
opening. Tangle came up behind him, and peeping through the window into
the heart of the great deep green ocean, saw the most curious
creatures, some very ugly, all very odd, and with especially queer
mouths, swimming about everywhere, above and below, but all coming
towards the window in answer to the tap of the Old Man of the Sea. Only
a few could get their mouths against the glass; but those who were
floating miles away yet turned their heads towards it. The old man
looked through the whole flock carefully for some minutes, and then
turning to Tangle, said,--

"I am sorry I have not got one ready yet. I want more time than she
does. But I will send some as soon as I can."

He then shut the slide.

Presently a great noise arose in the sea. The old man opened the slide
again, and tapped on the glass, whereupon the fishes were all as still
as sleep.

"They were only talking about you," he said. "And they do speak such
nonsense!--To-morrow," he continued, "I must show you the way to the
Old Man of the Earth. He lives a long way from here."

"Do let me go at once," said Tangle.

"No. That is not possible. You must come this way first."

He led her to a hole in the wall, which she had not observed before. It
was covered with the green leaves and white blossoms of a creeping
plant.

"Only white-blossoming plants can grow under the sea," said the old
man. "In there you will find a bath, in which you must lie till I call
you."

Tangle went in, and found a smaller room or cave, in the further corner
of which was a great basin hollowed out of a rock, and half-full of the
clearest sea-water. Little streams were constantly running into it from
cracks in the wall of the cavern. It was polished quite smooth inside,
and had a carpet of yellow sand in the bottom of it. Large green leaves
and white flowers of various plants crowded up and over it, draping and
covering it almost entirely.

No sooner was she undressed and lying in the bath, than she began to
feel as if the water were sinking into her, and she were receiving all
the good of sleep without undergoing its forgetfulness. She felt the
good coming all the time. And she grew happier and more hopeful than
she had been since she lost Mossy. But she could not help thinking how
very sad it was for a poor old man to live there all alone, and have to
take care of a whole seaful of stupid and riotous fishes.

After about an hour, as she thought, she heard his voice calling her,
and rose out of the bath. All the fatigue and aching of her long
journey had vanished. She was as whole, and strong, and well as if she
had slept for seven days.

Returning to the opening that led into the other part of the house, she
started back with amazement, for through it she saw the form of a grand
man, with a majestic and beautiful face, waiting for her.

"Come," he said; "I see you are ready."

She entered with reverence.

"Where is the Old Man of the Sea?" she asked, humbly.

"There is no one here but me," he answered, smiling. "Some people call
me the Old Man of the Sea. Others have another name for me, and are
terribly frightened when they meet me taking a walk by the shore.
Therefore I avoid being seen by them, for they are so afraid, that they
never see what I really am. You see me now.--But I must show you the
way to the Old Man of the Earth."

He led her into the cave where the bath was, and there she saw, in the
opposite corner, a second opening in the rock.

"Go down that stair, and it will bring you to him," said the Old Man of
the Sea.

With humble thanks Tangle took her leave. She went down the winding
stair, till she began to fear there was no end to it. Still down and
down it went, rough and broken, with springs of water bursting out of
the rocks and running down the steps beside her. It was quite dark
about her, and yet she could see. For after being in that bath,
people's eyes always give out a light they can see by. There were no
creeping things in the way. All was safe and pleasant though so dark
and damp and deep.

At last there was not one step more, and she found herself in a
glimmering cave. On a stone in the middle of it sat a figure with its
back towards her--the figure of an old man bent double with age. From
behind she could see his white beard spread out on the rocky floor in
front of him. He did not move as she entered, so she passed round that
she might stand before him and speak to him.

The moment she looked in his face, she saw that he was a youth of
marvellous beauty. He sat entranced with the delight of what he beheld
in a mirror of something like silver, which lay on the floor at his
feet, and which from behind she had taken for his white beard. He sat
on, heedless of her presence, pale with the joy of his vision. She
stood and watched him. At length, all trembling, she spoke. But her
voice made no sound. Yet the youth lifted up his head. He showed no
surprise, however, at seeing her--only smiled a welcome.

"Are you the Old Man of the Earth?" Tangle had said.

And the youth answered, and Tangle heard him, though not with her
ears:--

"I am. What can I do for you?"

"Tell me the way to the country whence the shadows fall."

"Ah! that I do not know. I only dream about it myself. I see its
shadows sometimes in my mirror: the way to it I do not know. But I
think the Old Man of the Fire must know. He is much older than I am. He
is the oldest man of all."

"Where does he live?"

"I will show you the way to his place. I never saw him myself."

So saying, the young man rose, and then stood for a while gazing at
Tangle.

"I wish I could see that country too," he said. "But I must mind my
work."

He led her to the side of the cave, and told her to lay her ear against
the wall.

"What do you hear?" he asked.

"I hear," answered Tangle, "the sound of a great water running inside
the rock."

"That river runs down to the dwelling of the oldest man of all--the Old
Man of the Fire. I wish I could go to see him. But I must mind my work.
That river is the only way to him."

Then the Old Man of the Earth stooped over the floor of the cave,
raised a huge stone from it, and left it leaning. It disclosed a great
hole that went plumb-down.

"That is the way," he said.

"But there are no stairs."

"You must throw yourself in. There is no other way."

She turned and looked him full in the face--stood so for a whole
minute, as she thought: it was a whole year--then threw herself
headlong into the hole.

When she came to herself, she found herself gliding down fast and deep.
Her head was under water, but that did not signify, for, when she
thought about it, she could not remember that she had breathed once
since her bath in the cave of the Old Man of the Sea. When she lifted
up her head a sudden and fierce heat struck her, and she sank it again
instantly, and went sweeping on.

Gradually the stream grew shallower. At length she could hardly keep
her head under. Then the water could carry her no farther. She rose
from the channel, and went step for step down the burning descent. The
water ceased altogether. The heat was terrible. She felt scorched to
the bone, but it did not touch her strength. It grew hotter and hotter.
She said, "I can bear it no longer." Yet she went on.

At the long last, the stair ended at a rude archway in an all but
glowing rock. Through this archway Tangle fell exhausted into a cool
mossy cave. The floor and walls were covered with moss--green, soft,
and damp. A little stream spouted from a rent in the rock and fell into
a basin of moss. She plunged her face into it and drank. Then she
lifted her head and looked around. Then she rose and looked again. She
saw no one in the cave. But the moment she stood upright she had a
marvellous sense that she was in the secret of the earth and all its
ways. Everything she had seen, or learned from books; all that her
grandmother had said or sung to her; all the talk of the beasts, birds,
and fishes; all that had happened to her on her journey with Mossy, and
since then in the heart of the earth with the Old man and the Older
man--all was plain: she understood it all, and saw that everything
meant the same thing, though she could not have put it into words
again.

The next moment she descried, in a corner of the cave, a little naked
child sitting on the moss. He was playing with balls of various colours
and sizes, which he disposed in strange figures upon the floor beside
him. And now Tangle felt that there was something in her knowledge
which was not in her understanding. For she knew there must be an
infinite meaning in the change and sequence and individual forms of the
figures into which the child arranged the balls, as well as in the
varied harmonies of their colours, but what it all meant she could not
tell.* He went on busily, tirelessly, playing his solitary game,
without looking up, or seeming to know that there was a stranger in his
deep-withdrawn cell. Diligently as a lace-maker shifts her bobbins, he
shifted and arranged his balls. Flashes of meaning would now pass from
them to Tangle, and now again all would be not merely obscure, but
utterly dark. She stood looking for a long time, for there was
fascination in the sight; and the longer she looked the more an
indescribable vague intelligence went on rousing itself in her mind.
For seven years she had stood there watching the naked child with his
coloured balls, and it seemed to her like seven hours, when all at once
the shape the balls took, she knew not why, reminded her of the Valley
of Shadows, and she spoke:--

"Where is the Old Man of the Fire?" she said.

* I think I must be indebted to Novalis for these geometrical figures.

"Here I am," answered the child, rising and leaving his balls on the
moss. "What can I do for you?"

There was such an awfulness of absolute repose on the face of the child
that Tangle stood dumb before him. He had no smile, but the love in his
large gray eyes was deep as the centre. And with the repose there lay
on his face a shimmer as of moonlight, which seemed as if any moment it
might break into such a ravishing smile as would cause the beholder to
weep himself to death. But the smile never came, and the moonlight lay
there unbroken. For the heart of the child was too deep for any smile
to reach from it to his face.

"Are you the oldest man of all?" Tangle at length, although filled with
awe, ventured to ask.

"Yes, I am. I am very, very old. I am able to help you, I know. I can
help everybody." And the child drew near and looked up in her face so
that she burst into tears.

"Can you tell me the way to the country the shadows fall from?" she
sobbed.

"Yes. I know the way quite well. I go there myself sometimes. But you
could not go my way; you are not old enough. I will show you how you
can go."

"Do not send me out into the great heat again," prayed Tangle.

"I will not," answered the child.

And he reached up, and put his little cool hand on her heart.

"Now," he said, "you can go. The fire will not burn you. Come."

He led her from the cave, and following him through another archway,
she found herself in a vast desert of sand and rock. The sky of it was
of rock, lowering over them like solid thunderclouds; and the whole
place was so hot that she saw, in bright rivulets, the yellow gold and
white silver and red copper trickling molten from the rocks. But the
heat never came near her.

When they had gone some distance, the child turned up a great stone,
and took something like an egg from under it. He next drew a long
curved line in the sand with his finger, and laid the egg in it. He
then spoke something Tangle could not understand. The egg broke, a
small snake came out, and, lying in the line in the sand, grew and grew
till he filled it. The moment he was thus full-grown, he began to glide
away, undulating like a sea-wave.

"Follow that serpent," said the child. "He will lead you the right
way."

Tangle followed the serpent. But she could not go far without looking
back at the marvellous child. He stood alone in the midst of the
glowing desert, beside a fountain of red flame that had burst forth at
his feet, his naked whiteness glimmering a pale rosy red in the torrid
fire. There he stood, looking after her, till, from the lengthening
distance, she could see him no more. The serpent went straight on,
turning neither to the right nor left.


Meantime Mossy had got out of the Lake of Shadows, and, following his
mournful, lonely way, had reached the sea-shore. It was a dark, stormy
evening. The sun had set. The wind was blowing from the sea. The waves
had surrounded the rock within which lay the old man's house. A deep
water rolled between it and the shore, upon which a majestic figure was
walking alone.

Mossy went up to him and said,--

"Will you tell me where to find the Old Man of the Sea?"

"I am the Old Man of the Sea," the figure answered.

"I see a strong kingly man of middle age," returned Mossy.

Then the old man looked at him more intently, and said,--

"Your sight, young man, is better than that of most who take this way.
The night is stormy: come to my house and tell me what I can do for
you."

Mossy followed him. The waves flew from before the footsteps of the Old
Man of the Sea, and Mossy followed upon dry sand.

When they had reached the cave, they sat down and gazed at each other.

Now Mossy was an old man by this time. He looked much older than the
Old Man of the Sea, and his feet were very weary.

After looking at him for a moment, the old man took him by the hand and
led him into his inner cave. There he helped him to undress, and laid
him in the bath. And he saw that one of his hands Mossy did not open.

"What have you in that hand?" he asked.

Mossy opened his hand, and there lay the golden key.

"Ah!" said the old man, "that accounts for your knowing me. And I know
the way you have to go."

"I want to find the country whence the shadows fall," said Mossy.

"I dare say you do. So do I. But meantime, one thing is certain.--What
is that key for, do you think?"

"For a key-hole somewhere. But I don't know why I keep it. I never
could find the key-hole. And I have lived a good while, I believe,"
said Mossy, sadly. "I'm not sure that I'm not old. I know my feet
ache."

"Do they?" said the old man, as if he really meant to ask the question;
and Mossy, who was still lying in the bath, watched his feet for a
moment before he replied,--"No, they do not. Perhaps I am not old
either."

"Get up and look at yourself in the water."

He rose and looked at himself in the water, and there was not a gray
hair on his head or a wrinkle on his skin.

"You have tasted of death now," said the old man. "Is it good?"

"It is good," said Mossy. "It is better than life."

"No, said the old man: it is only more life.--Your feet will make no
holes in the water now."

"What do you mean?"

"I will show you that presently."

They returned to the outer cave, and sat and talked together for a long
time. At length the Old Man of the Sea rose, and said to Mossy,--

"Follow me."

He led him up the stair again, and opened another door. They stood on
the level of the raging sea, looking towards the east. Across the waste
of waters, against the bosom of a fierce black cloud, stood the foot of
a rainbow, glowing in the dark.

"This indeed is my way," said Mossy, as soon as he saw the rainbow, and
stepped out upon the sea. His feet made no holes in the water. He
fought the wind, and clomb the waves, and went on towards the rainbow.

The storm died away. A lovely day and a lovelier night followed. A cool
wind blew over the wide plain of the quiet ocean. And still Mossy
journeyed eastward. But the rainbow had vanished with the storm.

Day after day he held on, and he thought he had no guide. He did not
see how a shining fish under the water directed his steps. He crossed
the sea, and came to a great precipice of rock, up which he could
discover but one path. Nor did this lead him farther than half-way up
the rock, where it ended on a platform. Here he stood and pondered.--It
could not be that the way stopped here, else what was the path for? It
was a rough path, not very plain, yet certainly a path.--He examined
the face of the rock. It was smooth as glass. But as his eyes kept
roving hopelessly over it, something glittered, and he caught sight of
a row of small sapphires. They bordered a little hole in the rock.

"The key-hole!" he cried.

He tried the key. It fitted. It turned. A great clang and clash, as of
iron bolts on huge brazen caldrons, echoed thunderously within. He drew
out the key. The rock in front of him began to fall. He retreated from
it as far as the breadth of the platform would allow. A great slab fell
at his feet. In front was still the solid rock, with this one slab
fallen forward out of it. But the moment he stepped upon it, a second
fell, just short of the edge of the first, making the next step of a
stair, which thus kept dropping itself before him as he ascended into
the heart of the precipice. It led him into a hall fit for such an
approach--irregular and rude in formation, but floor, sides, pillars,
and vaulted roof, all one mass of shining stones of every colour that
light can show. In the centre stood seven columns, ranged from red to
violet. And on the pedestal of one of them sat a woman, motionless,
with her face bowed upon her knees. Seven years had she sat there
waiting. She lifted her head as Mossy drew near. It was Tangle. Her
hair had grown to her feet, and was rippled like the windless sea on
broad sands. Her face was beautiful, like her grandmother's, and as
still and peaceful as that of the Old Man of the Fire. Her form was
tall and noble. Yet Mossy knew her at once.

"How beautiful you are, Tangle!" he said, in delight and astonishment.

"Am I?" she returned. "Oh, I have waited for you so long! But you, you
are like the Old Man of the Sea. No. You are like the Old Man of the
Earth. No, no. You are like the oldest man of all. You are like them
all. And yet you are my own old Mossy! How did you come here? What did
you do after I lost you? Did you find the key-hole? Have you got the
key still?"

She had a hundred questions to ask him, and he a hundred more to ask
her. They told each other all their adventures, and were as happy as
man and woman could be. For they were younger and better, and stronger
and wiser, than they had ever been before.

It began to grow dark. And they wanted more than ever to reach the
country whence the shadows fall. So they looked about them for a way
out of the cave. The door by which Mossy entered had closed again, and
there was half a mile of rock between them and the sea. Neither could
Tangle find the opening in the floor by which the serpent had led her
thither. They searched till it grew so dark that they could see
nothing, and gave it up.

After a while, however, the cave began to glimmer again. The light came
from the moon, but it did not look like moonlight, for it gleamed
through those seven pillars in the middle, and filled the place with
all colours. And now Mossy saw that there was a pillar beside the red
one, which he had not observed before. And it was of the same new
colour that he had seen in the rainbow when he saw it first in the
fairy forest. And on it he saw a sparkle of blue. It was the sapphires
round the key-hole.

He took his key. It turned in the lock to the sound of Aeolian music. A
door opened upon slow hinges, and disclosed a winding stair within. The
key vanished from his fingers. Tangle went up. Mossy followed. The door
closed behind them. They climbed out of the earth; and, still climbing,
rose above it. They were in the rainbow. Far abroad, over ocean and
land, they could see through its transparent walls the earth beneath
their feet. Stairs beside stairs wound up together, and beautiful
beings of all ages climbed along with them.

They knew that they were going up to the country whence the shadows
fall.

And by this time I think they must have got there.






CHAPTER 1

The Mountain

Curdie was the son of Peter the miner.  He lived with his father and
mother in a cottage built on a mountain, and he worked with his father
inside the mountain.

A mountain is a strange and awful thing.  In old times, without knowing
so much of their strangeness and awfulness as we do, people were yet
more afraid of mountains.  But then somehow they had not come to see
how beautiful they are as well as awful, and they hated them--and what
people hate they must fear.  Now that we have learned to look at them
with admiration, perhaps we do not feel quite awe enough of them.  To
me they are beautiful terrors.

I will try to tell you what they are.  They are portions of the heart
of the earth that have escaped from the dungeon down below, and rushed
up and out.  For the heart of the earth is a great wallowing mass, not
of blood, as in the hearts of men and animals, but of glowing hot,
melted metals and stones.  And as our hearts keep us alive, so that
great lump of heat keeps the earth alive: it is a huge power of buried
sunlight--that is what it is.

Now think: out of that cauldron, where all the bubbles would be as big
as the Alps if it could get room for its boiling, certain bubbles have
bubbled out and escaped--up and away, and there they stand in the cool,
cold sky--mountains.  Think of the change, and you will no more wonder
that there should be something awful about the very look of a mountain:
from the darkness--for where the light has nothing to shine upon, much
the same as darkness--from the heat, from the endless tumult of boiling
unrest--up, with a sudden heavenward shoot, into the wind, and the
cold, and the starshine, and a cloak of snow that lies like ermine
above the blue-green mail of the glaciers; and the great sun, their
grandfather, up there in the sky; and their little old cold aunt, the
moon, that comes wandering about the house at night; and everlasting
stillness, except for the wind that turns the rocks and caverns into a
roaring organ for the young archangels that are studying how to let out
the pent-up praises of their hearts, and the molten music of the
streams, rushing ever from the bosoms of the glaciers fresh born.

Think, too, of the change in their own substance--no longer molten and
soft, heaving and glowing, but hard and shining and cold. Think of the
creatures scampering over and burrowing in it, and the birds building
their nests upon it, and the trees growing out of its sides, like hair
to clothe it, and the lovely grass in the valleys, and the gracious
flowers even at the very edge of its armour of ice, like the rich
embroidery of the garment below, and the rivers galloping down the
valleys in a tumult of white and green!  And along with all these,
think of the terrible precipices down which the traveller may fall and
be lost, and the frightful gulfs of blue air cracked in the glaciers,
and the dark profound lakes, covered like little arctic oceans with
floating lumps of ice.

All this outside the mountain!  But the inside, who shall tell what
lies there?  Caverns of awfullest solitude, their walls miles thick,
sparkling with ores of gold or silver, copper or iron, tin or mercury,
studded perhaps with precious stones--perhaps a brook, with eyeless
fish in it, running, running ceaselessly, cold and babbling, through
banks crusted with carbuncles and golden topazes, or over a gravel of
which some of the stones arc rubies and emeralds, perhaps diamonds and
sapphires--who can tell?--and whoever can't tell is free to think--all
waiting to flash, waiting for millions of ages--ever since the earth
flew off from the sun, a great blot of fire, and began to cool.

Then there are caverns full of water, numbingly cold, fiercely
hot--hotter than any boiling water.  From some of these the water
cannot get out, and from others it runs in channels as the blood in the
body: little veins bring it down from the ice above into the great
caverns of the mountain's heart, whence the arteries let it out again,
gushing in pipes and clefts and ducts of all shapes and kinds, through
and through its bulk, until it springs newborn to the light, and rushes
down the Mountainside in torrents, and down the valleys in
rivers--down, down, rejoicing, to the mighty lungs of the world, that
is the sea, where it is tossed in storms and cyclones, heaved up in
billows, twisted in waterspouts, dashed to mist upon rocks, beaten by
millions of tails, and breathed by millions of gills, whence at last,
melted into vapour by the sun, it is lifted up pure into the air, and
borne by the servant winds back to the mountaintops and the snow, the
solid ice, and the molten stream.

Well, when the heart of the earth has thus come rushing up among her
children, bringing with it gifts of all that she possesses, then
straightway into it rush her children to see what they can find there.
With pickaxe and spade and crowbar, with boring chisel and blasting
powder, they force their way back: is it to search for what toys they
may have left in their long-forgotten nurseries? Hence the mountains
that lift their heads into the clear air, and are dotted over with the
dwellings of men, are tunnelled and bored in the darkness of their
bosoms by the dwellers in the houses which they hold up to the sun and
air.

Curdie and his father were of these: their business was to bring to
light hidden things; they sought silver in the rock and found it, and
carried it out.  Of the many other precious things in their mountain
they knew little or nothing.  Silver ore was what they were sent to
find, and in darkness and danger they found it.  But oh, how sweet was
the air on the mountain face when they came out at sunset to go home to
wife and mother!  They did breathe deep then!

The mines belonged to the king of the country, and the miners were his
servants, working under his overseers and officers.  He was a real
king--that is, one who ruled for the good of his people and not to
please himself, and he wanted the silver not to buy rich things for
himself, but to help him to govern the country, and pay the ones that
defended it from certain troublesome neighbours, and the judges whom he
set to portion out righteousness among the people, that so they might
learn it themselves, and come to do without judges at all.  Nothing
that could be got from the heart of the earth could have been put to
better purposes than the silver the king's miners got for him.  There
were people in the country who, when it came into their hands, degraded
it by locking it up in a chest, and then it grew diseased and was
called mammon, and bred all sorts of quarrels; but when first it left
the king's hands it never made any but friends, and the air of the
world kept it clean.

About a year before this story began, a series of very remarkable
events had just ended.  I will narrate as much of them as will serve to
show the tops of the roots of my tree.

Upon the mountain, on one of its many claws, stood a grand old house,
half farmhouse, half castle, belonging to the king; and there his only
child, the Princess Irene, had been brought up till she was nearly nine
years old, and would doubtless have continued much longer, but for the
strange events to which I have referred.

At that time the hollow places of the mountain were inhabited by
creatures called goblins, who for various reasons and in various ways
made themselves troublesome to all, but to the little princess
dangerous.  Mainly by the watchful devotion and energy of Curdie,
however, their designs had been utterly defeated, and made to recoil
upon themselves to their own destruction, so that now there were very
few of them left alive, and the miners did not believe there was a
single goblin remaining in the whole inside of the mountain.

The king had been so pleased with the boy--then approaching thirteen
years of age--that when he carried away his daughter he asked him to
accompany them; but he was still better pleased with him when he found
that he preferred staying with his father and mother.  He was a right
good king and knew that the love of a boy who would not leave his
father and mother to be made a great man was worth ten thousand offers
to die for his sake, and would prove so when the right time came.  As
for his father and mother, they would have given him up without a
grumble, for they were just as good as the king, and he and they
understood each other perfectly; but in this matter, not seeing that he
could do anything for the king which one of his numerous attendants
could not do as well, Curdie felt that it was for him to decide.  So
the king took a kind farewell of them all and rode away, with his
daughter on his horse before him.

A gloom fell upon the mountain and the miners when she was gone, and
Curdie did not whistle for a whole week.  As for his verses, there was
no occasion to make any now.  He had made them only to drive away the
goblins, and they were all gone--a good riddance--only the princess was
gone too!  He would rather have had things as they were, except for the
princess's sake.  But whoever is diligent will soon be cheerful, and
though the miners missed the household of the castle, they yet managed
to get on without them. Peter and his wife, however, were troubled with
the fancy that they had stood in the way of their boy's good fortune.
It would have been such a fine thing for him and them, too, they
thought, if he had ridden with the good king's train.  How beautiful he
looked, they said, when he rode the king's own horse through the river
that the goblins had sent out of the hill!  He might soon have been a
captain, they did believe!  The good, kind people did not reflect that
the road to the next duty is the only straight one, or that, for their
fancied good, we should never wish our children or friends to do what
we would not do ourselves if we were in their position.  We must accept
righteous sacrifices as well as make them.



CHAPTER 2

The White Pigeon

When in the winter they had had their supper and sat about the fire, or
when in the summer they lay on the border of the rock-margined stream
that ran through their little meadow close by the door of their
cottage, issuing from the far-up whiteness often folded in clouds,
Curdie's mother would not seldom lead the conversation to one peculiar
personage said and believed to have been much concerned in the late
issue of events.

That personage was the great-great-grandmother of the princess, of whom
the princess had often talked, but whom neither Curdie nor his mother
had ever seen.  Curdie could indeed remember, although already it
looked more like a dream than he could account for if it had really
taken place, how the princess had once led him up many stairs to what
she called a beautiful room in the top of the tower, where she went
through all the--what should he call it?--the behaviour of presenting
him to her grandmother, talking now to her and now to him, while all
the time he saw nothing but a bare garret, a heap of musty straw, a
sunbeam, and a withered apple. Lady, he would have declared before the
king himself, young or old, there was none, except the princess
herself, who was certainly vexed that he could not see what she at
least believed she saw.

As for his mother, she had once seen, long before Curdie was born, a
certain mysterious light of the same description as one Irene spoke of,
calling it her grandmother's moon; and Curdie himself had seen this
same light, shining from above the castle, just as the king and
princess were taking their leave.  Since that time neither had seen or
heard anything that could be supposed connected with her.  Strangely
enough, however, nobody had seen her go away.  If she was such an old
lady, she could hardly be supposed to have set out alone and on foot
when all the house was asleep.  Still, away she must have gone, for, of
course, if she was so powerful, she would always be about the princess
to take care of her.

But as Curdie grew older, he doubted more and more whether Irene had
not been talking of some dream she had taken for reality: he had heard
it said that children could not always distinguish betwixt dreams and
actual events.  At the same time there was his mother's testimony: what
was he to do with that?  His mother, through whom he had learned
everything, could hardly be imagined by her own dutiful son to have
mistaken a dream for a fact of the waking world.

So he rather shrank from thinking about it, and the less he thought
about it, the less he was inclined to believe it when he did think
about it, and therefore, of course, the less inclined to talk about it
to his father and mother; for although his father was one of those men
who for one word they say think twenty thoughts, Curdie was well
assured that he would rather doubt his own eyes than his wife's
testimony.

There were no others to whom he could have talked about it.  The miners
were a mingled company--some good, some not so good, some rather
bad--none of them so bad or so good as they might have been; Curdie
liked most of them, and was a favourite with all; but they knew very
little about the upper world, and what might or might not take place
there.  They knew silver from copper ore; they understood the
underground ways of things, and they could look very wise with their
lanterns in their hands searching after this or that sign of ore, or
for some mark to guide their way in the hollows of the earth; but as to
great-great-grandmothers, they would have mocked Curdie all the rest of
his life for the absurdity of not being absolutely certain that the
solemn belief of his father and mother was nothing but ridiculous
nonsense.  Why, to them the very word 'great-great-grandmother' would
have been a week's laughter!  I am not sure that they were able quite
to believe there were such persons as great-great-grandmothers; they
had never seen one.  They were not companions to give the best of help
toward progress, and as Curdie grew, he grew at this time faster in
body than in mind--with the usual consequence, that he was getting
rather stupid--one of the chief signs of which was that he believed
less and less in things he had never seen.  At the same time I do not
think he was ever so stupid as to imagine that this was a sign of
superior faculty and strength of mind.  Still, he was becoming more and
more a miner, and less and less a man of the upper world where the wind
blew.  On his way to and from the mine he took less and less notice of
bees and butterflies, moths and dragonflies, the flowers and the brooks
and the clouds.  He was gradually changing into a commonplace man.

There is this difference between the growth of some human beings and
that of others: in the one case it is a continuous dying, in the other
a continuous resurrection.  One of the latter sort comes at length to
know at once whether a thing is true the moment it comes before him;
one of the former class grows more and more afraid of being taken in,
so afraid of it that he takes himself in altogether, and comes at
length to believe in nothing but his dinner: to be sure of a thing with
him is to have it between his teeth.

Curdie was not in a very good way, then, at that time.  His father and
mother had, it is true, no fault to find with him and yet--and
yet--neither of them was ready to sing when the thought of him came up.
There must be something wrong when a mother catches herself sighing
over the time when her boy was in petticoats, or a father looks sad
when he thinks how he used to carry him on his shoulder.  The boy
should enclose and keep, as his life, the old child at the heart of
him, and never let it go.  He must still, to be a right man, be his
mother's darling, and more, his father's pride, and more.  The child is
not meant to die, but to be forever fresh born.

Curdie had made himself a bow and some arrows, and was teaching himself
to shoot with them.  One evening in the early summer, as he was walking
home from the mine with them in his hand, a light flashed across his
eyes.  He looked, and there was a snow-white pigeon settling on a rock
in front of him, in the red light of the level sun.  There it fell at
once to work with one of its wings, in which a feather or two had got
some sprays twisted, causing a certain roughness unpleasant to the
fastidious creature of the air.

It was indeed a lovely being, and Curdie thought how happy it must be
flitting through the air with a flash--a live bolt of light. For a
moment he became so one with the bird that he seemed to feel both its
bill and its feathers, as the one adjusted the other to fly again, and
his heart swelled with the pleasure of its involuntary sympathy.
Another moment and it would have been aloft in the waves of rosy
light--it was just bending its little legs to spring: that moment it
fell on the path broken-winged and bleeding from Curdie's cruel arrow.

With a gush of pride at his skill, and pleasure at his success, he ran
to pick up his prey.  I must say for him he picked it up
gently--perhaps it was the beginning of his repentance.  But when he
had the white thing in his hands its whiteness stained with another red
than that of the sunset flood in which it had been revelling--ah God!
who knows the joy of a bird, the ecstasy of a creature that has neither
storehouse nor barn!--when he held it, I say, in his victorious hands,
the winged thing looked up in his face--and with such eyes!--asking
what was the matter, and where the red sun had gone, and the clouds,
and the wind of its flight.  Then they closed, but to open again
presently, with the same questions in them.

And as they closed and opened, their look was fixed on his.  It did not
once flutter or try to get away; it only throbbed and bled and looked
at him.  Curdie's heart began to grow very large in his bosom.  What
could it mean?  It was nothing but a pigeon, and why should he not kill
a pigeon?  But the fact was that not till this very moment had he ever
known what a pigeon was.  A good many discoveries of a similar kind
have to be made by most of us.  Once more it opened its eyes--then
closed them again, and its throbbing ceased.  Curdie gave a sob: its
last look reminded him of the princess--he did not know why.  He
remembered how hard he had laboured to set her beyond danger, and yet
what dangers she had had to encounter for his sake: they had been
saviours to each other--and what had he done now?  He had stopped
saving, and had begun killing!  What had he been sent into the world
for?  Surely not to be a death to its joy and loveliness.  He had done
the thing that was contrary to gladness; he was a destroyer!  He was
not the Curdie he had been meant to be!

Then the underground waters gushed from the boy's heart.  And with the
tears came the remembrance that a white pigeon, just before the
princess went away with her father, came from somewhere--yes, from the
grandmother's lamp, and flew round the king and Irene and himself, and
then flew away: this might be that very pigeon! Horrible to think!  And
if it wasn't, yet it was a white pigeon, the same as this.  And if she
kept a great Many pigeons--and white ones, as Irene had told him, then
whose pigeon could he have killed but the grand old princess's?

Suddenly everything round about him seemed against him.  The red sunset
stung him; the rocks frowned at him; the sweet wind that had been
laving his face as he walked up the hill dropped--as if he wasn't fit
to be kissed any more.  Was the whole world going to cast him out?
Would he have to stand there forever, not knowing what to do, with the
dead pigeon in his hand?  Things looked bad indeed.  Was the whole
world going to make a work about a pigeon--a white pigeon?  The sun
went down.  Great clouds gathered over the west, and shortened the
twilight.  The wind gave a howl, and then lay down again.  The clouds
gathered thicker.  Then came a rumbling.  He thought it was thunder.
It was a rock that fell inside the mountain.  A goat ran past him down
the hill, followed by a dog sent to fetch him home.  He thought they
were goblin creatures, and trembled.  He used to despise them.  And
still he held the dead pigeon tenderly in his hand.

It grew darker and darker.  An evil something began to move in his
heart.  'What a fool I am!' he said to himself.  Then he grew angry,
and was just going to throw the bird from him and whistle, when a
brightness shone all round him.  He lifted his eyes, and saw a great
globe of light--like silver at the hottest heat: he had once seen
silver run from the furnace.  It shone from somewhere above the roofs
of the castle: it must be the great old princess's moon!  How could she
be there?  Of course she was not there!  He had asked the whole
household, and nobody knew anything about her or her globe either.  It
couldn't be!  And yet what did that signify, when there was the white
globe shining, and here was the dead white bird in his hand?  That
moment the pigeon gave a little flutter.  'It's not dead!' cried
Curdie, almost with a shriek.  The same instant he was running full
speed toward the castle, never letting his heels down, lest he should
shake the poor, wounded bird.



CHAPTER 3

The Mistress of the Silver Moon

When Curdie reached the castle, and ran into the little garden in front
of it, there stood the door wide open.  This was as he had hoped, for
what could he have said if he had had to knock at it? Those whose
business it is to open doors, so often mistake and shut them!  But the
woman now in charge often puzzled herself greatly to account for the
strange fact that however often she shut the door, which, like the
rest, she took a great deal of unnecessary trouble to do, she was
certain, the next time she went to it, to find it open.  I speak now of
the great front door, of course: the back door she as persistently kept
wide: if people could only go in by that, she said, she would then know
what sort they were, and what they wanted.  But she would neither have
known what sort Curdie was, nor what he wanted, and would assuredly
have denied him admittance, for she knew nothing of who was in the
tower.  So the front door was left open for him, and in he walked.

But where to go next he could not tell.  It was not quite dark: a dull,
shineless twilight filled the place.  All he knew was that he must go
up, and that proved enough for the present, for there he saw the great
staircase rising before him.  When he reached the top of it, he knew
there must be more stairs yet, for he could not be near the top of the
tower.  Indeed by the situation of the stairs, he must be a good way
from the tower itself.  But those who work well in the depths more
easily understand the heights, for indeed in their true nature they are
one and the same; miners are in mountains; and Curdie, from knowing the
ways of the king's mines, and being able to calculate his whereabouts
in them, was now able to find his way about the king's house.  He knew
its outside perfectly, and now his business was to get his notion of
the inside right with the outside.

So he shut his eyes and made a picture of the outside of it in his
mind.  Then he came in at the door of the picture, and yet kept the
picture before him all the time--for you can do that kind of thing in
your mind--and took every turn of the stair over again, always watching
to remember, every time he turned his face, how the tower lay, and then
when he came to himself at the top where he stood, he knew exactly
where it was, and walked at once in the right direction.

On his way, however, he came to another stair, and up that he went, of
course, watching still at every turn how the tower must lie.  At the
top of this stair was yet another--they were the stairs up which the
princess ran when first, without knowing it, she was on her way to find
her great-great-grandmother.  At the top of the second stair he could
go no farther, and must therefore set out again to find the tower,
which, as it rose far above the rest of the house, must have the last
of its stairs inside itself.

Having watched every turn to the very last, he still knew quite well in
what direction he must go to find it, so he left the stair and went
down a passage that led, if not exactly toward it, yet nearer it.  This
passage was rather dark, for it was very long, with only one window at
the end, and although there were doors on both sides of it, they were
all shut.  At the distant window glimmered the chill east, with a few
feeble stars in it, and its like was dreary and old, growing brown, and
looking as if it were thinking about the day that was just gone.
Presently he turned into another passage, which also had a window at
the end of it; and in at that window shone all that was left of the
sunset, just a few ashes, with here and there a little touch of warmth:
it was nearly as sad as the east, only there was one difference--it was
very plainly thinking of tomorrow.

But at present Curdie had nothing to do with today or tomorrow; his
business was with the bird, and the tower where dwelt the grand old
princess to whom it belonged.  So he kept on his way, still eastward,
and came to yet another passage, which brought him to a door.  He was
afraid to open it without first knocking.  He knocked, but heard no
answer.  He was answered nevertheless; for the door gently opened, and
there was a narrow stair--and so steep that, big lad as he was, he,
too, like the Princess Irene before him, found his hands needful for
the climbing.  And it was a long climb, but he reached the top at
last--a little landing, with a door in front and one on each side.
Which should he knock at?

As he hesitated, he heard the noise of a spinning wheel.  He knew it at
once, because his mother's spinning wheel had been his governess long
ago, and still taught him things.  It was the spinning wheel that first
taught him to make verses, and to sing, and to think whether all was
right inside him; or at least it had helped him in all these things.
Hence it was no wonder he should know a spinning wheel when he heard it
sing--even although as the bird of paradise to other birds was the song
of that wheel to the song of his mother's.

He stood listening, so entranced that he forgot to knock, and the wheel
went on and on, spinning in his brain songs and tales and rhymes, till
he was almost asleep as well as dreaming, for sleep does not always
come first.  But suddenly came the thought of the poor bird, which had
been lying motionless in his hand all the time, and that woke him up,
and at once he knocked.

'Come in, Curdie,' said a voice.

Curdie shook.  It was getting rather awful.  The heart that had never
much heeded an army of goblins trembled at the soft word of invitation.
But then there was the red-spotted white thing in his hand!  He dared
not hesitate, though.  Gently he opened the door through which the
sound came, and what did he see?  Nothing at first--except indeed a
great sloping shaft of moonlight that came in at a high window, and
rested on the floor.  He stood and stared at it, forgetting to shut the
door.

'Why don't you come in, Curdie?' said the voice.  'Did you never see
moonlight before?'

'Never without a moon,' answered Curdie, in a trembling tone, but
gathering courage.

'Certainly not,' returned the voice, which was thin and quavering: 'I
never saw moonlight without a moon.'

'But there's no moon outside,' said Curdie.

'Ah! but you're inside now,' said the voice.

The answer did not satisfy Curdie; but the voice went on.

'There are more moons than you know of, Curdie.  Where there is one sun
there are many moons--and of many sorts.  Come in and look out of my
window, and you will soon satisfy yourself that there is a moon looking
in at it.'

The gentleness of the voice made Curdie remember his manners.  He shut
the door, and drew a step or two nearer to the moonlight.

All the time the sound of the spinning had been going on and on, and
Curdie now caught sight of the wheel.  Oh, it was such a thin, delicate
thing--reminding him of a spider's web in a hedge.  It stood in the
middle of the moonlight, and it seemed as if the moonlight had nearly
melted it away.  A step nearer, he saw, with a start, two little hands
at work with it.  And then at last, in the shadow on the other side of
the moonlight which came like silver between, he saw the form to which
the hands belonged: a small withered creature, so old that no age would
have seemed too great to write under her picture, seated on a stool
beyond the spinning wheel, which looked very large beside her, but, as
I said, very thin, like a long-legged spider holding up its own web,
which was the round wheel itself She sat crumpled together, a filmy
thing that it seemed a puff would blow away, more like the body of a
fly the big spider had sucked empty and left hanging in his web, than
anything else I can think of.

When Curdie saw her, he stood still again, a good deal in wonder, a
very little in reverence, a little in doubt, and, I must add, a little
in amusement at the odd look of the old marvel.  Her grey hair mixed
with the moonlight so that he could not tell where the one began and
the other ended.  Her crooked back bent forward over her chest, her
shoulders nearly swallowed up her head between them, and her two little
hands were just like the grey claws of a hen, scratching at the thread,
which to Curdie was of course invisible across the moonlight.  Indeed
Curdie laughed within himself, just a little, at the sight; and when he
thought of how the princess used to talk about her huge, great, old
grandmother, he laughed more.  But that moment the little lady leaned
forward into the moonlight, and Curdie caught a glimpse of her eyes,
and all the laugh went out of him.

'What do you come here for, Curdie?' she said, as gently as before.

Then Curdie remembered that he stood there as a culprit, and worst of
all, as one who had his confession yet to make.  There was no time to
hesitate over it.

'Oh, ma'am!  See here,' he said, and advanced a step or two, holding
out the pigeon.

'What have you got there?' she asked.

Again Curdie advanced a few steps, and held out his hand with the
pigeon, that she might see what it was, into the moonlight.  The moment
the rays fell upon it the pigeon gave a faint flutter.  The old lady
put out her old hands and took it, and held it to her bosom, and rocked
it, murmuring over it as if it were a sick baby.

When Curdie saw how distressed she was he grew sorrier still, and said:

'I didn't mean to do any harm, ma'am.  I didn't think of its being
yours.'

'Ah, Curdie!  If it weren't mine, what would become of it now?' she
returned.  'You say you didn't mean any harm: did you mean any good,
Curdie?'

'No,' answered Curdie.

'Remember, then, that whoever does not mean good is always in danger of
harm.  But I try to give everybody fair play; and those that are in the
wrong are in far more need of it always than those who are in the
right: they can afford to do without it.  Therefore I say for you that
when you shot that arrow you did not know what a pigeon is.  Now that
you do know, you are sorry.  It is very dangerous to do things you
don't know about.'

'But, please, ma'am--I don't mean to be rude or to contradict you,'
said Curdie, 'but if a body was never to do anything but what he knew
to be good, he would have to live half his time doing nothing.'

'There you are much mistaken,' said the old quavering voice.  'How
little you must have thought!  Why, you don't seem even to know the
good of the things you are constantly doing.  Now don't mistake me. I
don't mean you are good for doing them.  It is a good thing to eat your
breakfast, but you don't fancy it's very good of you to do it.  The
thing is good, not you.'

Curdie laughed.

'There are a great many more good things than bad things to do. Now
tell me what bad thing you have done today besides this sore hurt to my
little white friend.'

While she talked Curdie had sunk into a sort of reverie, in which he
hardly knew whether it was the old lady or his own heart that spoke.
And when she asked him that question, he was at first much inclined to
consider himself a very good fellow on the whole.  'I really don't
think I did anything else that was very bad all day,' he said to
himself.  But at the same time he could not honestly feel that he was
worth standing up for.  All at once a light seemed to break in upon his
mind, and he woke up and there was the withered little atomy of the old
lady on the other side of the moonlight, and there was the spinning
wheel singing on and on in the middle of it!

'I know now, ma'am; I understand now,' he said.  'Thank you, ma'am, for
spinning it into me with your wheel.  I see now that I have been doing
wrong the whole day, and such a many days besides! Indeed, I don't know
when I ever did right, and yet it seems as if I had done right some
time and had forgotten how.  When I killed your bird I did not know I
was doing wrong, just because I was always doing wrong, and the wrong
had soaked all through me.'

'What wrong were you doing all day, Curdie?  It is better to come to
the point, you know,' said the old lady, and her voice was gentler even
than before.

'I was doing the wrong of never wanting or trying to be better. And now
I see that I have been letting things go as they would for a long time.
Whatever came into my head I did, and whatever didn't come into my head
I didn't do.  I never sent anything away, and never looked out for
anything to come.  I haven't been attending to my mother--or my father
either.  And now I think of it, I know I have often seen them looking
troubled, and I have never asked them what was the matter.  And now I
see, too, that I did not ask because I suspected it had something to do
with me and my behaviour, and didn't want to hear the truth.  And I
know I have been grumbling at my work, and doing a hundred other things
that are wrong.'

'You have got it, Curdie,' said the old lady, in a voice that sounded
almost as if she had been crying.  'When people don't care to be better
they must be doing everything wrong.  I am so glad you shot my bird!'

'Ma'am!' exclaimed Curdie.  'How can you be?'

'Because it has brought you to see what sort you were when you did it,
and what sort you will grow to be again, only worse, if you don't mind.
Now that you are sorry, my poor bird will be better. Look up, my dovey.'

The pigeon gave a flutter, and spread out one of its red-spotted wings
across the old woman's bosom.

'I will mend the little angel,' she said, 'and in a week or two it will
be flying again.  So you may ease your heart about the pigeon.'

'Oh, thank you!  Thank you!' cried Curdie.  'I don't know how to thank
you.'

'Then I will tell you.  There is only one way I care for.  Do better,
and grow better, and be better.  And never kill anything without a good
reason for it.'

'Ma'am, I will go and fetch my bow and arrows, and you shall burn them
yourself.'

'I have no fire that would burn your bow and arrows, Curdie.'

'Then I promise you to burn them all under my mother's porridge pot
tomorrow morning.'

'No, no, Curdie.  Keep them, and practice with them every day, and grow
a good shot.  There are plenty of bad things that want killing, and a
day will come when they will prove useful.  But I must see first
whether you will do as I tell you.'

'That I will!' said Curdie.  'What is it, ma'am?'

'Only something not to do,' answered the old lady; 'if you should hear
anyone speak about me, never to laugh or make fun of me.'

'Oh, ma'am!' exclaimed Curdie, shocked that she should think such a
request needful.

'Stop, stop,' she went on.  'People hereabout sometimes tell very odd
and in fact ridiculous stories of an old woman who watches what is
going on, and occasionally interferes.  They mean me, though what they
say is often great nonsense.  Now what I want of you is not to laugh,
or side with them in any way; because they will take that to mean that
you don't believe there is any such person a bit more than they do.
Now that would not be the case--would it, Curdie?'

'No, indeed, ma'am.  I've seen you.'

The old woman smiled very oddly.

'Yes, you've seen me,' she said.  'But mind,' she continued, 'I don't
want you to say anything--only to hold your tongue, and not seem to
side with them.'

'That will be easy,'said Curdie,'now that I've seen you with my very
own eyes, ma'am.'

'Not so easy as you think, perhaps,' said the old lady, with another
curious smile.  'I want to be your friend,' she added after a little
pause, 'but I don't quite know yet whether you will let me.'

'Indeed I will, ma'am,' said Curdie.

'That is for me to find out,' she rejoined, with yet another strange
smile.  'In the meantime all I can say is, come to me again when you
find yourself in any trouble, and I will see what I can do for
you--only the canning depends on yourself.  I am greatly pleased with
you for bringing me my pigeon, doing your best to set right what you
had set wrong.'

As she spoke she held out her hand to him, and when he took it she made
use of his to help herself up from her stool, and--when or how it came
about, Curdie could not tell--the same instant she stood before him a
tall, strong woman--plainly very old, but as grand as she was old, and
only rather severe-looking.  Every trace of the decrepitude and
witheredness she showed as she hovered like a film about her wheel, had
vanished.  Her hair was very white, but it hung about her head in great
plenty, and shone like silver in the moonlight.  Straight as a pillar
she stood before the astonished boy, and the wounded bird had now
spread out both its wings across her bosom, like some great mystical
ornament of frosted silver.

'Oh, now I can never forget you!' cried Curdie.  'I see now what you
really are!'

'Did I not tell you the truth when I sat at my wheel?' said the old
lady.

'Yes, ma'am,' answered Curdie.

'I can do no more than tell you the truth now,' she rejoined.  'It is a
bad thing indeed to forget one who has told us the truth.  Now go.'

Curdie obeyed, and took a few steps toward the door.  'Please,
ma'am--what am I to call you?' he was going to say; but when he turned
to speak, he saw nobody.  Whether she was there or not he could not
tell, however, for the moonlight had vanished, and the room was utterly
dark.  A great fear, such as he had never before known, came upon him,
and almost overwhelmed him.  He groped his way to the door, and crawled
down the stair--in doubt and anxiety as to how he should find his way
out of the house in the dark.  And the stair seemed ever so much longer
than when he came up.  Nor was that any wonder, for down and down he
went, until at length his foot struck a door, and when he rose and
opened it, he found himself under the starry, moonless sky at the foot
of the tower.

He soon discovered the way out of the garden, with which he had some
acquaintance already, and in a few minutes was climbing the mountain
with a solemn and cheerful heart.  It was rather dark, but he knew the
way well.  As he passed the rock from which the poor pigeon fell
wounded with his arrow, a great joy filled his heart at the thought
that he was delivered from the blood of the little bird, and he ran the
next hundred yards at full speed up the hill. Some dark shadows passed
him: he did not even care to think what they were, but let them run.
When he reached home, he found his father and mother waiting supper for
him.



CHAPTER 4

Curdie's Father and Mother

The eyes of the fathers and mothers are quick to read their children's
looks, and when Curdie entered the cottage, his parents saw at once
that something unusual had taken place.  When he said to his mother, 'I
beg your pardon for being so late,' there was something in the tone
beyond the politeness that went to her heart, for it seemed to come
from the place where all lovely things were born before they began to
grow in this world.  When he set his father's chair to the table, an
attention he had not shown him for a long time, Peter thanked him with
more gratitude than the boy had ever yet felt in all his life.  It was
a small thing to do for the man who had been serving him since ever he
was born, but I suspect there is nothing a man can be so grateful for
as that to which he has the most right.

There was a change upon Curdie, and father and mother felt there must
be something to account for it, and therefore were pretty sure he had
something to tell them.  For when a child's heart is all right, it is
not likely he will want to keep anything from his parents.  But the
story of the evening was too solemn for Curdie to come out with all at
once.  He must wait until they had had their porridge, and the affairs
of this world were over for the day.

But when they were seated on the grassy bank of the brook that went so
sweetly blundering over the great stones of its rocky channel, for the
whole meadow lay on the top of a huge rock, then he felt that the right
hour had come for sharing with them the wonderful things that had come
to him.  It was perhaps the loveliest of all hours in the year.  The
summer was young and soft, and this was the warmest evening they had
yet had--dusky, dark even below, while above, the stars were bright and
large and sharp in the blackest blue sky.  The night came close around
them, clasping them in one universal arm of love, and although it
neither spoke nor smiled, seemed all eye and ear, seemed to see and
hear and know everything they said and did.  It is a way the night has
sometimes, and there is a reason for it.  The only sound was that of
the brook, for there was no wind, and no trees for it to make its music
upon if there had been, for the cottage was high up on the mountain, on
a great shoulder of stone where trees would not grow.

There, to the accompaniment of the water, as it hurried down to the
valley and the sea, talking busily of a thousand true things which it
could not understand, Curdie told his tale, outside and in, to his
father and mother.  What a world had slipped in between the mouth of
the mine and his mother's cottage!  Neither of them said a word until
he had ended.

'Now what am I to make of it, Mother? it's so strange!' he said, and
stopped.

'It's easy enough to see what Curdie has got to make of it, isn't it,
Peter?' said the good woman, turning her face toward all she could see
of her husband's.

'It seems so to me,' answered Peter, with a smile which only the night
saw, but his wife felt in the tone of his words.  They were the
happiest couple in that country, because they always understood each
other, and that was because they always meant the same thing, and that
was because they always loved what was fair and true and right better,
not than anything else, but than everything else put together.

'Then will you tell Curdie?' said she.

'You can talk best, Joan,' said he.  'You tell him, and I will
listen--and learn how to say what I think,' he added.

'I,' said Curdie, 'don't know what to think.'

'It does not matter so much,' said his mother.  'If only you know what
to make of a thing, you'll know soon enough what to think of it.  Now I
needn't tell you, surely, Curdie, what you've got to do with this?'

'I suppose you mean, Mother,' answered Curdie, 'that I must do as the
old lady told me?'

'That is what I mean: what else could it be?  Am I not right, Peter?'

'Quite right, Joan,' answered Peter, 'so far as my judgement goes. It
is a very strange story, but you see the question is not about
believing it, for Curdie knows what came to him.'

'And you remember, Curdie,' said his mother, 'that when the princess
took you up that tower once before, and there talked to her
great-great-grandmother, you came home quite angry with her, and said
there was nothing in the place but an old tub, a heap of straw--oh, I
remember your inventory quite well!--an old tub, a heap of straw, a
withered apple, and a sunbeam.  According to your eyes, that was all
there was in the great, old, musty garret.  But now you have had a
glimpse of the old princess herself!'

'Yes, Mother, I did see her--or if I didn't--' said Curdie very
thoughtfully--then began again.  'The hardest thing to believe, though
I saw it with my own eyes, was when the thin, filmy creature that
seemed almost to float about in the moonlight like a bit of the silver
paper they put over pictures, or like a handkerchief made of spider
threads, took my hand, and rose up.  She was taller and stronger than
you, Mother, ever so much!--at least, she looked so.'

'And most certainly was so, Curdie, if she looked so,' said Mrs
Peterson.

'Well, I confess,' returned her son, 'that one thing, if there were no
other, would make me doubt whether I was not dreaming, after all, wide
awake though I fancied myself to be.'

'Of course,' answered his mother, 'it is not for me to say whether you
were dreaming or not if you are doubtful of it yourself; but it doesn't
make me think I am dreaming when in the summer I hold in my hand the
bunch of sweet peas that make my heart glad with their colour and
scent, and remember the dry, withered-looking little thing I dibbled
into the hole in the same spot in the spring.  I only think how
wonderful and lovely it all is.  It seems just as full of reason as it
is of wonder.  How it is done I can't tell, only there it is!  And
there is this in it, too, Curdie--of which you would not be so ready to
think--that when you come home to your father and mother, and they find
you behaving more like a dear, good son than you have behaved for a
long time, they at least are not likely to think you were only
dreaming.'

'Still,' said Curdie, looking a little ashamed, 'I might have dreamed
my duty.'

'Then dream often, my son; for there must then be more truth in your
dreams than in your waking thoughts.  But however any of these things
may be, this one point remains certain: there can be no harm in doing
as she told you.  And, indeed, until you are sure there is no such
person, you are bound to do it, for you promised.'

'It seems to me,' said his father, 'that if a lady comes to you in a
dream, Curdie, and tells you not to talk about her when you wake, the
least you can do is to hold your tongue.'

'True, Father!  Yes, Mother, I'll do it,' said Curdie.

Then they went to bed, and sleep, which is the night of the soul, next
took them in its arms and made them well.



CHAPTER 5

The Miners

It much increased Curdie's feeling of the strangeness of the whole
affair, that, the next morning, when they were at work in the mine, the
party of which he and his father were two, just as if they had known
what had happened to him the night before, began talking about all
manner of wonderful tales that were abroad in the country, chiefly, of
course, those connected with the mines, and the mountains in which they
lay.  Their wives and mothers and grandmothers were their chief
authorities.  For when they sat by their firesides they heard their
wives telling their children the selfsame tales, with little
differences, and here and there one they had not heard before, which
they had heard their mothers and grandmothers tell in one or other of
the same cottages.

At length they came to speak of a certain strange being they called Old
Mother Wotherwop.  Some said their wives had seen her.  It appeared as
they talked that not one had seen her more than once. Some of their
mothers and grandmothers, however, had seen her also, and they all had
told them tales about her when they were children. They said she could
take any shape she liked, but that in reality she was a withered old
woman, so old and so withered that she was as thin as a sieve with a
lamp behind it; that she was never seen except at night, and when
something terrible had taken place, or was going to take place--such as
the falling in of the roof of a mine, or the breaking out of water in
it.

She had more than once been seen--it was always at night--beside some
well, sitting on the brink of it, and leaning over and stirring it with
her forefinger, which was six times as long as any of the rest.  And
whoever for months after drank of that well was sure to be ill.  To
this, one of them, however, added that he remembered his mother saying
that whoever in bad health drank of the well was sure to get better.
But the majority agreed that the former was the right version of the
story--for was she not a witch, an old hating witch, whose delight was
to do mischief?  One said he had heard that she took the shape of a
young woman sometimes, as beautiful as an angel, and then was most
dangerous of all, for she struck every man who looked upon her
stone-blind.

Peter ventured the question whether she might not as likely be an angel
that took the form of an old woman, as an old woman that took the form
of an angel.  But nobody except Curdie, who was holding his peace with
all his might, saw any sense in the question.  They said an old woman
might be very glad to make herself look like a young one, but who ever
heard of a young and beautiful one making herself look old and ugly?

Peter asked why they were so much more ready to believe the bad that
was said of her than the good.  They answered, because she was bad.  He
asked why they believed her to be bad, and they answered, because she
did bad things.  When he asked how they knew that, they said, because
she was a bad creature.  Even if they didn't know it, they said, a
woman like that was so much more likely to be bad than good.  Why did
she go about at night?  Why did she appear only now and then, and on
such occasions?  One went on to tell how one night when his grandfather
had been having a jolly time of it with his friends in the market town,
she had served him so upon his way home that the poor man never drank a
drop of anything stronger than water after it to the day of his death.
She dragged him into a bog, and tumbled him up and down in it till he
was nearly dead.

'I suppose that was her way of teaching him what a good thing water
was,' said Peter; but the man, who liked strong drink, did not see the
joke.

'They do say,' said another, 'that she has lived in the old house over
there ever since the little princess left it.  They say too that the
housekeeper knows all about it, and is hand and glove with the old
witch.  I don't doubt they have many a nice airing together on
broomsticks.  But I don't doubt either it's all nonsense, and there's
no such person at all.'

'When our cow died,' said another, 'she was seen going round and round
the cowhouse the same night.  To be sure she left a fine calf behind
her--I mean the cow did, not the witch.  I wonder she didn't kill that,
too, for she'll be a far finer cow than ever her mother was.'

'My old woman came upon her one night, not long before the water broke
out in the mine, sitting on a stone on the hillside with a whole
congregation of cobs about her.  When they saw my wife they all
scampered off as fast as they could run, and where the witch was
sitting there was nothing to be seen but a withered bracken bush.  I
made no doubt myself she was putting them up to it.'

And so they went on with one foolish tale after another, while Peter
put in a word now and then, and Curdie diligently held his peace.  But
his silence at last drew attention upon it, and one of them said:

'Come, young Curdie, what are you thinking of?'

'How do you know I'm thinking of anything?' asked Curdie.

'Because you're not saying anything.'

'Does it follow then that, as you are saying so much, you're not
thinking at all?' said Curdie.

'I know what he's thinking,' said one who had not yet spoken; 'he's
thinking what a set of fools you are to talk such rubbish; as if ever
there was or could be such an old woman as you say!  I'm sure Curdie
knows better than all that comes to.'

'I think,' said Curdie, 'it would be better that he who says anything
about her should be quite sure it is true, lest she should hear him,
and not like to be slandered.'

'But would she like it any better if it were true?' said the same man.
'If she is What they say--I don't know--but I never knew a man that
wouldn't go in a rage to be called the very thing he was.'

'If bad things were true of her, and I knew it,' said Curdie, 'I would
not hesitate to say them, for I will never give in to being afraid of
anything that's bad.  I suspect that the things they tell, however, if
we knew all about them, would turn out to have nothing but good in
them; and I won't say a word more for fear I should say something that
mightn't be to her mind.'

They all burst into a loud laugh.

'Hear the parson!' they cried.  'He believes in the witch!  Ha! ha!'

'He's afraid of her!'

'And says all she does is good!'

'He wants to make friends with her, that she may help him to find the
silver ore.'

'Give me my own eyes and a good divining rod before all the witches in
the world!  And so I'd advise you too, Master Curdie; that is, when
your eyes have grown to be worth anything, and you have learned to cut
the hazel fork.'

Thus they all mocked and jeered at him, but he did his best to keep his
temper and go quietly on with his work.  He got as close to his father
as he could, however, for that helped him to bear it.  As soon as they
were tired of laughing and mocking, Curdie was friendly with them, and
long before their midday meal all between them was as it had been.

But when the evening came, Peter and Curdie felt that they would rather
walk home together without other company, and therefore lingered behind
when the rest of the men left the mine.



CHAPTER 6

The Emerald

Father and son had seated themselves on a projecting piece of rock at a
corner where three galleries met--the one they had come along from
their work, one to the right leading out of the mountain, and the other
to the left leading far into a portion of it which had been long
disused.  Since the inundation caused by the goblins, it had indeed
been rendered impassable by the settlement of a quantity of the water,
forming a small but very deep lake, in a part where there was a
considerable descent.

They had just risen and were turning to the right, when a gleam caught
their eyes, and made them look along the whole gallery.  Far up they
saw a pale green light, whence issuing they could not tell, about
halfway between floor and roof of the passage.  They saw nothing but
the light, which was like a large star, with a point of darker colour
yet brighter radiance in the heart of it, whence the rest of the light
shot out in rays that faded toward the ends until they vanished.  It
shed hardly any light around it, although in itself it was so bright as
to sting the eyes that beheld it. Wonderful stories had from ages gone
been current in the mines about certain magic gems which gave out light
of themselves, and this light looked just like what might be supposed
to shoot from the heart of such a gem.

They went up the old gallery to find out what it could be.  To their
surprise they found, however, that, after going some distance, they
were no nearer to it, so far as they could judge, than when they
started.  It did not seem to move, and yet they moving did not approach
it.  Still they persevered, for it was far too wonderful a thing to
lose sight of, so long as they could keep it.  At length they drew near
the hollow where the water lay, and still were no nearer the light.
Where they expected to be stopped by the water, however, water was
none: something had taken place in some part of the mine that had
drained it off, and the gallery lay open as in former times.

And now, to their surprise, the light, instead of being in front of
them, was shining at the same distance to the right, where they did not
know there was any passage at all.  Then they discovered, by the light
of the lanterns they carried, that there the water had broken through,
and made an entrance to a part of the mountain of which Peter knew
nothing.  But they were hardly well into it, still following the light,
before Curdie thought he recognized some of the passages he had so
often gone through when he was watching the goblins.

After they had advanced a long way, with many turnings, now to the
right, now to the left, all at once their eyes seemed to come suddenly
to themselves, and they became aware that the light which they had
taken to be a great way from them was in reality almost within reach of
their hands.

The same instant it began to grow larger and thinner, the point of
light grew dim as it spread, the greenness melted away, and in a moment
or two, instead of the star, a dark, dark and yet luminous face was
looking at them with living eyes.  And Curdie felt a great awe swell up
in his heart, for he thought he had seen those eyes before.

'I see you know me, Curdie,' said a voice.

'If your eyes are you, ma'am, then I know you,' said Curdie.  'But I
never saw your face before.'

'Yes, you have seen it, Curdie,' said the voice.  And with that the
darkness of its complexion melted away, and down from the face dawned
out the form that belonged to it, until at last Curdie and his father
beheld a lady, beautiful exceedingly, dressed in something pale green,
like velvet, over which her hair fell in cataracts of a rich golden
colour.  It looked as if it were pouring down from her head, and, like
the water of the Dustbrook, vanishing in a golden vapour ere it reached
the floor.  It came flowing from under the edge of a coronet of gold,
set with alternated pearls and emeralds.  In front of the crown was a
great emerald, which looked somehow as if out of it had come the light
they had followed. There was no ornament else about her, except on her
slippers, which were one mass of gleaming emeralds, of various shades
of green, all mingling lovelily like the waving of grass in the wind
and sun. She looked about five-and-twenty years old.  And for all the
difference, Curdie knew somehow or other, he could not have told how,
that the face before him was that of the old princess, Irene's
great-great-grandmother.

By this time all around them had grown light, and now first they could
see where they were.  They stood in a great splendid cavern, which
Curdie recognized as that in which the goblins held their state
assemblies.  But, strange to tell, the light by which they saw came
streaming, sparkling, and shooting from stones of many colours in the
sides and roof and floor of the cavern--stones of all the colours of
the rainbow, and many more.  It was a glorious sight--the whole rugged
place flashing with colours--in one spot a great light of deep
carbuncular red, in another of sapphirine blue, in another of topaz
yellow; while here and there were groups of stones of all hues and
sizes, and again nebulous spaces of thousands of tiniest spots of
brilliancy of every conceivable shade.  Sometimes the colours ran
together, and made a little river or lake of lambent, interfusing, and
changing tints, which, by their variegation, seemed to imitate the
flowing of water, or waves made by the wind.

Curdie would have gazed entranced, but that all the beauty of the
cavern, yes, of all he knew of the whole creation, seemed gathered in
one centre of harmony and loveliness in the person of the ancient lady
who stood before him in the very summer of beauty and strength.
Turning from the first glance at the circuadjacent splendour, it
dwindled into nothing as he looked again at the lady. Nothing flashed
or glowed or shone about her, and yet it was with a prevision of the
truth that he said,

'I was here once before, ma'am.'

'I know that, Curdie,' she replied.

'The place was full of torches, and the walls gleamed, but nothing as
they do now, and there is no light in the place.'

'You want to know where the light comes from?' she said, smiling.

'Yes, ma'am.'

'Then see: I will go out of the cavern.  Do not be afraid, but watch.'

She went slowly out.  The moment she turned her back to go, the light
began to pale and fade; the moment she was out of their sight the place
was black as night, save that now the smoky yellow-red of their lamps,
which they thought had gone out long ago, cast a dusky glimmer around
them.



CHAPTER 7

What Is in a Name?

For a time that seemed to them long, the two men stood waiting, while
still the Mother of Light did not return.  So long was she absent that
they began to grow anxious: how were they to find their way from the
natural hollows of the mountain crossed by goblin paths, if their lamps
should go out?  To spend the night there would mean to sit and wait
until an earthquake rent the mountain, or the earth herself fell back
into the smelting furnace of the sun whence she had issued--for it was
all night and no faintest dawn in the bosom of the world.

So long did they wait unrevisited, that, had there not been two of
them, either would at length have concluded the vision a home-born
product of his own seething brain.  And their lamps were going out, for
they grew redder and smokier!  But they did not lose courage, for there
is a kind of capillary attraction in the facing of two souls, that
lifts faith quite beyond the level to which either could raise it
alone: they knew that they had seen the lady of emeralds, and it was to
give them their own desire that she had gone from them, and neither
would yield for a moment to the half doubts and half dreads that awoke
in his heart.

And still she who with her absence darkened their air did not return.
They grew weary, and sat down on the rocky floor, for wait they
would--indeed, wait they must.  Each set his lamp by his knee, and
watched it die.  Slowly it sank, dulled, looked lazy and stupid.  But
ever as it sank and dulled, the image in his mind of the Lady of Light
grew stronger and clearer.  Together the two lamps panted and
shuddered.  First one, then the other went out, leaving for a moment a
great, red, evil-smelling snuff.  Then all was the blackness of
darkness up to their very hearts and everywhere around them.  Was it?
No.  Far away--it looked miles away--shone one minute faint point of
green light--where, who could tell?  They only knew that it shone.  It
grew larger, and seemed to draw nearer, until at last, as they watched
with speechless delight and expectation, it seemed once more within
reach of an outstretched hand.  Then it spread and melted away as
before, and there were eyes--and a face--and a lovely form--and lo! the
whole cavern blazing with lights innumerable, and gorgeous, yet soft
and interfused--so blended, indeed, that the eye had to search and see
in order to separate distinct spots of special colour.

The moment they saw the speck in the vast distance they had risen and
stood on their feet.  When it came nearer they bowed their heads.  Yet
now they looked with fearless eyes, for the woman that was old yet
young was a joy to see, and filled their hearts with reverent delight.
She turned first to Peter.

'I have known you long,' she said.  'I have met you going to and from
the mine, and seen you working in it for the last forty years.'

'How should it be, madam, that a grand lady like you should take notice
of a poor man like me?' said Peter, humbly, but more foolishly than he
could then have understood.

'I am poor as well as rich,' said she.  'I, too, work for my bread, and
I show myself no favour when I pay myself my own wages.  Last night
when you sat by the brook, and Curdie told you about my pigeon, and my
spinning, and wondered whether he could believe that he had actually
seen me, I heard what you said to each other.  I am always about, as
the miners said the other night when they talked of me as Old Mother
Wotherwop.'

The lovely lady laughed, and her laugh was a lightning of delight in
their souls.

'Yes,' she went on, 'you have got to thank me that you are so poor,
Peter.  I have seen to that, and it has done well for both you and me,
my friend.  Things come to the poor that can't get in at the door of
the rich.  Their money somehow blocks it up.  It is a great privilege
to be poor, Peter--one that no man ever coveted, and but a very few
have sought to retain, but one that yet many have learned to prize.
You must not mistake, however, and imagine it a virtue; it is but a
privilege, and one also that, like other privileges, may be terribly
misused.  Had you been rich, my Peter, you would not have been so good
as some rich men I know.  And now I am going to tell you what no one
knows but myself: you, Peter, and your wife both have the blood of the
royal family in your veins.  I have been trying to cultivate your
family tree, every branch of which is known to me, and I expect Curdie
to turn out a blossom on it.  Therefore I have been training him for a
work that must soon be done.  I was near losing him, and had to send my
pigeon.  Had he not shot it, that would have been better; but he
repented, and that shall be as good in the end.'

She turned to Curdie and smiled.

'Ma'am,' said Curdie, 'may I ask questions?'

'Why not, Curdie?'

'Because I have been told, ma'am, that nobody must ask the king
questions.'

'The king never made that law,' she answered, with some displeasure.
'You may ask me as many as you please--that is, so long as they are
sensible.  Only I may take a few thousand years to answer some of them.
But that's nothing.  Of all things time is the cheapest.'

'Then would you mind telling me now, ma'am, for I feel very confused
about it--are you the Lady of the Silver Moon?'

'Yes, Curdie; you may call me that if you like.  What it means is true.'

'And now I see you dark, and clothed in green, and the mother of all
the light that dwells in the stones of the earth!  And up there they
call you Old Mother Wotherwop!  And the Princess Irene told me you were
her great-great-grandmother!  And you spin the spider threads, and take
care of a whole people of pigeons; and you are worn to a pale shadow
with old age; and are as young as anybody can be, not to be too young;
and as strong, I do believe, as I am.'

The lady stooped toward a large green stone bedded in the rock of the
floor, and looking like a well of grassy light in it.  She laid hold of
it with her fingers, broke it out, and gave it to Peter. 'There!' cried
Curdie.  'I told you so.  Twenty men could not have done that.  And
your fingers are white and smooth as any lady's in the land.  I don't
know what to make of it.'

'I could give you twenty names more to call me, Curdie, and not one of
them would be a false one.  What does it matter how many names if the
person is one?'

'Ah!  But it is not names only, ma'am.  Look at what you were like last
night, and what I see you now!'

'Shapes are only dresses, Curdie, and dresses are only names.  That
which is inside is the same all the time.'

'But then how can all the shapes speak the truth?'

'It would want thousands more to speak the truth, Curdie; and then they
could not.  But there is a point I must not let you mistake about.  It
is one thing the shape I choose to put on, and quite another the shape
that foolish talk and nursery tale may please to put upon me.  Also, it
is one thing what you or your father may think about me, and quite
another what a foolish or bad man may see in me.  For instance, if a
thief were to come in here just now, he would think he saw the demon of
the mine, all in green flames, come to protect her treasure, and would
run like a hunted wild goat.  I should be all the same, but his evil
eyes would see me as I was not.'

'I think I understand,' said Curdie.

'Peter,' said the lady, turning then to him, 'you will have to give up
Curdie for a little while.'

'So long as he loves us, ma'am, that will not matter--much.'

'Ah! you are right there, my friend,' said the beautiful princess. And
as she said it she put out her hand, and took the hard, horny hand of
the miner in it, and held it for a moment lovingly.

'I need say no more,' she added, 'for we understand each other--you and
I, Peter.'

The tears came into Peter's eyes.  He bowed his head in thankfulness,
and his heart was much too full to speak.

Then the great old, young, beautiful princess turned to Curdie.

'Now, Curdie, are you ready?' she said.

'Yes, ma'am,' answered Curdie.

'You do not know what for.'

'You do, ma'am.  That is enough.'

'You could not have given me a better answer, or done more to prepare
yourself, Curdie,' she returned, with one of her radiant smiles.  'Do
you think you will know me again?'

'I think so.  But how can I tell what you may look like next?'

'Ah, that indeed!  How can you tell?  Or how could I expect you should?
But those who know me well, know me whatever new dress or shape or name
I may be in; and by and by you will have learned to do so too.'

'But if you want me to know you again, ma'am, for certain sure,' said
Curdie, 'could you not give me some sign, or tell me something about
you that never changes--or some other way to know you, or thing to know
you by?'

'No, Curdie; that would be to keep you from knowing me.  You must know
me in quite another way from that.  It would not be the least use to
you or me either if I were to make you know me in that way. It would be
but to know the sign of Me--not to know me myself.  It would be no
better than if I were to take this emerald out of my crown and give it
to you to take home with you, and you were to call it me, and talk to
it as if it heard and saw and loved you. Much good that would do you,
Curdie!  No; you must do what you can to know me, and if you do, you
will.  You shall see me again in very different circumstances from
these, and, I will tell you so much, it may be in a very different
shape.  But come now, I will lead you out of this cavern; my good Joan
will be getting too anxious about you.  One word more: you will allow
that the men knew little what they were talking about this morning,
when they told all those tales of Old Mother Wotherwop; but did it
occur to you to think how it was they fell to talking about me at all?
It was because I came to them; I was beside them all the time they were
talking about me, though they were far enough from knowing it, and had
very little besides foolishness to say.'

As she spoke she turned and led the way from the cavern, which, as if a
door had been closed, sank into absolute blackness behind them.  And
now they saw nothing more of the lady except the green star, which
again seemed a good distance in front of them, and to which they came
no nearer, although following it at a quick pace through the mountain.
Such was their confidence in her guidance, however, and so fearless
were they in consequence, that they felt their way neither with hand
nor foot, but walked straight on through the pitch-dark galleries.
When at length the night of the upper world looked in at the mouth of
the mine, the green light seemed to lose its way among the stars, and
they saw it no more.

Out they came into the cool, blessed night.  It was very late, and only
starlight.  To their surprise, three paces away they saw, seated upon a
stone, an old country-woman, in a cloak which they took for black.
When they came close up to it, they saw it was red.

'Good evening!' said Peter.

'Good evening!' returned the old woman, in a voice as old as herself.

But Curdie took off his cap and said:

'I am your servant, Princess.'

The old woman replied:

'Come to me in the dove tower tomorrow night, Curdie--alone.'

'I will, ma'am,' said Curdie.

So they parted, and father and son went home to wife and mother--two
persons in one rich, happy woman.



CHAPTER 8

Curdie's Mission

The next night Curdie went home from the mine a little earlier than
usual, to make himself tidy before going to the dove tower.  The
princess had not appointed an exact time for him to be there; he would
go as near the time he had gone first as he could.  On his way to the
bottom of the hill, he met his father coming up.  The sun was then
down, and the warm first of the twilight filled the evening.  He came
rather wearily up the hill: the road, he thought, must have grown
steeper in parts since he was Curdie's age.  His back was to the light
of the sunset, which closed him all round in a beautiful setting, and
Curdie thought what a grand-looking man his father was, even when he
was tired.  It is greed and laziness and selfishness, not hunger or
weariness or cold, that take the dignity out of a man, and make him
look mean.

'Ah, Curdie!  There you are!' he said, seeing his son come bounding
along as if it were morning with him and not evening.

'You look tired, Father,' said Curdie.

'Yes, my boy.  I'm not so young as you.'

'Nor so old as the princess,' said Curdie.

'Tell me this,' said Peter, 'why do people talk about going downhill
when they begin to get old?  It seems to me that then first they begin
to go uphill.'

'You looked to me, Father, when I caught sight of you, as if you had
been climbing the hill all your life, and were soon to get to the top.'

'Nobody can tell when that will be,' returned Peter.  'We're so ready
to think we're just at the top when it lies miles away.  But I must not
keep you, my boy, for you are wanted; and we shall be anxious to know
what the princess says to you--that is, if she will allow you to tell
us.'

'I think she will, for she knows there is nobody more to be trusted
than my father and mother,' said Curdie, with pride.

And away he shot, and ran, and jumped, and seemed almost to fly down
the long, winding, steep path, until he came to the gate of the king's
house.

There he met an unexpected obstruction: in the open door stood the
housekeeper, and she seemed to broaden herself out until she almost
filled the doorway.

'So!' she said, 'it's you, is it, young man?  You are the person that
comes in and goes out when he pleases, and keeps running up and down my
stairs without ever saying by your leave, or even wiping his shoes, and
always leaves the door open!  Don't you know this is my house?'

'No, I do not,' returned Curdie respectfully.  'You forget, ma'am, that
it is the king's house.'

'That is all the same.  The king left it to me to take care of--and
that you shall know!'

'Is the king dead, ma'am, that he has left it to you?' asked Curdie,
half in doubt from the self-assertion of the woman.

'Insolent fellow!' exclaimed the housekeeper.  'Don't you see by my
dress that I am in the king's service?'

'And am I not one of his miners?'

'Ah! that goes for nothing.  I am one of his household.  You are an
out-of-doors labourer.  You are a nobody.  You carry a pickaxe.  I
carry the keys at my girdle.  See!'

'But you must not call one a nobody to whom the king has spoken,' said
Curdie.

'Go along with you!' cried the housekeeper, and would have shut the
door in his face, had she not been afraid that when she stepped back he
would step in ere she could get it in motion, for it was very heavy and
always seemed unwilling to shut.  Curdie came a pace nearer.  She
lifted the great house key from her side, and threatened to strike him
down with it, calling aloud on Mar and Whelk and Plout, the menservants
under her, to come and help her. Ere one of them could answer, however,
she gave a great shriek and turned and fled, leaving the door wide open.

Curdie looked behind him, and saw an animal whose gruesome oddity even
he, who knew so many of the strange creatures, two of which were never
the same, that used to live inside the mountain with their masters the
goblins, had never seen equalled.  Its eyes were flaming with anger,
but it seemed to be at the housekeeper, for it came cowering and
creeping up and laid its head on the ground at Curdie's feet.  Curdie
hardly waited to look at it, however, but ran into the house, eager to
get up the stairs before any of the men should come to annoy--he had no
fear of their preventing him. Without halt or hindrance, though the
passages were nearly dark, he reached the door of the princess's
workroom, and knocked.

'Come in,' said the voice of the princess.

Curdie opened the door--but, to his astonishment, saw no room there.
Could he have opened a wrong door?  There was the great sky, and the
stars, and beneath he could see nothing only darkness! But what was
that in the sky, straight in front of him?  A great wheel of fire,
turning and turning, and flashing out blue lights!

'Come in, Curdie,' said the voice again.

'I would at once, ma'am,' said Curdie, 'if I were sure I was standing
at your door.'

'Why should you doubt it, Curdie?'

'Because I see neither walls nor floor, only darkness and the great
sky.'

'That is all right, Curdie.  Come in.'

Curdie stepped forward at once.  He was indeed, for the very crumb of a
moment, tempted to feel before him with his foot; but he saw that would
be to distrust the princess, and a greater rudeness he could not offer
her.  So he stepped straight in--I will not say without a little
tremble at the thought of finding no floor beneath his foot.  But that
which had need of the floor found it, and his foot was satisfied.

No sooner was he in than he saw that the great revolving wheel in the
sky was the princess's spinning wheel, near the other end of the room,
turning very fast.  He could see no sky or stars any more, but the
wheel was flashing out blue--oh, such lovely sky-blue light!--and
behind it of course sat the princess, but whether an old woman as thin
as a skeleton leaf, or a glorious lady as young as perfection, he could
not tell for the turning and flashing of the wheel.

'Listen to the wheel,' said the voice which had already grown dear to
Curdie: its very tone was precious like a jewel, not as a jewel, for no
jewel could compare with it in preciousness.

And Curdie listened and listened.

'What is it saying?' asked the voice.

'It is singing,' answered Curdie.

'What is it singing?'

Curdie tried to make out, but thought he could not; for no sooner had
he got hold of something than it vanished again.

Yet he listened, and listened, entranced with delight.

'Thank you, Curdie, said the voice.

'Ma'am,' said Curdie, 'I did try hard for a while, but I could not make
anything of it.'

'Oh yes, you did, and you have been telling it to me!  Shall I tell you
again what I told my wheel, and my wheel told you, and you have just
told me without knowing it?'

'Please, ma'am.'

Then the lady began to sing, and her wheel spun an accompaniment to her
song, and the music of the wheel was like the music of an Aeolian harp
blown upon by the wind that bloweth where it listeth. Oh, the sweet
sounds of that spinning wheel!  Now they were gold, now silver, now
grass, now palm trees, now ancient cities, now rubies, now mountain
brooks, now peacock's feathers, now clouds, now snowdrops, and now
mid-sea islands.  But for the voice that sang through it all, about
that I have no words to tell.  It would make you weep if I were able to
tell you what that was like, it was so beautiful and true and lovely.
But this is something like the words of its song:


  The stars are spinning their threads,
  And the clouds are the dust that flies,
  And the suns are weaving them up
  For the time when the sleepers shall rise.

  The ocean in music rolls,
  And gems are turning to eyes,
  And the trees are gathering souls
  For the day when the sleepers shall rise.

  The weepers are learning to smile,
  And laughter to glean the sighs;
  Burn and bury the care and guile,
  For the day when the sleepers shall rise.

  Oh, the dews and the moths and the daisy red,
  The larks and the glimmers and flows!
  The lilies and sparrows and daily bread,
  And the something that nobody knows!


The princess stopped, her wheel stopped, and she laughed.  And her
laugh was sweeter than song and wheel; sweeter than running brook and
silver bell; sweeter than joy itself, for the heart of the laugh was
love.

'Come now, Curdie, to this side of my wheel, and you will find me,' she
said; and her laugh seemed sounding on still in the words, as if they
were made of breath that had laughed.

Curdie obeyed, and passed the wheel, and there she stood to receive
him!--fairer than when he saw her last, a little younger still, and
dressed not in green and emeralds, but in pale blue, with a coronet of
silver set with pearls, and slippers covered with opals that gleamed
every colour of the rainbow.  It was some time before Curdie could take
his eyes from the marvel of her loveliness. Fearing at last that he was
rude, he turned them away; and, behold, he was in a room that was for
beauty marvellous!  The lofty ceiling was all a golden vine, Whose
great clusters of carbuncles, rubies, and chrysoberyls hung down like
the bosses of groined arches, and in its centre hung the most glorious
lamp that human eyes ever saw--the Silver Moon itself, a globe of
silver, as it seemed, with a heart of light so wondrous potent that it
rendered the mass translucent, and altogether radiant.

The room was so large that, looking back, he could scarcely see the end
at which he entered; but the other was only a few yards from him--and
there he saw another wonder: on a huge hearth a great fire was burning,
and the fire was a huge heap of roses, and yet it was fire.  The smell
of the roses filled the air, and the heat of the flames of them glowed
upon his face.  He turned an inquiring look upon the lady, and saw that
she was now seated in an ancient chair, the legs of which were crusted
with gems, but the upper part like a nest of daisies and moss and green
grass.

'Curdie,' she said in answer to his eyes, 'you have stood more than one
trial already, and have stood them well: now I am going to put you to a
harder.  Do you think you are prepared for it?'

'How can I tell, ma'am,' he returned, 'seeing I do not know what it is,
or what preparation it needs?  Judge me yourself, ma'am.'

'It needs only trust and obedience,' answered the lady.

'I dare not say anything, ma'am.  If you think me fit, command me.'

'It will hurt you terribly, Curdie, but that will be all; no real hurt
but much good will come to you from it.'

Curdie made no answer but stood gazing with parted lips in the lady's
face.

'Go and thrust both your hands into that fire,' she said quickly,
almost hurriedly.

Curdie dared not stop to think.  It was much too terrible to think
about.  He rushed to the fire, and thrust both of his hands right into
the middle of the heap of flaming roses, and his arms halfway up to the
elbows.  And it did hurt!  But he did not draw them back. He held the
pain as if it were a thing that would kill him if he let it go--as
indeed it would have done.  He was in terrible fear lest it should
conquer him.

But when it had risen to the pitch that he thought he could bear it no
longer, it began to fall again, and went on growing less and less until
by contrast with its former severity it had become rather pleasant.  At
last it ceased altogether, and Curdie thought his hands must be burned
to cinders if not ashes, for he did not feel them at all.  The princess
told him to take them out and look at them.  He did so, and found that
all that was gone of them was the rough, hard skin; they were white and
smooth like the princess's.

'Come to me,' she said.

He obeyed and saw, to his surprise, that her face looked as if she had
been weeping.

'Oh, Princess!  What is the matter?' he cried.  'Did I make a noise and
vex you?'

'No, Curdie, she answered; 'but it was very bad.'

'Did you feel it too then?'

'Of course I did.  But now it is over, and all is well.  Would you like
to know why I made You put your hands in the fire?' Curdie looked at
them again--then said:

'To take the marks of the work off them and make them fit for the
king's court, I suppose.'

'No, Curdie,' answered the princess, shaking her head, for she was not
pleased with the answer.  'It would be a poor way of making your hands
fit for the king's court to take off them signs of his service.  There
is a far greater difference on them than that.  Do you feel none?'

'No, ma'am.'

'You will, though, by and by, when the time comes.  But perhaps even
then you might not know what had been given you, therefore I will tell
you.  Have you ever heard what some philosophers say--that men were all
animals once?'

'No, ma'am.'

'It is of no consequence.  But there is another thing that is of the
greatest consequence--this: that all men, if they do not take care, go
down the hill to the animals' country; that many men are actually, all
their lives, going to be beasts.  People knew it once, but it is long
since they forgot it.'

'I am not surprised to hear it, ma'am, when I think of some of our
miners.'

'Ah!  But you must beware, Curdie, how you say of this man or that man
that he is travelling beastward.  There are not nearly so many going
that way as at first sight you might think.  When you met your father
on the hill tonight, you stood and spoke together on the same spot; and
although one of you was going up and the other coming down, at a little
distance no one could have told which was bound in the one direction
and which in the other.  Just so two people may be at the same spot in
manners and behaviour, and yet one may be getting better and the other
worse, which is just the greatest of all differences that could
possibly exist between them.'

'But ma'am,' said Curdie, 'where is the good of knowing that there is
such a difference, if you can never know where it is?'

'Now, Curdie, you must mind exactly what words I use, because although
the right words cannot do exactly what I want them to do, the wrong
words will certainly do what I do not want them to do. I did not say
you can never know.  When there is a necessity for your knowing, when
you have to do important business with this or that man, there is
always a way of knowing enough to keep you from any great blunder.  And
as you will have important business to do by and by, and that with
people of whom you yet know nothing, it will be necessary that you
should have some better means than usual of learning the nature of them.

'Now listen.  Since it is always what they do, whether in their minds
or their bodies, that makes men go down to be less than men, that is,
beasts, the change always comes first in their hands--and first of all
in the inside hands, to which the outside ones are but as the gloves.
They do not know it of course; for a beast does not know that he is a
beast, and the nearer a man gets to being a beast the less he knows it.
Neither can their best friends, or their worst enemies indeed, see any
difference in their hands, for they see only the living gloves of them.
But there are not a few who feel a vague something repulsive in the
hand of a man who is growing a beast.

'Now here is what the rose-fire has done for you: it has made your
hands so knowing and wise, it has brought your real hands so near the
outside of your flesh gloves, that you will henceforth be able to know
at once the hand of a man who is growing into a beast; nay, more--you
will at once feel the foot of the beast he is growing, just as if there
were no glove made like a man's hand between you and it.

'Hence of course it follows that you will be able often, and with
further education in zoology, will be able always to tell, not only
when a man is growing a beast, but what beast he is growing to, for you
will know the foot--what it is and what beast's it is. According, then,
to your knowledge of that beast will be your knowledge of the man you
have to do with.  Only there is one beautiful and awful thing about it,
that if any one gifted with this perception once uses it for his own
ends, it is taken from him, and then, not knowing that it is gone, he
is in a far worse condition than before, for he trusts to what he has
not got.'

'How dreadful!' Said Curdie.  'I must mind what I am about.'

'Yes, indeed, Curdie.'

'But may not one sometimes make a mistake without being able to help
it?'

'Yes.  But so long as he is not after his own ends, he will never make
a serious mistake.'

'I suppose you want me, ma'am, to warn every one whose hand tells me
that he is growing a beast--because, as you say, he does not know it
himself.'

The princess smiled.

'Much good that would do, Curdie!  I don't say there are no cases in
which it would be of use, but they are very rare and peculiar cases,
and if such come you will know them.  To such a person there is in
general no insult like the truth.  He cannot endure it, not because he
is growing a beast, but because he is ceasing to be a man.  It is the
dying man in him that it makes uncomfortable, and he trots, or creeps,
or swims, or flutters out of its way--calls it a foolish feeling, a
whim, an old wives' fable, a bit of priests' humbug, an effete
superstition, and so on.'

'And is there no hope for him?  Can nothing be done?  It's so awful to
think of going down, down, down like that!'

'Even when it's with his own will?'

'That's what seems to me to make it worst of all,' said Curdie.

'You are right,' answered the princess, nodding her head; 'but there is
this amount of excuse to make for all such, remember--that they do not
know what or how horrid their coming fate is. Many a lady, so delicate
and nice that she can bear nothing coarser than the finest linen to
touch her body, if she had a mirror that could show her the animal she
is growing to, as it lies waiting within the fair skin and the fine
linen and the silk and the jewels, would receive a shock that might
possibly wake her up.'

'Why then, ma'am, shouldn't she have it?'

The princess held her peace.

'Come here, Lina,' she said after a long pause.

From somewhere behind Curdie, crept forward the same hideous animal
which had fawned at his feet at the door, and which, without his
knowing it, had followed him every step up the dove tower.  She ran to
the princess, and lay down flat at her feet, looking up at her with an
expression so pitiful that in Curdie's heart it overcame all the
ludicrousness of her horrible mass of incongruities.  She had a very
short body, and very long legs made like an elephant's, so that in
lying down she kneeled with both pairs.  Her tail, which dragged on the
floor behind her, was twice as long and quite as thick as her body.
Her head was something between that of a polar bear and a snake.  Her
eyes were dark green, with a yellow light in them.  Her under teeth
came up like a fringe of icicles, only very white, outside of her upper
lip.  Her throat looked as if the hair had been plucked off.  It showed
a skin white and smooth.

'Give Curdie a paw, Lina,' said the princess.

The creature rose, and, lifting a long foreleg, held up a great doglike
paw to Curdie.  He took it gently.  But what a shudder, as of terrified
delight, ran through him, when, instead of the paw of a dog, such as it
seemed to his eyes, he clasped in his great mining fist the soft, neat
little hand of a child!  He took it in both of his, and held it as if
he could not let it go.  The green eyes stared at him with their yellow
light, and the mouth was turned up toward him with its constant half
grin; but here was the child's hand!  If he could but pull the child
out of the beast! His eyes sought the princess.  She was watching him
with evident satisfaction.

'Ma'am, here is a child's hand!' said Curdie.

'Your gift does more for you than it promised.  It is yet better to
perceive a hidden good than a hidden evil.'

'But,' began Curdie.

'I am not going to answer any more questions this evening,' interrupted
the princess.  'You have not half got to the bottom of the answers I
have already given you.  That paw in your hand now might almost teach
you the whole science of natural history--the heavenly sort, I mean.'

'I will think,' said Curdie.  'But oh! please! one word more: may I
tell my father and mother all about it?'

'Certainly--though perhaps now it may be their turn to find it a little
difficult to believe that things went just as you must tell them.'

'They shall see that I believe it all this time,' said Curdie.

'Tell them that tomorrow morning you must set out for the court--not
like a great man, but just as poor as you are.  They had better not
speak about it.  Tell them also that it will be a long time before they
hear of you again, but they must not lose heart.  And tell your father
to lay that stone I gave him at night in a safe place--not because of
the greatness of its price, although it is such an emerald as no prince
has in his crown, but because it will be a news-bearer between you and
him.  As often as he gets at all anxious about you, he must take it and
lay it in the fire, and leave it there when he goes to bed.  In the
morning he must find it in the ashes, and if it be as green as ever,
then all goes well with you; if it have lost colour, things go ill with
you; but if it be very pale indeed, then you are in great danger, and
he must come to me.'

'Yes, ma'am,' said Curdie.  'Please, am I to go now?'

'Yes,' answered the princess, and held out her hand to him.

Curdie took it, trembling with joy.  It was a very beautiful hand--not
small, very smooth, but not very soft--and just the same to his
fire-taught touch that it was to his eyes.  He would have stood there
all night holding it if she had not gently withdrawn it.

'I will provide you a servant,' she said, 'for your journey and to wait
upon you afterward.'

'But where am I to go, ma'am, and what am I to do?  You have given me
no message to carry, neither have you said what I am wanted for. I go
without a notion whether I am to walk this way or that, or what I am to
do when I get I don't know where.'

'Curdie!' said the princess, and there was a tone of reminder in his
own name as she spoke it, 'did I not tell you to tell your father and
mother that you were to set out for the court?  And you know that lies
to the north.  You must learn to use far less direct directions than
that.  You must not be like a dull servant that needs to be told again
and again before he will understand.  You have orders enough to start
with, and you will find, as you go on, and as you need to know, what
you have to do.  But I warn you that perhaps it will not look the least
like what you may have been fancying I should require of you.  I have
one idea of you and your work, and you have another.  I do not blame
you for that--you cannot help it yet; but you must be ready to let my
idea, which sets you working, set your idea right.  Be true and honest
and fearless, and all shall go well with you and your work, and all
with whom your work lies, and so with your parents--and me too,
Curdie,' she added after a little pause.

The young miner bowed his head low, patted the strange head that lay at
the princess's feet, and turned away.  As soon as he passed the
spinning wheel, which looked, in the midst of the glorious room, just
like any wheel you might find in a country cottage--old and worn and
dingy and dusty--the splendour of the place vanished, and he saw but
the big bare room he seemed at first to have entered, with the
moon--the princess's moon no doubt--shining in at one of the windows
upon the spinning wheel.



CHAPTER 9

Hands

Curdie went home, pondering much, and told everything to his father and
mother.  As the old princess had said, it was now their turn to find
what they heard hard to believe.  If they had not been able to trust
Curdie himself, they would have refused to believe more than the half
of what he reported, then they would have refused that half too, and at
last would most likely for a time have disbelieved in the very
existence of the princess, what evidence their own senses had given
them notwithstanding.

For he had nothing conclusive to show in proof of what he told them.
When he held out his hands to them, his mother said they looked as if
he had been washing them with soft soap, only they did smell of
something nicer than that, and she must allow it was more like roses
than anything else she knew.  His father could not see any difference
upon his hands, but then it was night, he said, and their poor little
lamp was not enough for his old eyes.  As to the feel of them, each of
his own hands, he said, was hard and horny enough for two, and it must
be the fault of the dullness of his own thick skin that he felt no
change on Curdie's palms.

'Here, Curdie,' said his mother, 'try my hand, and see what beast's paw
lies inside it.'

'No, Mother,' answered Curdie, half beseeching, half indignant, 'I will
not insult my new gift by making pretence to try it.  That would be
mockery.  There is no hand within yours but the hand of a true woman,
my mother.'

'I should like you just to take hold of my hand though,' said his
mother.  'You are my son, and may know all the bad there is in me.'

Then at once Curdie took her hand in his.  And when he had it, he kept
it, stroking it gently with his other hand.

'Mother,' he said at length, 'your hand feels just like that of the
princess.'

'What!  My horny, cracked, rheumatic old hand, with its big joints, and
its short nails all worn down to the quick with hard work--like the
hand of the beautiful princess!  Why, my child, you will make me fancy
your fingers have grown very dull indeed, instead of sharp and
delicate, if you talk such nonsense.  Mine is such an ugly hand I
should be ashamed to show it to any but one that loved me.  But love
makes all safe--doesn't it, Curdie?'

'Well, Mother, all I can say is that I don't feel a roughness, or a
crack, or a big joint, or a short nail.  Your hand feels just and
exactly, as near as I can recollect, and it's not more than two hours
since I had it in mine--well, I will say, very like indeed to that of
the old princess.'

'Go away, you flatterer,' said his mother, with a smile that showed how
she prized the love that lay beneath what she took for its hyperbole.
The praise even which one cannot accept is sweet from a true mouth.
'If that is all your new gift can do, it won't make a warlock of you,'
she added.

'Mother, it tells me nothing but the truth,' insisted Curdie, 'however
unlike the truth it may seem.  It wants no gift to tell what anybody's
outside hands are like.  But by it I know your inside hands are like
the princess's.'

'And I am sure the boy speaks true,' said Peter.  'He only says about
your hand what I have known ever so long about yourself, Joan.  Curdie,
your mother's foot is as pretty a foot as any lady's in the land, and
where her hand is not so pretty it comes of killing its beauty for you
and me, my boy.  And I can tell you more, Curdie.  I don't know much
about ladies and gentlemen, but I am sure your inside mother must be a
lady, as her hand tells you, and I will try to say how I know it.  This
is how: when I forget myself looking at her as she goes about her
work--and that happens often as I grow older--I fancy for a moment or
two that I am a gentleman; and when I wake up from my little dream, it
is only to feel the more strongly that I must do everything as a
gentleman should.  I will try to tell you what I mean, Curdie.  If a
gentleman--I mean a real gentleman, not a pretended one, of which sort
they say there are a many above ground--if a real gentleman were to
lose all his money and come down to work in the mines to get bread for
his family--do you think, Curdie, he would work like the lazy ones?
Would he try to do as little as he could for his wages?  I know the
sort of the true gentleman pretty near as well as he does himself.  And
my wife, that's your mother, Curdie, she's a true lady, you may take my
word for it, for it's she that makes me want to be a true gentleman.
Wife, the boy is in the right about your hand.'

'Now, Father, let me feel yours,' said Curdie, daring a little more.

'No, no, my boy,' answered Peter.  'I don't want to hear anything about
my hand or my head or my heart.  I am what I am, and I hope growing
better, and that's enough.  No, you shan't feel my hand. You must go to
bed, for you must start with the sun.'

It was not as if Curdie had been leaving them to go to prison, or to
make a fortune, and although they were sorry enough to lose him, they
were not in the least heartbroken or even troubled at his going.

As the princess had said he was to go like the poor man he was, Curdie
came down in the morning from his little loft dressed in his working
clothes.  His mother, who was busy getting his breakfast for him, while
his father sat reading to her out of an old book, would have had him
put on his holiday garments, which, she said, would look poor enough
among the fine ladies and gentlemen he was going to.  But Curdie said
he did not know that he was going among ladies and gentlemen, and that
as work was better than play, his workday clothes must on the whole be
better than his playday Clothes; and as his father accepted the
argument, his mother gave in.  When he had eaten his breakfast, she
took a pouch made of goatskin, with the long hair on it, filled it with
bread and cheese, and hung it over his shoulder.  Then his father gave
him a stick he had cut for him in the wood, and he bade them good-bye
rather hurriedly, for he was afraid of breaking down.  As he went out
he caught up his mattock and took it with him.  It had on the one side
a pointed curve of strong steel for loosening the earth and the ore,
and on the other a steel hammer for breaking the stones and rocks.
Just as he crossed the threshold the sun showed the first segment of
his disc above the horizon.



CHAPTER 10

The Heath

He had to go to the bottom of the hill to get into a country he could
cross, for the mountains to the north were full of precipices, and it
would have been losing time to go that way.  Not until he had reached
the king's house was it any use to turn northwards.  Many a look did he
raise, as he passed it, to the dove tower, and as long as it was in
sight, but he saw nothing of the lady of the pigeons.

On and on he fared, and came in a few hours to a country where there
were no mountains more--only hills, with great stretches of desolate
heath.  Here and there was a village, but that brought him little
pleasure, for the people were rougher and worse mannered than those in
the mountains, and as he passed through, the children came behind and
mocked him.

'There's a monkey running away from the mines!' they cried. Sometimes
their parents came out and encouraged them.

'He doesn't want to find gold for the king any longer--the lazybones!'
they would say.  'He'll be well taxed down here though, and he won't
like that either.'

But it was little to Curdie that men who did not know what he was about
should not approve of his proceedings.  He gave them a merry answer now
and then, and held diligently on his way.  When they got so rude as
nearly to make him angry, he would treat them as he used to treat the
goblins, and sing his own songs to keep out their foolish noises.  Once
a child fell as he turned to run away after throwing a stone at him.
He picked him up, kissed him, and carried him to his mother.  The woman
had run out in terror when she saw the strange miner about, as she
thought, to take vengeance on her boy.  When he put him in her arms,
she blessed him, and Curdie went on his way rejoicing.

And so the day went on, and the evening came, and in the middle of a
great desolate heath he began to feel tired, and sat down under an
ancient hawthorn, through which every now and then a lone wind that
seemed to come from nowhere and to go nowhither sighed and hissed.  It
was very old and distorted.  There was not another tree for miles all
around.  It seemed to have lived so long, and to have been so torn and
tossed by the tempests on that moor, that it had at last gathered a
wind of its own, which got up now and then, tumbled itself about, and
lay down again.

Curdie had been so eager to get on that he had eaten nothing since his
breakfast.  But he had had plenty of water, for Many little streams had
crossed his path.  He now opened the wallet his mother had given him,
and began to eat his supper.  The sun was setting. A few clouds had
gathered about the west, but there was not a single cloud anywhere else
to be seen.

Now Curdie did not know that this was a part of the country very hard
to get through.  Nobody lived there, though many had tried to build in
it.  Some died very soon.  Some rushed out of it.  Those who stayed
longest went raving mad, and died a terrible death. Such as walked
straight on, and did not spend a night there, got through well and were
nothing the worse.  But those who slept even a single night in it were
sure to meet with something they could never forget, and which often
left a mark everybody could read. And that old hawthorn Might have been
enough for a warning--it looked so like a human being dried up and
distorted with age and suffering, with cares instead of loves, and
things instead of thoughts.  Both it and the heath around it, which
stretched on all sides as far as he could see, were so withered that it
was impossible to say whether they were alive or not.

And while Curdie ate there came a change.  Clouds had gathered over his
head, and seemed drifting about in every direction, as if not
'shepherded by the slow, unwilling wind,' but hunted in all directions
by wolfish flaws across the plains of the sky.  The sun was going down
in a storm of lurid crimson, and out of the west came a wind that felt
red and hot the one moment, and cold and pale the other.  And very
strangely it sang in the dreary old hawthorn tree, and very cheerily it
blew about Curdie, now making him creep close up to the tree for
shelter from its shivery cold, now fan himself with his cap, it was so
sultry and stifling.  It seemed to come from the deathbed of the sun,
dying in fever and ague.

And as he gazed at the sun, now on the verge of the horizon, very large
and very red and very dull--for though the clouds had broken away a
dusty fog was spread all over the disc--Curdie saw something strange
appear against it, moving about like a fly over its burning face.  This
looked as if it were coming out of the sun's furnace heart, and was a
living creature of some kind surely; but its shape was very uncertain,
because the dazzle of the light all around melted the outlines.

It was growing larger, it must be approaching!  It grew so rapidly that
by the time the sun was half down its head reached the top of the arch,
and presently nothing but its legs were to be seen, crossing and
recrossing the face of the vanishing disc.

When the sun was down he could see nothing of it more, but in a moment
he heard its feet galloping over the dry crackling heather, and seeming
to come straight for him.  He stood up, lifted his pickaxes and threw
the hammer end over his shoulder: he was going to have a fight for his
life!  And now it appeared again, vague, yet very awful, in the dim
twilight the sun had left behind.  But just before it reached him, down
from its four long legs it dropped flat on the ground, and came
crawling towards him, wagging a huge tail as it came.



CHAPTER 11

Lina

It was Lina.  All at once Curdie recognized her--the frightful creature
he had seen at the princess's.  He dropped his pickaxes and held out
his hand.  She crept nearer and nearer, and laid her chin in his palm,
and he patted her ugly head.  Then she crept away behind the tree, and
lay down, panting hard.

Curdie did not much like the idea of her being behind him. Horrible as
she was to look at, she seemed to his mind more horrible when he was
not looking at her.  But he remembered the child's hand, and never
thought of driving her away.  Now and then he gave a glance behind him,
and there she lay flat, with her eyes closed and her terrible teeth
gleaming between her two huge forepaws.

After his supper and his long day's journey it was no wonder Curdie
should now be sleepy.  Since the sun set the air had been warm and
pleasant.  He lay down under the tree, closed his eyes, and thought to
sleep.  He found himself mistaken, however.  But although he could not
sleep, he was yet aware of resting delightfully.

Presently he heard a sweet sound of singing somewhere, such as he had
never heard before--a singing as of curious birds far off, which drew
nearer and nearer.  At length he heard their wings, and, opening his
eyes, saw a number of very large birds, as it seemed, alighting around
him, still singing.  It was strange to hear song from the throats of
such big birds.

And still singing, with large and round but not the less birdlike
voices, they began to weave a strange dance about him, moving their
wings in time with their legs.  But the dance seemed somehow to be
troubled and broken, and to return upon itself in an eddy, in place of
sweeping smoothly on.

And he soon learned, in the low short growls behind him, the cause of
the imperfection: they wanted to dance all round the tree, but Lina
would not permit them to come on her side.

Now curdie liked the birds, and did not altogether like Lina.  But
neither, nor both together, made a reason for driving away the
princess's creature.  Doubtless she had been the goblins' creature, but
the last time he saw her was in the king's house and the dove tower,
and at the old princess's feet.  So he left her to do as she would, and
the dance of the birds continued only a semicircle, troubled at the
edges, and returning upon itself.

But their song and their motions, nevertheless, and the waving of their
wings, began at length to make him very sleepy.  All the time he had
kept doubting whether they could really be birds, and the sleepier he
got, the more he imagined them something else, but he suspected no harm.

Suddenly, just as he was sinking beneath the waves of slumber, he awoke
in fierce pain.  The birds were upon him--all over him--and had begun
to tear him with beaks and claws.  He had but time, however, to feel
that he could not move under their weight, when they set up a hideous
screaming, and scattered like a cloud.  Lina was among them, snapping
and striking with her paws, while her tail knocked them over and over.
But they flew up, gathered, and descended on her in a swarm, perching
upon every part of her body, so that he could see only a huge misshapen
mass, which seemed to go rolling away into the darkness.  He got up and
tried to follow, but could see nothing, and after wandering about
hither and thither for some time, found himself again beside the
hawthorn.  He feared greatly that the birds had been too much for Lina,
and had torn her to pieces.  In a little while, however, she came
limping back, and lay down in her old place.  Curdie also lay down,
but, from the pain of his wounds, there was no sleep for him.  When the
light came he found his clothes a good deal torn and his skin as well,
but gladly wondered why the wicked birds had not at once attacked his
eyes.  Then he turned, looking for Lina.  She rose and crept to him.
But she was in far worse plight than he--plucked and gashed and torn
with the beaks and claws of the birds, especially about the bare part
of her neck, so that she was pitiful to see.  And those worst wounds
she could not reach to lick.

'Poor Lina!' said Curdie, 'you got all those helping me.'

She wagged her tail, and made it clear she understood him.  Then it
flashed upon Curdie's mind that perhaps this was the companion the
princess had promised him.  For the princess did so many things
differently from what anybody looked for!  Lina was no beauty
certainly, but already, the first night, she had saved his life.

'Come along, Lina,' he said, 'we want water.'

She put her nose to the earth, and after snuffing for a moment, darted
off in a straight line.  Curdie followed.  The ground was so uneven,
that after losing sight of her many times, at last he seemed to have
lost her altogether.  In a few minutes, however, he came upon her
waiting for him.  Instantly she darted off again. After he had lost and
found her again many times, he found her the last time lying beside a
great stone.  As soon as he came up she began scratching at it with her
paws.  When he had raised it an inch or two, she shoved in first her
nose and then her teeth, and lifted with all the might of her neck.

When at length between them they got it up, there was a beautiful
little well.  He filled his cap with the clearest and sweetest water,
and drank.  Then he gave to Lina, and she drank plentifully. Next he
washed her wounds very carefully.  And as he did so, he noted how much
the bareness of her neck added to the strange repulsiveness of her
appearance.  Then he bethought him of the goatskin wallet his mother
had given him, and taking it from his shoulders, tried whether it would
do to make a collar of for the poor animal.  He found there was just
enough, and the hair so similar in colour to Lina's, that no one could
suspect it of having grown somewhere else.

He took his knife, ripped up the seams of the wallet, and began trying
the skin to her neck.  It was plain she understood perfectly what he
wished, for she endeavoured to hold her neck conveniently, turning it
this way and that while he contrived, with his rather scanty material,
to make the collar fit.  As his mother had taken care to provide him
with needles and thread, he soon had a nice gorget ready for her.  He
laced it on with one of his boot laces, which its long hair covered.
Poor Lina looked much better in it. Nor could any one have called it a
piece of finery.  If ever green eyes with a yellow light in them looked
grateful, hers did.

As they had no longer any bag to carry them in, Curdie and Lina now ate
what was left of the provisions.  Then they set out again upon their
journey.  For seven days it lasted.  They met with various adventures,
and in all of them Lina proved so helpful, and so ready to risk her
life for the sake of her companion, that Curdie grew not merely very
fond but very trustful of her; and her ugliness, which at first only
moved his pity, now actually increased his affection for her.  One day,
looking at her stretched on the grass before him, he said:

'Oh, Lina!  If the princess would but burn you in her fire of roses!'

She looked up at him, gave a mournful whine like a dog, and laid her
head on his feet.  What or how much he could not tell, but clearly she
had gathered something from his words.



CHAPTER 12

More Creatures

One day from morning till night they had been passing through a forest.
As soon as the sun was down Curdie began to be aware that there were
more in it than themselves.  First he saw only the swift rush of a
figure across the trees at some distance.  Then he saw another and then
another at shorter intervals.  Then he saw others both farther off and
nearer.  At last, missing Lina and looking about after her, he saw an
appearance as marvellous as herself steal up to her, and begin
conversing with her after some beast fashion which evidently she
understood.

Presently what seemed a quarrel arose between them, and stranger noises
followed, mingled with growling.  At length it came to a fight, which
had not lasted long, however, before the creature of the wood threw
itself upon its back, and held up its paws to Lina. She instantly
walked on, and the creature got up and followed her. They had not gone
far before another strange animal appeared, approaching Lina, when
precisely the same thing was repeated, the vanquished animal rising and
following with the former.  Again, and yet again, and again, a fresh
animal came up, seemed to be reasoned and certainly was fought with and
overcome by Lina, until at last, before they were out of the wood, she
was followed by forty-nine of the most grotesquely ugly, the most
extravagantly abnormal animals imagination can conceive.  To describe
them were a hopeless task.

I knew a boy who used to make animals out of heather roots. Wherever he
could find four legs, he was pretty sure to find a head and a tail.
His beasts were a most comic menagerie, and right fruitful of laughter.
But they were not so grotesque and extravagant as Lina and her
followers.  One of them, for instance, was like a boa constrictor
walking on four little stumpy legs near its tail.  About the same
distance from its head were two little wings, which it was forever
fluttering as if trying to fly with them.  Curdie thought it fancied it
did fly with them, when it was merely plodding on busily with its four
little stumps.  How it managed to keep up he could not think, till once
when he missed it from the group: the same moment he caught sight of
something at a distance plunging at an awful serpentine rate through
the trees, and presently, from behind a huge ash, this same creature
fell again into the group, quietly waddling along on its four stumps.

Watching it after this, he saw that, when it was not able to keep up
any longer, and they had all got a little space ahead, it shot into the
wood away from the route, and made a great round, serpentine alone in
huge billows of motion, devouring the ground, undulating awfully,
galloping as if it were all legs together, and its four stumps nowhere.
In this mad fashion it shot ahead, and, a few minutes after, toddled in
again among the rest, walking peacefully and somewhat painfully on its
few fours.

From the time it takes to describe one of them it will be readily seen
that it would hardly do to attempt a description of each of the
forty-nine.  They were not a goodly company, but well worth
contemplating, nevertheless; and Curdie had been too long used to the
goblins' creatures in the mines and on the mountain, to feel the least
uncomfortable at being followed by such a herd.  On the contrary, the
marvellous vagaries of shape they manifested amused him greatly, and
shortened the journey much.

Before they were all gathered, however, it had got so dark that he
could see some of them only a part at a time, and every now and then,
as the company wandered on, he would be startled by some extraordinary
limb or feature, undreamed of by him before, thrusting itself out of
the darkness into the range of his ken. Probably there were some of his
old acquaintances among them, although such had been the conditions of
semi-darkness, in which alone he had ever seen any of them, that it was
not like he would be able to identify any of them.

On they marched solemnly, almost in silence, for either with feet or
voice the creatures seldom made any noise.  By the time they reached
the outside of the wood it was morning twilight.  Into the open trooped
the strange torrent of deformity, each one following Lina.  Suddenly
she stopped, turned towards them, and said something which they
understood, although to Curdie's ear the sounds she made seemed to have
no articulation.  Instantly they all turned, and vanished in the
forest, and Lina alone came trotting lithely and clumsily after her
master.



CHAPTER 13

The Baker's Wife

They were now passing through a lovely country of hill and dale and
rushing stream.  The hills were abrupt, with broken chasms for
watercourses, and deep little valleys full of trees.  But now and then
they came to a larger valley, with a fine river, whose level banks and
the adjacent meadows were dotted all over with red and white kine,
while on the fields above, that sloped a little to the foot of the
hills, grew oats and barley and wheat, and on the sides of the hills
themselves vines hung and chestnuts rose.

They came at last to a broad, beautiful river, up which they must go to
arrive at the city of Gwyntystorm, where the king had his court.  As
they went the valley narrowed, and then the river, but still it was
wide enough for large boats.  After this, while the river kept its
size, the banks narrowed, until there was only room for a road between
the river and the great Cliffs that overhung it. At last river and road
took a sudden turn, and lo! a great rock in the river, which dividing
flowed around it, and on the top of the rock the city, with lofty walls
and towers and battlements, and above the city the palace of the king,
built like a strong castle. But the fortifications had long been
neglected, for the whole country was now under one king, and all men
said there was no more need for weapons or walls.  No man pretended to
love his neighbour, but every one said he knew that peace and quiet
behaviour was the best thing for himself, and that, he said, was quite
as useful, and a great deal more reasonable.  The city was prosperous
and rich, and if everybody was not comfortable, everybody else said he
ought to be.

When Curdie got up opposite the mighty rock, which sparkled all over
with crystals, he found a narrow bridge, defended by gates and
portcullis and towers with loopholes.  But the gates stood wide open,
and were dropping from their great hinges; the portcullis was eaten
away with rust, and clung to the grooves evidently immovable; while the
loopholed towers had neither floor nor roof, and their tops were fast
filling up their interiors.  Curdie thought it a pity, if only for
their old story, that they should be thus neglected.  But everybody in
the city regarded these signs of decay as the best proof of the
prosperity of the place.  Commerce and self-interest, they said, had
got the better of violence, and the troubles of the past were whelmed
in the riches that flowed in at their open gates.

Indeed, there was one sect of philosophers in it which taught that it
would be better to forget all the past history of the city, were it not
that its former imperfections taught its present inhabitants how
superior they and their times were, and enabled them to glory over
their ancestors.  There were even certain quacks in the city who
advertised pills for enabling people to think well of themselves, and
some few bought of them, but most laughed, and said, with evident
truth, that they did not require them.  Indeed, the general theme of
discourse when they met was, how much wiser they were than their
fathers.

Curdie crossed the river, and began to ascend the winding road that led
up to the city.  They met a good many idlers, and all stared at them.
It was no wonder they should stare, but there was an unfriendliness in
their looks which Curdie did not like.  No one, however, offered them
any molestation: Lina did not invite liberties.  After a long ascent,
they reached the principal gate of the city and entered.

The street was very steep, ascending toward the palace, which rose in
great strength above all the houses.  Just as they entered, a baker,
whose shop was a few doors inside the gate, came out in his white
apron, and ran to the shop of his friend, the barber, on the opposite
side of the way.  But as he ran he stumbled and fell heavily.  Curdie
hastened to help him up, and found he had bruised his forehead badly.
He swore grievously at the stone for tripping him up, declaring it was
the third time he had fallen over it within the last month; and saying
what was the king about that he allowed such a stone to stick up
forever on the main street of his royal residence of Gwyntystorm!  What
was a king for if he would not take care of his people's heads!  And he
stroked his forehead tenderly.

'Was it your head or your feet that ought to bear the blame of your
fall?' asked Curdie.

'Why, you booby of a miner!  My feet, of course,' answered the baker.

'Nay, then,' said Curdie, 'the king can't be to blame.'

'Oh, I see!' said the baker.  'You're laying a trap for me.  Of course,
if you come to that, it was my head that ought to have looked after my
feet.  But it is the king's part to look after us all, and have his
streets smooth.'

'Well, I don't see, said Curdie, 'why the king should take care of the
baker, when the baker's head won't take care of the baker's feet.'

'Who are you to make game of the king's baker?' cried the man in a rage.

But, instead of answering, Curdie went up to the bump on the street
which had repeated itself on the baker's head, and turning the hammer
end of his mattock, struck it such a blow that it flew wide in pieces.
Blow after blow he struck until he had levelled it with the street.

But out flew the barber upon him in a rage. 'What do you break my
window for, you rascal, with your pickaxe?'

'I am very sorry,' said Curdie.  'It must have been a bit of stone that
flew from my mattock.  I couldn't help it, you know.'

'Couldn't help it!  A fine story!  What do you go breaking the rock
for--the very rock upon which the city stands?'

'Look at your friend's forehead,' said Curdie.  'See what a lump he has
got on it with falling over that same stone.'

'What's that to my window?' cried the barber.  'His forehead can mend
itself; my poor window can't.'

'But he's the king's baker,' said Curdie, more and more surprised at
the man's anger.

'What's that to me?  This is a free city.  Every man here takes care of
himself, and the king takes care of us all.  I'll have the price of my
window out of you, or the exchequer shall pay for it.'

Something caught Curdie's eye.  He stooped, picked up a piece of the
stone he had just broken, and put it in his pocket.

'I suppose you are going to break another of my windows with that
stone!' said the barber.

'Oh no,' said Curdie.  'I didn't mean to break your window, and I
certainly won't break another.'

'Give me that stone,' said the barber.

Curdie gave it him, and the barber threw it over the city wall.

'I thought you wanted the stone,' said Curdie.

'No, you fool!' answered the barber.  'What should I want with a stone?'

Curdie stooped and picked up another.

'Give me that stone,' said the barber.

'No,' answered Curdie.  'You have just told me YOU don't want a stone,
and I do.'

The barber took Curdie by the collar.

'Come, now!  You pay me for that window.'

'How much?' asked Curdie.

The barber said, 'A crown.'  But the baker, annoyed at the
heartlessness of the barber, in thinking more of his broken window than
the bump on his friend's forehead, interfered.

'No, no,' he said to Curdie; 'don't you pay any such sum.  A little
pane like that cost only a quarter.'

'Well, to be certain,' said Curdie, 'I'll give a half.'  For he doubted
the baker as well as the barber.  'Perhaps one day, if he finds he has
asked too much, he will bring me the difference.'

'Ha! ha!' laughed the barber.  'A fool and his money are soon parted.'

But as he took the coin from Curdie's hand he grasped it in affected
reconciliation and real satisfaction.  In Curdie's, his was the cold
smooth leathery palm of a monkey.  He looked up, almost expecting to
see him pop the money in his cheek; but he had not yet got so far as
that, though he was well on the road to it: then he would have no other
pocket.

'I'm glad that stone is gone, anyhow,' said the baker.  'It was the
bane of my life.  I had no idea how easy it was to remove it.  Give me
your pickaxes young miner, and I will show you how a baker can make the
stones fly.'

He caught the tool out of Curdie's hand, and flew at one of the
foundation stones of the gateway.  But he jarred his arm terribly,
scarcely chipped the stone, dropped the mattock with a cry of pain, and
ran into his own shop.  Curdie picked up his implement, and, looking
after the baker, saw bread in the window, and followed him in.  But the
baker, ashamed of himself, and thinking he was coming to laugh at him,
popped out of the back door, and when Curdie entered, the baker's wife
came from the bakehouse to serve him. Curdie requested to know the
price of a certain good-sized loaf.

Now the baker's wife had been watching what had passed since first her
husband ran out of the shop, and she liked the look of Curdie. Also she
was more honest than her husband.  Casting a glance to the back door,
she replied:

'That is not the best bread.  I will sell you a loaf of what we bake
for ourselves.'  And when she had spoken she laid a finger on her lips.
'Take care of yourself in this place, MY son,' she added.  'They do not
love strangers.  I was once a stranger here, and I know what I say.'
Then fancying she heard her husband, 'That is a strange animal you
have,' she said, in a louder voice.

'Yes,' answered Curdie.  'She is no beauty, but she is very good, and
we love each other.  Don't we, Lina?'

Lina looked up and whined.  Curdie threw her the half of his loaf,
which she ate, while her master and the baker's wife talked a little.
Then the baker's wife gave them some water, and Curdie having paid for
his loaf, he and Lina went up the street together.



CHAPTER 14

The Dogs of Gwyntystorm

The steep street led them straight up to a large market place with
butchers' shops, about which were many dogs.  The moment they caught
sight of Lina, one and all they came rushing down upon her, giving her
no chance of explaining herself.  When Curdie saw the dogs coming he
heaved up his mattock over his shoulder, and was ready, if they would
have it so.  Seeing him thus prepared to defend his follower, a great
ugly bulldog flew at him.  With the first blow Curdie struck him
through the brain and the brute fell dead at his feet.  But he could
not at once recover his weapon, which stuck in the skull of his foe,
and a huge mastiff, seeing him thus hampered, flew at him next.

Now Lina, who had shown herself so brave upon the road thither, had
grown shy upon entering the city, and kept always at Curdie's heel. But
it was her turn now.  The moment she saw her master in danger she
seemed to go mad with rage.  As the mastiff jumped at Curdie's throat,
Lina flew at him, seized him with her tremendous jaws, gave one roaring
grind, and he lay beside the bulldog with his neck broken.  They were
the best dogs in the market, after the judgement of the butchers of
Gwyntystorm.  Down came their masters, knives in hand.

Curdie drew himself up fearlessly, mattock on shoulder, and awaited
their coming, while at his heel his awful attendant showed not only her
outside fringe of icicle teeth, but a double row of right serviceable
fangs she wore inside her mouth, and her green eyes flashed yellow as
gold.  The butchers, not liking the look of either of them or of the
dogs at their feet, drew back, and began to remonstrate in the manner
of outraged men.

'Stranger,' said the first, 'that bulldog is mine.'

'Take him, then,' said Curdie, indignant.

'You've killed him!'

'Yes--else he would have killed me.'

'That's no business of mine.'

'No?'

'No.'

'That makes it the more mine, then.'

'This sort of thing won't do, you know,' said the other butcher.

'That's true,' said Curdie. 'That's my mastiff,' said the butcher.

'And as he ought to be,' said Curdie.

'Your brute shall be burned alive for it,' said the butcher.

'Not yet,' answered Curdie.  'We have done no wrong.  We were walking
quietly up your street when your dogs flew at us.  If you don't teach
your dogs how to treat strangers, you must take the consequences.'

'They treat them quite properly,' said the butcher.  'What right has
any one to bring an abomination like that into our city?  The horror is
enough to make an idiot of every child in the place.'

'We are both subjects of the king, and my poor animal can't help her
looks.  How would you like to be served like that because you were
ugly?  She's not a bit fonder of her looks than you are--only what can
she do to change them?'

'I'll do to change them,' said the fellow.

Thereupon the butchers brandished their long knives and advanced,
keeping their eyes upon Lina.

'Don't be afraid, Lina,' cried Curdie.  'I'll kill one--you kill the
other.'

Lina gave a howl that might have terrified an army, and crouched ready
to spring.  The butchers turned and ran.

By this time a great crowd had gathered behind the butchers, and in it
a number of boys returning from school who began to stone the
strangers.  It was a way they had with man or beast they did not expect
to make anything by.  One of the stones struck Lina; she caught it in
her teeth and crunched it so that it fell in gravel from her mouth.
Some of the foremost of the crowd saw this, and it terrified them.
They drew back; the rest took fright from their retreat; the panic
spread; and at last the crowd scattered in all directions.  They ran,
and cried out, and said the devil and his dam were come to Gwyntystorm.
So Curdie and Lina were left standing unmolested in the market place.
But the terror of them spread throughout the city, and everybody began
to shut and lock his door so that by the time the setting sun shone
down the street, there was not a shop left open, for fear of the devil
and his horrible dam.  But all the upper windows within sight of them
were crowded with heads watching them where they stood lonely in the
deserted market place.

Curdie looked carefully all round, but could not see one open door. He
caught sight of the sign of an inn, however, and laying down his
mattock, and telling Lina to take care of it, walked up to the door of
it and knocked.  But the people in the house, instead of opening the
door, threw things at him from the windows.  They would not listen to a
word he said, but sent him back to Lina with the blood running down his
face.  When Lina saw that she leaped up in a fury and was rushing at
the house, into which she would certainly have broken; but Curdie
called her, and made her lie down beside him while he bethought him
what next he should do.

'Lina,' he said, 'the people keep their gates open, but their houses
and their hearts shut.'

As if she knew it was her presence that had brought this trouble upon
him, she rose and went round and round him, purring like a tigress, and
rubbing herself against his legs.

Now there was one little thatched house that stood squeezed in between
two tall gables, and the sides of the two great houses shot out
projecting windows that nearly met across the roof of the little one,
so that it lay in the street like a doll's house.  In this house lived
a poor old woman, with a grandchild.  And because she never gossiped or
quarrelled, or chaffered in the market, but went without what she could
not afford, the people called her a witch, and would have done her many
an ill turn if they had not been afraid of her.

Now while Curdie was looking in another direction the door opened, and
out came a little dark-haired, black-eyed, gypsy-looking child, and
toddled across the market place toward the outcasts.  The moment they
saw her coming, Lina lay down flat on the road, and with her two huge
forepaws covered her mouth, while Curdie went to meet her, holding out
his arms.  The little one came straight to him, and held up her mouth
to be kissed.  Then she took him by the hand, and drew him toward the
house, and Curdie yielded to the silent invitation.

But when Lina rose to follow, the child shrank from her, frightened a
little.  Curdie took her up, and holding her on one arm, patted Lina
with the other hand.  Then the child wanted also to pat doggy, as she
called her by a right bountiful stretch of courtesy, and having once
patted her, nothing would serve but Curdie must let her have a ride on
doggy.  So he set her on Lina's back, holding her hand, and she rode
home in merry triumph, all unconscious of the hundreds of eyes staring
at her foolhardiness from the windows about the market place, or the
murmur of deep disapproval that rose from as many lips.

At the door stood the grandmother to receive them.  She caught the
child to her bosom with delight at her courage, welcomed Curdie, and
showed no dread of Lina.  Many were the significant nods exchanged, and
many a one said to another that the devil and the witch were old
friends.  But the woman was only a wise woman, who, having seen how
Curdie and Lina behaved to each other, judged from that what sort they
were, and so made them welcome to her house. She was not like her
fellow townspeople, for that they were strangers recommended them to
her.

The moment her door was shut the other doors began to open, and soon
there appeared little groups here and there about a threshold, while a
few of the more courageous ventured out upon the square--all ready to
make for their houses again, however, upon the least sign of movement
in the little thatched one.

The baker and the barber had joined one of these groups, and were
busily wagging their tongues against Curdie and his horrible beast.

'He can't be honest,' said the barber; 'for he paid me double the worth
of the pane he broke in my window.'

And then he told them how Curdie broke his window by breaking a stone
in the street with his hammer.  There the baker struck in.

'Now that was the stone,' said he, 'over which I had fallen three times
within the last month: could it be by fair means he broke that to
pieces at the first blow?  Just to make up my mind on that point I
tried his own hammer against a stone in the gate; it nearly broke both
my arms, and loosened half the teeth in my head!'



CHAPTER 15

Derba and Barbara

Meantime the wanderers were hospitably entertained by the old woman and
her grandchild and they were all very comfortable and happy together.
Little Barbara sat upon Curdie's knee, and he told her stories about
the mines and his adventures in them.  But he never mentioned the king
or the princess, for all that story was hard to believe.  And he told
her about his mother and father, and how good they were.  And Derba sat
and listened.  At last little Barbara fell asleep in Curdie's arms, and
her grandmother carried her to bed.

It was a poor little house, and Derba gave up her own room to Curdie
because he was honest and talked wisely.  Curdie saw how it was, and
begged her to allow him to lie on the floor, but she would not hear of
it.

In the night he was waked by Lina pulling at him.  As soon as he spoke
to her she ceased, and Curdie, listening, thought he heard someone
trying to get in.  He rose, took his mattock, and went about the house,
listening and watching; but although he heard noises now at one place
now at another, he could not think what they meant for no one appeared.
Certainly, considering how she had frightened them all in the day, it
was not likely any one would attack Lina at night.  By and by the
noises ceased, and Curdie went back to his bed, and slept undisturbed.

In the morning, however, Derba came to him in great agitation, and said
they had fastened up the door, so that she could not get out. Curdie
rose immediately and went with her: they found that not only the door,
but every window in the house was so secured on the outside that it was
impossible to open one of them without using great force.  Poor Derba
looked anxiously in Curdie's face.  He broke out laughing.

'They are much mistaken,' he said, 'if they fancy they could keep Lina
and a miner in any house in Gwyntystorm--even if they built up doors
and windows.'

With that he shouldered his mattock.  But Derba begged him not to make
a hole in her house just yet.  She had plenty for breakfast, she said,
and before it was time for dinner they would know what the people meant
by it.

And indeed they did.  For within an hour appeared one of the chief
magistrates of the city, accompanied by a score of soldiers with drawn
swords, and followed by a great multitude of people, requiring the
miner and his brute to yield themselves, the one that he might be tried
for the disturbance he had occasioned and the injury he had committed,
the other that she might be roasted alive for her part in killing two
valuable and harmless animals belonging to worthy citizens.  The
summons was preceded and followed by flourish of trumpet, and was read
with every formality by the city marshal himself.

The moment he ended, Lina ran into the little passage, and stood
opposite the door.

'I surrender,' cried Curdie.

'Then tie up your brute, and give her here.'

'No, no,' cried Curdie through the door.  'I surrender; but I'm not
going to do your hangman's work.  If you want MY dog, you must take
her.'

'Then we shall set the house on fire, and burn witch and all.'

'It will go hard with us but we shall kill a few dozen of you first,'
cried Curdie.  'We're not the least afraid of you.'  With that Curdie
turned to Derba, and said:

'Don't be frightened.  I have a strong feeling that all will be well.
Surely no trouble will come to you for being good to strangers.'

'But the poor dog!' said Derba.

Now Curdie and Lina understood each other more than a little by this
time, and not only had he seen that she understood the proclamation,
but when she looked up at him after it was read, it was with such a
grin, and such a yellow flash, that he saw also she was determined to
take care of herself.

'The dog will probably give you reason to think a little more of her
ere long,' he answered.  'But now,' he went on, 'I fear I must hurt
your house a little.  I have great confidence, however, that I shall be
able to make up to you for it one day.'

'Never mind the house, if only you can get safe off,' she answered. 'I
don't think they will hurt this precious lamb,' she added, clasping
little Barbara to her bosom.  'For myself, it is all one; I am ready
for anything.'

'It is but a little hole for Lina I want to make,' said Curdie. 'She
can creep through a much smaller one than you would think.'

Again he took his mattock, and went to the back wall.

'They won't burn the house,' he said to himself.  'There is too good a
one on each side of it.'

The tumult had kept increasing every moment, and the city marshal had
been shouting, but Curdie had not listened to him.  When now they heard
the blows of his mattock, there went up a great cry, and the people
taunted the soldiers that they were afraid of a dog and his miner.  The
soldiers therefore made a rush at the door, and cut its fastenings.

The moment they opened it, out leaped Lina, with a roar so unnaturally
horrible that the sword arms of the soldiers dropped by their sides,
paralysed with the terror of that cry; the crowd fled in every
direction, shrieking and yelling with mortal dismay; and without even
knocking down with her tail, not to say biting a man of them with her
pulverizing jaws, Lina vanished--no one knew whither, for not one of
the crowd had had courage to look upon her.

The moment she was gone, Curdie advanced and gave himself up.  The
soldiers were so filled with fear, shame, and chagrin, that they were
ready to kill him on the spot.  But he stood quietly facing them, with
his mattock on his shoulder; and the magistrate wishing to examine him,
and the people to see him made an example of, the soldiers had to
content themselves with taking him.  Partly for derision, partly to
hurt him, they laid his mattock against his back, and tied his arms to
it.

They led him up a very steep street, and up another still, all the
crowd following.  The king's palace-castle rose towering above them;
but they stopped before they reached it, at a low-browed door in a
great, dull, heavy-looking building.

The city marshal opened it with a key which hung at his girdle, and
ordered Curdie to enter.  The place within was dark as night, and while
he was feeling his way with his feet, the marshal gave him a rough
push.  He fell, and rolled once or twice over, unable to help himself
because his hands were tied behind him.

It was the hour of the magistrate's second and more important
breakfast, and until that was over he never found himself capable of
attending to a case with concentration sufficient to the distinguishing
of the side upon which his own advantage lay; and hence was this
respite for Curdie, with time to collect his thoughts.  But indeed he
had very few to collect, for all he had to do, so far as he could see,
was to wait for what would come next. Neither had he much power to
collect them, for he was a good deal shaken.

In a few minutes he discovered, to his great relief, that, from the
projection of the pick end of his mattock beyond his body, the fall had
loosened the ropes tied round it.  He got one hand disengaged, and then
the other; and presently stood free, with his good mattock once more in
right serviceable relation to his arms and legs.



CHAPTER 16

The Mattock

While The magistrate reinvigorated his selfishness with a greedy
breakfast, Curdie found doing nothing in the dark rather tiresome work.
It was useless attempting to think what he should do next, seeing the
circumstances in which he was presently to find himself were altogether
unknown to him.  So he began to think about his father and mother in
their little cottage home, high in the clear air of the open
Mountainside, and the thought, instead of making his dungeon gloomier
by the contrast, made a light in his soul that destroyed the power of
darkness and captivity.

But he was at length startled from his waking dream by a swell in the
noise outside.  All the time there had been a few of the more idle of
the inhabitants about the door, but they had been rather quiet.  Now,
however, the sounds of feet and voices began to grow, and grew so
rapidly that it was plain a multitude was gathering. For the people of
Gwyntystorm always gave themselves an hour of pleasure after their
second breakfast, and what greater pleasure could they have than to see
a stranger abused by the officers of justice?

The noise grew till it was like the roaring of the sea, and that
roaring went on a long time, for the magistrate, being a great man,
liked to know that he was waited for: it added to the enjoyment of his
breakfast, and, indeed, enabled him to eat a little more after he had
thought his powers exhausted.

But at length, in the waves of the human noises rose a bigger wave, and
by the running and shouting and outcry, Curdie learned that the
magistrate was approaching.

Presently came the sound of the great rusty key in the lock, which
yielded with groaning reluctance; the door was thrown back, the light
rushed in, and with it came the voice of the city marshal, calling upon
Curdie, by many legal epithets opprobrious, to come forth and be tried
for his life, inasmuch as he had raised a tumult in His Majesty's city
of Gwyntystorm, troubled the hearts of the king's baker and barber, and
slain the faithful dogs of His Majesty's well-beloved butchers.

He was still reading, and Curdie was still seated in the brown twilight
of the vault, not listening, but pondering with himself how this king
the city marshal talked of could be the same with the Majesty he had
seen ride away on his grand white horse with the Princess Irene on a
cushion before him, when a scream of agonized terror arose on the
farthest skirt of the crowd, and, swifter than flood or flame, the
horror spread shrieking.  In a moment the air was filled with hideous
howling, cries of unspeakable dismay, and the multitudinous noise of
running feet.  The next moment, in at the door of the vault bounded
Lina, her two green eyes flaming yellow as sunflowers, and seeming to
light up the dungeon.  With one spring she threw herself at Curdie's
feet, and laid her head upon them panting.  Then came a rush of two or
three soldiers darkening the doorway, but it was only to lay hold of
the key, pull the door to, and lock it; so that once more Curdie and
Lina were prisoners together.

For a few moments Lina lay panting hard: it is breathless work leaping
and roaring both at once, and that in a way to scatter thousands of
people.  Then she jumped up, and began snuffing about all over the
place; and Curdie saw what he had never seen before--two faint spots of
light cast from her eyes upon the ground, one on each side of her
snuffing nose.  He got out his tinder box--a miner is never without
one--and lighted a precious bit of candle he carried in a division of
it just for a moment, for he must not waste it.

The light revealed a vault without any window or other opening than the
door.  It was very old and much neglected.  The mortar had vanished
from between the stones, and it was half filled with a heap of all
sorts of rubbish, beaten down in the middle, but looser at the sides;
it sloped from the door to the foot of the opposite wall: evidently for
a long time the vault had been left open, and every sort of refuse
thrown into it.  A single minute served for the survey, so little was
there to note.

Meantime, down in the angle between the back wall and the base of the
heap Lina was scratching furiously with all the eighteen great strong
claws of her mighty feet.

'Ah, ha!' said Curdie to himself, catching sight of her, 'if only they
will leave us long enough to ourselves!'

With that he ran to the door, to see if there was any fastening on the
inside.  There was none: in all its long history it never had had one.
But a few blows of the right sort, now from the one, now from the other
end of his mattock, were as good as any bolt, for they so ruined the
lock that no key could ever turn in it again. Those who heard them
fancied he was trying to get out, and laughed spitefully.  As soon as
he had done, he extinguished his candle, and went down to Lina.

She had reached the hard rock which formed the floor of the dungeon,
and was now clearing away the earth a little wider. Presently she
looked up in his face and whined, as much as to say, 'My paws are not
hard enough to get any farther.'

'Then get out of my way, Lina,' said Curdie, and mind you keep your
eyes shining, for fear I should hit you.'

So saying, he heaved his mattock, and assailed with the hammer end of
it the spot she had cleared.

The rock was very hard, but when it did break it broke in good-sized
pieces.  Now with hammer, now with pick, he worked till he was weary,
then rested, and then set to again.  He could not tell how the day
went, as he had no light but the lamping of Lina's eyes.  The darkness
hampered him greatly, for he would not let Lina come close enough to
give him all the light she could, lest he should strike her.  So he
had, every now and then, to feel with his hands to know how he was
getting on, and to discover in what direction to strike: the exact spot
was a mere imagination.

He was getting very tired and hungry, and beginning to lose heart a
little, when out of the ground, as if he had struck a spring of it,
burst a dull, gleamy, lead-coloured light, and the next moment he heard
a hollow splash and echo.  A piece of rock had fallen out of the floor,
and dropped into water beneath.  Already Lina, who had been lying a few
yards off all the time he worked, was on her feet and peering through
the hole.  Curdie got down on his hands and knees, and looked.  They
were over what seemed a natural cave in the rock, to which apparently
the river had access, for, at a great distance below, a faint light was
gleaming upon water.  If they could but reach it, they might get out;
but even if it was deep enough, the height was very dangerous.  The
first thing, whatever might follow, was to make the hole larger.  It
was comparatively easy to break away the sides of it, and in the course
of another hour he had it large enough to get through.

And now he must reconnoitre.  He took the rope they had tied him
with--for Curdie's hindrances were always his furtherance--and fastened
one end of it by a slipknot round the handle of his pickaxes then
dropped the other end through, and laid the pickaxe so that, when he
was through himself, and hanging on the edge, he could place it across
the hole to support him on the rope.  This done, he took the rope in
his hands, and, beginning to descend, found himself in a narrow cleft
widening into a cave.  His rope was not very long, and would not do
much to lessen the force of his fall--he thought to himself--if he
should have to drop into the water; but he was not more than a couple
of yards below the dungeon when he spied an opening on the opposite
side of the cleft: it might be but a shadow hole, or it might lead them
out.  He dropped himself a little below its level, gave the rope a
swing by pushing his feet against the side of the cleft, and so
penduled himself into it.  Then he laid a stone on the end of the rope
that it should not forsake him, called to Lina, whose yellow eyes were
gleaming over the mattock grating above, to watch there till he
returned, and went cautiously in.  It proved a passage, level for some
distance, then sloping gently up.  He advanced carefully, feeling his
way as he went.  At length he was stopped by a door--a small door,
studded with iron.  But the wood was in places so much decayed that
some of the bolts had dropped out, and he felt sure of being able to
open it.  He returned, therefore, to fetch Lina and his mattock.
Arrived at the cleft, his strong miner arms bore him swiftly up along
the rope and through the hole into the dungeon.  There he undid the
rope from his mattock, and making Lina take the end of it in her teeth,
and get through the hole, he lowered her--it was all he could do, she
was so heavy.  When she came opposite the passage, with a slight push
of her tail she shot herself into it, and let go the rope, which Curdie
drew up.

Then he lighted his candle and searching in the rubbish found a bit of
iron to take the place of his pickaxe across the hole.  Then he
searched again in the rubbish, and found half an old shutter.  This he
propped up leaning a little over the hole, with a bit of stick, and
heaped against the back of it a quantity of the loosened earth. Next he
tied his mattock to the end of the rope, dropped it, and let it hang.
Last, he got through the hole himself, and pulled away the propping
stick, so that the shutter fell over the hole with a quantity of earth
on the top of it.  A few motions of hand over hand, and he swung
himself and his mattock into the passage beside Lina.

There he secured the end of the rope, and they went on together to the
door.



CHAPTER 17

The Wine Cellar

He lighted his candle and examined it.  Decayed and broken as it was,
it was strongly secured in its place by hinges on the one side, and
either lock or bolt, he could not tell which, on the other.  A brief
use of his pocket-knife was enough to make room for his hand and arm to
get through, and then he found a great iron bolt--but so rusty that he
could not move it.

Lina whimpered.  He took his knife again, made the hole bigger, and
stood back.  In she shot her small head and long neck, seized the bolt
with her teeth, and dragged it, grating and complaining, back. A push
then opened the door.  It was at the foot of a short flight of steps.
They ascended, and at the top Curdie found himself in a space which,
from the echo to his stamp, appeared of some size, though of what sort
he could not at first tell, for his hands, feeling about, came upon
nothing.  Presently, however, they fell on a great thing: it was a wine
cask.

He was just setting out to explore the place thoroughly, when he heard
steps coming down a stair.  He stood still, not knowing whether the
door would open an inch from his nose or twenty yards behind his back.
It did neither.  He heard the key turn in the lock, and a stream of
light shot in, ruining the darkness, about fifteen yards away on his
right.

A man carrying a candle in one hand and a large silver flagon in the
other, entered, and came toward him.  The light revealed a row of huge
wine casks, that stretched away into the darkness of the other end of
the long vault.  Curdie retreated into the recess of the stair, and
peeping round the corner of it, watched him, thinking what he could do
to prevent him from locking them in.  He came on and on, until curdie
feared he would pass the recess and see them.  He was just preparing to
rush out, and master him before he should give alarm, not in the least
knowing what he should do next, when, to his relief, the man stopped at
the third cask from where he stood.  He set down his light on the top
of it, removed what seemed a large vent-peg, and poured into the cask a
quantity of something from the flagon.  Then he turned to the next
cask, drew some wine, rinsed the flagon, threw the wine away, drew and
rinsed and threw away again, then drew and drank, draining to the
bottom.  Last of all, he filled the flagon from the cask he had first
visited, replaced then the vent-peg, took up his candle, and turned
toward the door.

'There is something wrong here!' thought Curdie.

'Speak to him, Lina,' he whispered.

The sudden howl she gave made Curdie himself start and tremble for a
moment.  As to the man, he answered Lina's with another horrible howl,
forced from him by the convulsive shudder of every muscle of his body,
then reeled gasping to and fro, and dropped his candle. But just as
Curdie expected to see him fall dead he recovered himself, and flew to
the door, through which he darted, leaving it open behind him.  The
moment he ran, Curdie stepped out, picked up the candle still alight,
sped after him to the door, drew out the key, and then returned to the
stair and waited.  In a few minutes he heard the sound of many feet and
voices.  Instantly he turned the tap of the cask from which the man had
been drinking, set the candle beside it on the floor, went down the
steps and out of the little door, followed by Lina, and closed it
behind them.

Through the hole in it he could see a little, and hear all.  He could
see how the light of many candles filled the place, and could hear how
some two dozen feet ran hither and thither through the echoing cellar;
he could hear the clash of iron, probably spits and pokers, now and
then; and at last heard how, finding nothing remarkable except the best
wine running to waste, they all turned on the butler and accused him of
having fooled them with a drunken dream.  He did his best to defend
himself, appealing to the evidence of their own senses that he was as
sober as they were. They replied that a fright was no less a fright
that the cause was imaginary, and a dream no less a dream that the
fright had waked him from it.

When he discovered, and triumphantly adduced as corroboration, that the
key was gone from the door, they said it merely showed how drunk he had
been--either that or how frightened, for he had certainly dropped it.
In vain he protested that he had never taken it out of the lock--that
he never did when he went in, and certainly had not this time stopped
to do so when he came out; they asked him why he had to go to the
cellar at such a time of the day, and said it was because he had
already drunk all the wine that was left from dinner.  He said if he
had dropped the key, the key was to be found, and they must help him to
find it.  They told him they wouldn't move a peg for him.  He declared,
with much language, he would have them all turned out of the king's
service.  They said they would swear he was drunk.

And so positive were they about it, that at last the butler himself
began to think whether it was possible they could be in the right. For
he knew that sometimes when he had been drunk he fancied things had
taken place which he found afterward could not have happened. Certain
of his fellow servants, however, had all the time a doubt whether the
cellar goblin had not appeared to him, or at least roared at him, to
protect the wine.  In any case nobody wanted to find the key for him;
nothing could please them better than that the door of the wine cellar
should never more be locked.  By degrees the hubbub died away, and they
departed, not even pulling to the door, for there was neither handle
nor latch to it.

As soon as they were gone, Curdie returned, knowing now that they were
in the wine cellar of the palace, as indeed, he had suspected. Finding
a pool of wine in a hollow of the floor, Lina lapped it up eagerly: she
had had no breakfast, and was now very thirsty as well as hungry.  Her
master was in a similar plight, for he had but just begun to eat when
the magistrate arrived with the soldiers.  If only they were all in
bed, he thought, that he might find his way to the larder!  For he said
to himself that, as he was sent there by the young princess's
great-great-grandmother to serve her or her father in some way, surely
he must have a right to his food in the Palace, without which he could
do nothing.  He would go at once and reconnoitre.

So he crept up the stair that led from the cellar.  At the top was a
door, opening on a long passage dimly lighted by a lamp.  He told Lina
to lie down upon the stair while he went on.  At the end of the passage
he found a door ajar, and, peering through, saw right into a great
stone hall, where a huge fire was blazing, and through which men in the
king's livery were constantly coming and going. Some also in the same
livery were lounging about the fire.  He noted that their colours were
the same as those he himself, as king's miner, wore; but from what he
had seen and heard of the habits of the place, he could not hope they
would treat him the better for that.

The one interesting thing at the moment, however, was the plentiful
supper with which the table was spread.  It was something at least to
stand in sight of food, and he was unwilling to turn his back on the
prospect so long as a share in it was not absolutely hopeless. Peeping
thus, he soon made UP his mind that if at any moment the hall should be
empty, he would at that moment rush in and attempt to carry off a dish.
That he might lose no time by indecision, he selected a large pie upon
which to pounce instantaneously.  But after he had watched for some
minutes, it did not seem at all likely the chance would arrive before
suppertime, and he was just about to turn away and rejoin Lina, when he
saw that there was not a person in the place.  Curdie never made up his
mind and then hesitated.  He darted in, seized the pie, and bore it
swiftly and noiselessly to the cellar stair.



CHAPTER 18

The King's Kitchen

Back to the cellar Curdie and Lina sped with their booty, where, seated
on the steps, Curdie lighted his bit of candle for a moment. A very
little bit it was now, but they did not waste much of it in examination
of the pie; that they effected by a more summary process.  Curdie
thought it the nicest food he had ever tasted, and between them they
soon ate it up.  Then Curdie would have thrown the dish along with the
bones into the water, that there might be no traces of them; but he
thought of his mother, and hid it instead; and the very next minute
they wanted it to draw some wine into.  He was careful it should be
from the cask of which he had seen the butler drink.

Then they sat down again upon the steps, and waited until the house
should be quiet.  For he was there to do something, and if it did not
come to him in the cellar, he must go to meet it in other places.
Therefore, lest he should fall asleep, he set the end of the helve of
his mattock on the ground, and seated himself on the cross part,
leaning against the wall, so that as long as he kept awake he should
rest, but the moment he began to fall asleep he must fall awake
instead.  He quite expected some of the servants would visit the cellar
again that night, but whether it was that they were afraid of each
other, or believed more of the butler's story than they had chosen to
allow, not one of them appeared.

When at length he thought he might venture, he shouldered his mattock
and crept up the stair.  The lamp was out in the passage, but he could
not miss his way to the servants' hall.  Trusting to Lina's quickness
in concealing herself, he took her with him.

When they reached the hall they found it quiet and nearly dark. The
last of the great fire was glowing red, but giving little light.
Curdie stood and warmed himself for a few moments: miner as he was, he
had found the cellar cold to sit in doing nothing; and standing thus he
thought of looking if there were any bits of candle about.  There were
many candlesticks on the supper table, but to his disappointment and
indignation their candles seemed to have been all left to burn out, and
some of them, indeed, he found still hot in the neck.

Presently, one after another, he came upon seven men fast asleep, most
of them upon tables, one in a chair, and one on the floor. They seemed,
from their shape and colour, to have eaten and drunk so much that they
might be burned alive without wakening.  He grasped the hand of each in
succession, and found two ox hoofs, three pig hoofs, one concerning
which he could not be sure whether it was the hoof of a donkey or a
pony, and one dog's paw.  'A nice set of people to be about a king!'
thought Curdie to himself, and turned again to his candle hunt.  He did
at last find two or three little pieces, and stowed them away in his
pockets.  They now left the hall by another door, and entered a short
passage, which led them to the huge kitchen, vaulted and black with
smoke.  There, too, the fire was still burning, so that he was able to
see a little of the state of things in this quarter also.

The place was dirty and disorderly.  In a recess, on a heap of
brushwood, lay a kitchen-maid, with a table cover around her, and a
skillet in her hand: evidently she too had been drinking.  In another
corner lay a page, and Curdie noted how like his dress was to his own.
In the cinders before the hearth were huddled three dogs and five cats,
all fast asleep, while the rats were running about the floor.  Curdie's
heart ached to think of the lovely child-princess living over such a
sty.  The mine was a paradise to a palace with such servants in it.

Leaving the kitchen, he got into the region of the sculleries. There
horrible smells were wandering about, like evil spirits that come forth
with the darkness.  He lighted a candle--but only to see ugly sights.
Everywhere was filth and disorder.  Mangy turnspit dogs were lying
about, and grey rats were gnawing at refuse in the sinks.  It was like
a hideous dream.  He felt as if he should never get out of it, and
longed for one glimpse of his mother's poor little kitchen, so clean
and bright and airy. Turning from it at last in miserable disgust, he
almost ran back through the kitchen, re-entered the hall, and crossed
it to another door.

It opened upon a wider passage leading to an arch in a stately
corridor, all its length lighted by lamps in niches.  At the end of it
was a large and beautiful hall, with great pillars.  There sat three
men in the royal livery, fast asleep, each in a great armchair, with
his feet on a huge footstool.  They looked like fools dreaming
themselves kings; and Lina looked as if she longed to throttle them.
At one side of the hall was the grand staircase, and they went up.

Everything that now met Curdie's eyes was rich--not glorious like the
splendours of the mountain cavern, but rich and soft--except where, now
and then, some rough old rib of the ancient fortress came through, hard
and discoloured.  Now some dark bare arch of stone, now some rugged and
blackened pillar, now some huge beam, brown with the smoke and dust of
centuries, looked like a thistle in the midst of daisies, or a rock in
a smooth lawn.

They wandered about a good while, again and again finding themselves
where they had been before.  Gradually, however, Curdie was gaining
some idea of the place.  By and by Lina began to look frightened, and
as they went on Curdie saw that she looked more and more frightened.
Now, by this time he had come to understand that what made her look
frightened was always the fear of frightening, and he therefore
concluded they must be drawing nigh to somebody.

At last, in a gorgeously painted gallery, he saw a curtain of crimson,
and on the curtain a royal crown wrought in silks and stones.  He felt
sure this must be the king's chamber, and it was here he was wanted;
or, if it was not the place he was bound for, something would meet him
and turn him aside; for he had come to think that so long as a man
wants to do right he may go where he can: when he can go no farther,
then it is not the way.  'Only,' said his father, in assenting to the
theory, 'he must really want to do right, and not merely fancy he does.
He must want it with his heart and will, and not with his rag of a
tongue.'

So he gently lifted the corner of the curtain, and there behind it was
a half-open door.  He entered, and the moment he was in, Lina stretched
herself along the threshold between the curtain and the door.



CHAPTER 19

The King's Chamber

He found himself in a large room, dimly lighted by a silver lamp that
hung from the ceiling.  Far at the other end was a great bed,
surrounded with dark heavy curtains.  He went softly toward it, his
heart beating fast.  It was a dreadful thing to be alone in the king's
chamber at the dead of night.  To gain courage he had to remind himself
of the beautiful princess who had sent him.

But when he was about halfway to the bed, a figure appeared from the
farther side of it, and came towards him, with a hand raised warningly.
He stood still.  The light was dim, and he could distinguish little
more than the outline of a young girl.  But though the form he saw was
much taller than the princess he remembered, he never doubted it was
she.  For one thing, he knew that most girls would have been frightened
to see him there in the dead of the night, but like a true princess,
and the princess he used to know, she walked straight on to meet him.
As she came she lowered the hand she had lifted, and laid the
forefinger of it upon her lips.  Nearer and nearer, quite near, close
up to him she came, then stopped, and stood a moment looking at him.

'You are Curdie,' she said.

'And you are the Princess Irene,' he returned.

'Then we know each other still,' she said, with a sad smile of
pleasure.  'You will help me.'

'That I will,' answered Curdie.  He did not say, 'If I can'; for he
knew that what he was sent to do, that he could do.  'May I kiss your
hand, little Princess?'

She was only between nine and ten, though indeed she looked several
years older, and her eyes almost those of a grown woman, for she had
had terrible trouble of late.

She held out her hand.

'I am not the little princess any more.  I have grown up since I saw
you last, Mr Miner.'

The smile which accompanied the words had in it a strange mixture of
playfulness and sadness.

'So I see, Miss Princess,' returned Curdie; 'and therefore, being more
of a princess, you are the more my princess.  Here I am, sent by your
great-great-grandmother, to be your servant.  May I ask why you are up
so late, Princess?'

'Because my father wakes so frightened, and I don't know what he would
do if he didn't find me by his bedside.  There! he's waking now.'

She darted off to the side of the bed she had come from.

Curdie stood where he was.

A voice altogether unlike what he remembered of the mighty, noble king
on his white horse came from the bed, thin, feeble, hollow, and husky,
and in tone like that of a petulant child:

'I will not, I will not.  I am a king, and I will be a king.  I hate
you and despise you, and you shall not torture me!'

'Never mind them, Father dear,' said the princess.  'I am here, and
they shan't touch you.  They dare not, you know, so long as you defy
them.'

'They want my crown, darling; and I can't give them my crown, can I?
For what is a king without his crown?'

'They shall never have your crown, my king,' said Irene.  'Here it
is--all safe.  I am watching it for you.'

Curdie drew near the bed on the other side.  There lay the grand old
king--he looked grand still, and twenty years older.  His body was
pillowed high; his beard descended long and white over the crimson
coverlid; and his crown, its diamonds and emeralds gleaming in the
twilight of the curtains, lay in front of him, his long thin old hands
folded round it, and the ends of his beard straying among the lovely
stones.  His face was like that of a man who had died fighting nobly;
but one thing made it dreadful: his eyes, while they moved about as if
searching in this direction and in that, looked more dead than his
face.  He saw neither his daughter nor his crown: it was the voice of
the one and the touch of the other that comforted him.  He kept
murmuring what seemed words, but was unintelligible to Curdie,
although, to judge from the look of Irene's face, she learned and
concluded from it.

By degrees his voice sank away and the murmuring ceased, although still
his lips moved.  Thus lay the old king on his bed, slumbering with his
crown between his hands; on one side of him stood a lovely little
maiden, with blue eyes, and brown hair going a little back from her
temples, as if blown by a wind that no one felt but herself; and on the
other a stalwart young miner, with his mattock over his shoulder.
Stranger sight still was Lina lying along the threshold--only nobody
saw her just then.

A moment more and the king's lips ceased to move.  His breathing had
grown regular and quiet.  The princess gave a sigh of relief, and came
round to Curdie.

'We can talk a little now,' she said, leading him toward the middle of
the room.  'My father will sleep now till the doctor wakes him to give
him his medicine.  It is not really medicine, though, but wine.
Nothing but that, the doctor says, could have kept him so long alive.
He always comes in the middle of the night to give it him with his own
hands.  But it makes me cry to see him wake up when so nicely asleep.'

'What sort of man is your doctor?' asked Curdie.

'Oh, such a dear, good, kind gentleman!' replied the princess.  'He
speaks so softly, and is so sorry for his dear king!  He will be here
presently, and you shall see for yourself.  You will like him very
much.'

'Has your king-father been long ill?' asked Curdie.

'A whole year now,' she replied.  'Did you not know?  That's how your
mother never got the red petticoat my father promised her. The lord
chancellor told me that not only Gwyntystorm but the whole land was
mourning over the illness of the good man.'

Now Curdie himself had not heard a word of His Majesty's illness, and
had no ground for believing that a single soul in any place he had
visited on his journey had heard of it.  Moreover, although mention had
been made of His Majesty again and again in his hearing since he came
to Gwyntystorm, never once had he heard an allusion to the state of his
health.  And now it dawned upon him also that he had never heard the
least expression of love to him.  But just for the time he thought it
better to say nothing on either point.

'Does the king wander like this every night?' he asked.

'Every night,' answered Irene, shaking her head mournfully.  'That is
why I never go to bed at night.  He is better during the day--a little,
and then I sleep--in the dressing room there, to be with him in a
moment if he should call me.  It is so sad he should have only me and
not my mamma!  A princess is nothing to a queen!'

'I wish he would like me,' said Curdie, 'for then I might watch by him
at night, and let you go to bed, Princess.'

'Don't you know then?' returned Irene, in wonder.  'How was it you
came?  Ah!  You said my grandmother sent you.  But I thought you knew
that he wanted you.'

And again she opened wide her blue stars.

'Not I,' said Curdie, also bewildered, but very glad.

'He used to be constantly saying--he was not so ill then as he is
now--that he wished he had you about him.'

'And I never to know it!' said Curdie, with displeasure.

'The master of the horse told papa's own secretary that he had written
to the miner-general to find you and send you up; but the miner-general
wrote back to the master of the horse, and he told the secretary, and
the secretary told my father, that they had searched every mine in the
kingdom and could hear nothing of you. My father gave a great sigh, and
said he feared the goblins had got you, after all, and your father and
mother were dead of grief.  And he has never mentioned you since,
except when wandering.  I cried very much.  But one of my grandmother's
pigeons with its white wing flashed a message to me through the window
one day, and then I knew that my Curdie wasn't eaten by the goblins,
for my grandmother wouldn't have taken care of him one time to let him
be eaten the next.  Where were you, Curdie, that they couldn't find
you?'

'We will talk about that another time, when we are not expecting the
doctor,' said Curdie.

As he spoke, his eyes fell upon something shining on the table under
the lamp.  His heart gave a great throb, and he went nearer. Yes, there
could be no doubt--it was the same flagon that the butler had filled in
the wine cellar.

'It looks worse and worse!'he said to himself, and went back to Irene,
where she stood half dreaming.

'When will the doctor be here?' he asked once more--this time hurriedly.

The question was answered--not by the princess, but by something which
that instant tumbled heavily into the room.  Curdie flew toward it in
vague terror about Lina.

On the floor lay a little round man, puffing and blowing, and uttering
incoherent language.  Curdie thought of his mattock, and ran and laid
it aside.

'Oh, dear Dr Kelman!' cried the princess, running up and taking hold of
his arm; 'I am so sorry!'  She pulled and pulled, but might almost as
well have tried to set up a cannon ball.  'I hope you have not hurt
yourself?'

'Not at all, not at all,' said the doctor, trying to smile and to rise
both at once, but finding it impossible to do either.

'If he slept on the floor he would be late for breakfast,' said Curdie
to himself, and held out his hand to help him.

But when he took hold of it, Curdie very nearly let him fall again, for
what he held was not even a foot: it was the belly of a creeping thing.
He managed, however, to hold both his peace and his grasp, and pulled
the doctor roughly on his legs--such as they were.

'Your Royal Highness has rather a thick mat at the door,' said the
doctor, patting his palms together.  'I hope my awkwardness may not
have startled His Majesty.'

While he talked Curdie went to the door: Lina was not there.

The doctor approached the bed.

'And how has my beloved king slept tonight?' he asked.

'No better,' answered Irene, with a mournful shake of her head.

'Ah, that is very well!' returned the doctor, his fall seeming to have
muddled either his words or his meaning.  'When we give him his wine,
he will be better still.'

Curdie darted at the flagon, and lifted it high, as if he had expected
to find it full, but had found it empty.

'That stupid butler!  I heard them say he was drunk!' he cried in a
loud whisper, and was gliding from the room.

'Come here with that flagon, you!  Page!' cried the doctor. Curdie came
a few steps toward him with the flagon dangling from his hand, heedless
of the gushes that fell noiseless on the thick carpet.

'Are you aware, young man,' said the doctor, 'that it is not every wine
can do His Majesty the benefit I intend he should derive from my
prescription?'

'Quite aware, sir, answered Curdie.  'The wine for His Majesty's use is
in the third cask from the corner.'

'Fly, then,' said the doctor, looking satisfied.

Curdie stopped outside the curtain and blew an audible breath--no more;
up came Lina noiseless as a shadow.  He showed her the flagon.

'The cellar, Lina: go,' he said.

She galloped away on her soft feet, and Curdie had indeed to fly to
keep up with her.  Not once did she make even a dubious turn.  From the
king's gorgeous chamber to the cold cellar they shot.  Curdie dashed
the wine down the back stair, rinsed the flagon out as he had seen the
butler do, filled it from the cask of which he had seen the butler
drink, and hastened with it up again to the king's room.

The little doctor took it, poured out a full glass, smelt, but did not
taste it, and set it down.  Then he leaned over the bed, shouted in the
king's ear, blew upon his eyes, and pinched his arm: Curdie thought he
saw him run something bright into it.  At last the king half woke.  The
doctor seized the glass, raised his head, poured the wine down his
throat, and let his head fall back on the pillow again.  Tenderly
wiping his beard, and bidding the princess good night in paternal
tones, he then took his leave.  Curdie would gladly have driven his
pick into his head, but that was not in his commission, and he let him
go.  The little round man looked very carefully to his feet as he
crossed the threshold.

'That attentive fellow of a page has removed the mat,' he said to
himself, as he walked along the corridor.  'I must remember him.'



CHAPTER 20

Counterplotting

Curdie was already sufficiently enlightened as to how things were
going, to see that he must have the princess of one mind with him, and
they must work together.  It was clear that among those about the king
there was a plot against him: for one thing, they had agreed in a lie
concerning himself; and it was plain also that the doctor was working
out a design against the health and reason of His Majesty, rendering
the question of his life a matter of little moment.  It was in itself
sufficient to justify the worst fears, that the people outside the
palace were ignorant of His Majesty's condition: he believed those
inside it also--the butler excepted--were ignorant of it as well.
Doubtless His Majesty's councillors desired to alienate the hearts of
his subjects from their sovereign.  Curdie's idea was that they
intended to kill the king, marry the princess to one of themselves, and
found a new dynasty; but whatever their purpose, there was treason in
the palace of the worst sort: they were making and keeping the king
incapable, in order to effect that purpose.  The first thing to be seen
to, therefore, was that His Majesty should neither eat morsel nor drink
drop of anything prepared for him in the palace.  Could this have been
managed without the princess, Curdie would have preferred leaving her
in ignorance of the horrors from which he sought to deliver her.  He
feared also the danger of her knowledge betraying itself to the evil
eyes about her; but it must be risked and she had always been a wise
child.

Another thing was clear to him--that with such traitors no terms of
honour were either binding or possible, and that, short of lying, he
might use any means to foil them.  And he could not doubt that the old
princess had sent him expressly to frustrate their plans.

While he stood thinking thus with himself, the princess was earnestly
watching the king, with looks of childish love and womanly tenderness
that went to Curdie's heart.  Now and then with a great fan of peacock
feathers she would fan him very softly; now and then, seeing a cloud
begin to gather upon the sky of his sleeping face, she would climb upon
the bed, and bending to his ear whisper into it, then draw back and
watch again--generally to see the cloud disperse.  In his deepest
slumber, the soul of the king lay open to the voice of his child, and
that voice had power either to change the aspect of his visions, or,
which was better still, to breathe hope into his heart, and courage to
endure them.

Curdie came near, and softly called her.

'I can't leave Papa just yet,' she returned, in a low voice.

'I will wait,' said Curdie; 'but I want very much to say something.'

In a few minutes she came to him where he stood under the lamp.

'Well, Curdie, what is it?' she said.

'Princess,' he replied, 'I want to tell you that I have found why your
grandmother sent me.'

'Come this way, then, she answered, 'where I can see the face of my
king.'

Curdie placed a chair for her in the spot she chose, where she would be
near enough to mark any slightest change on her father's countenance,
yet where their low-voiced talk would not disturb him. There he sat
down beside her and told her all the story--how her grandmother had
sent her good pigeon for him, and how she had instructed him, and sent
him there without telling him what he had to do.  Then he told her what
he had discovered of the state of things generally in Gwyntystorm, and
especially what he had heard and seen in the palace that night.

'Things are in a bad state enough,' he said in conclusion--'lying and
selfishness and inhospitality and dishonesty everywhere; and to crown
all, they speak with disrespect of the good king, and not a man knows
he is ill.'

'You frighten me dreadfully,' said Irene, trembling.

'You must be brave for your king's sake,' said Curdie.

'Indeed I will,' she replied, and turned a long loving look upon the
beautiful face of her father.  'But what is to be done?  And how am I
to believe such horrible things of Dr Kelman?'

'My dear Princess,' replied Curdie, 'you know nothing of him but his
face and his tongue, and they are both false.  Either you must beware
of him, or you must doubt your grandmother and me; for I tell you, by
the gift she gave me of testing hands, that this man is a snake.  That
round body he shows is but the case of a serpent. Perhaps the creature
lies there, as in its nest, coiled round and round inside.'

'Horrible!' said Irene.

'Horrible indeed; but we must not try to get rid of horrible things by
refusing to look at them, and saying they are not there.  Is not your
beautiful father sleeping better since he had the wine?'

'Yes.'

'Does he always sleep better after having it?'

She reflected an instant.

'No; always worse--till tonight,' she answered.

'Then remember that was the wine I got him--not what the butler drew.
Nothing that passes through any hand in the house except yours or mine
must henceforth, till he is well, reach His Majesty's lips.'

'But how, dear Curdie?' said the princess, almost crying.

'That we must contrive,' answered Curdie.  'I know how to take care of
the wine; but for his food--now we must think.'

'He takes hardly any,' said the princess, with a pathetic shake of her
little head which Curdie had almost learned to look for.

'The more need,' he replied, 'there should be no poison in it.' Irene
shuddered.  'As soon as he has honest food he will begin to grow
better.  And you must be just as careful with yourself, Princess,'
Curdie went on, 'for you don't know when they may begin to poison you,
too.'

'There's no fear of me; don't talk about me,' said Irene.  'The good
food!  How are we to get it, Curdie?  That is the whole question.'

'I am thinking hard,' answered Curdie.  'The good food?  Let me
see--let me see!  Such servants as I saw below are sure to have the
best of everything for themselves: I will go an see what I can find on
their table.'

'The chancellor sleeps in the house, and he and the master of the
king's horse always have their supper together in a room off the great
hall, to the right as you go down the stairs,' said Irene. 'I would go
with you, but I dare not leave my father.  Alas!  He scarcely ever
takes more than a mouthful.  I can't think how he lives!  And the very
thing he would like, and often asks for--a bit of bread--I can hardly
ever get for him: Dr Kelman has forbidden it, and says it is nothing
less than poison to him.'

'Bread at least he shall have,' said Curdie; 'and that, with the honest
wine, will do as well as anything, I do believe.  I will go at once and
look for some.  But I want you to see Lina first, and know her, lest,
coming upon her by accident at any time, you should be frightened.'

'I should like much to see her,' said the princess.

Warning her not to be startled by her ugliness, he went to the door and
called her.

She entered, creeping with downcast head, and dragging her tail over
the floor behind her.  Curdie watched the princess as the frightful
creature came nearer and nearer.  One shudder went from head to foot,
and next instant she stepped to meet her.  Lina dropped flat on the
floor, and covered her face with her two big paws.  It went to the
heart of the princess: in a moment she was on her knees beside her,
stroking her ugly head, and patting her all over.

'Good dog!  Dear ugly dog!' she said.

Lina whimpered.

'I believe,' said Curdie, 'from what your grandmother told me, that
Lina is a woman, and that she was naughty, but is now growing good.'

Lina had lifted her head while Irene was caressing her; now she dropped
it again between her paws; but the princess took it in her hands, and
kissed the forehead betwixt the gold-green eyes.

'Shall I take her with me or leave her?' asked Curdie.

'Leave her, poor dear,' said Irene, and Curdie, knowing the way now,
went without her.

He took his way first to the room the princess had spoken of, and there
also were the remains of supper; but neither there nor in the kitchen
could he find a scrap of plain wholesome-looking bread.  So he returned
and told her that as soon as it was light he would go into the city for
some, and asked her for a handkerchief to tie it in.  If he could not
bring it himself, he would send it by Lina, who could keep out of sight
better than he, and as soon as all was quiet at night he would come to
her again.  He also asked her to tell the king that he was in the
house.  His hope lay in the fact that bakers everywhere go to work
early.  But it was yet much too early.  So he persuaded the princess to
lie down, promising to call her if the king should stir.



CHAPTER 21

The Loaf

His Majesty slept very quietly.  The dawn had grown almost day, and
still Curdie lingered, unwilling to disturb the princess.

At last, however, he called her, and she was in the room in a moment.
She had slept, she said, and felt quite fresh.  Delighted to find her
father still asleep, and so peacefully, she pushed her chair close to
the bed, and sat down with her hands in her lap.

Curdie got his mattock from where he had hidden it behind a great
mirror, and went to the cellar, followed by Lina.  They took some
breakfast with them as they passed through the hall, and as soon as
they had eaten it went out the back way.

At the mouth of the passage Curdie seized the rope, drew himself up,
pushed away the shutter, and entered the dungeon.  Then he swung the
end of the rope to Lina, and she caught it in her teeth. When her
master said, 'Now, Lina!' she gave a great spring, and he ran away with
the end of the rope as fast as ever he could.  And such a spring had
she made, that by the time he had to bear her weight she was within a
few feet of the hole.  The instant she got a paw through, she was all
through.

Apparently their enemies were waiting till hunger should have cowed
them, for there was no sign of any attempt having been made to open the
door.  A blow or two of Curdie's mattock drove the shattered lock clean
from it, and telling Lina to wait there till he came back, and let no
one in, he walked out into the silent street, and drew the door to
behind them.  He could hardly believe it was not yet a whole day since
he had been thrown in there with his hands tied at his back.

Down the town he went, walking in the middle of the street, that, if
any one saw him, he might see he was not afraid, and hesitate to rouse
an attack on him.  As to the dogs, ever since the death of their two
companions, a shadow that looked like a mattock was enough to make them
scamper.  As soon as he reached the archway of the city gate he turned
to reconnoitre the baker's shop, and perceiving no sign of movement,
waited there watching for the first.

After about an hour, the door opened, and the baker's man appeared with
a pail in his hand.  He went to a pump that stood in the street, and
having filled his pail returned with it into the shop. Curdie stole
after him, found the door on the latch, opened it very gently, peeped
in, saw nobody, and entered.  Remembering perfectly from what shelf the
baker's wife had taken the loaf she said was the best, and seeing just
one upon it, he seized it, laid the price of it on the counter, and
sped softly out, and up the street.  Once more in the dungeon beside
Lina, his first thought was to fasten up the door again, which would
have been easy, so many iron fragments of all sorts and sizes lay
about; but he bethought himself that if he left it as it was, and they
came to find him, they would conclude at once that they had made their
escape by it, and would look no farther so as to discover the hole.  He
therefore merely pushed the door close and left it.  Then once more
carefully arranging the earth behind the shutter, so that it should
again fall with it, he returned to the cellar.

And now he had to convey the loaf to the princess.  If he could venture
to take it himself, well; if not, he would send Lina.  He crept to the
door of the servants' hall, and found the sleepers beginning to stir.
One said it was time to go to bed; another, that he would go to the
cellar instead, and have a mug of wine to waken him up; while a third
challenged a fourth to give him his revenge at some game or other.

'Oh, hang your losses!' answered his companion; 'you'll soon pick up
twice as much about the house, if you but keep your eyes open.'

Perceiving there would be risk in attempting to pass through, and
reflecting that the porters in the great hall would probably be awake
also, Curdie went back to the cellar, took Irene's handkerchief with
the loaf in it, tied it round Lina's neck, and told her to take it to
the princess.

Using every shadow and every shelter, Lina slid through the servants
like a shapeless terror through a guilty mind, and so, by corridor and
great hall, up the stair to the king's chamber.

Irene trembled a little when she saw her glide soundless in across the
silent dusk of the morning, that filtered through the heavy drapery of
the windows, but she recovered herself at once when she saw the bundle
about her neck, for it both assured her of Curdie's safety, and gave
her hope of her father's.  She untied it with joy, and Lina stole away,
silent as she had come.  Her joy was the greater that the king had
waked up a little before, and expressed a desire for food--not that he
felt exactly hungry, he said, and yet he wanted something.  If only he
might have a piece of nice fresh bread!  Irene had no knife, but with
eager hands she broke a great piece from the loaf, and poured out a
full glass of wine. The king ate and drank, enjoyed the bread and the
wine much, and instantly fell asleep again.

It was hours before the lazy people brought their breakfast.  When it
came, Irene crumbled a little about, threw some into the fireplace, and
managed to make the tray look just as usual.

In the meantime, down below in the cellar, Curdie was lying in the
hollow between the upper sides of two of the great casks, the warmest
place he could find.  Lina was watching.  She lay at his feet, across
the two casks, and did her best so to arrange her huge tail that it
should be a warm coverlid for her master.

By and by Dr Kelman called to see his patient; and now that Irene's
eyes were opened, she saw clearly enough that he was both annoyed and
puzzled at finding His Majesty rather better.  He pretended however to
congratulate him, saying he believed he was quite fit to see the lord
chamberlain: he wanted his signature to something important; only he
must not strain his mind to understand it, whatever it might be: if His
Majesty did, he would not be answerable for the consequences.  The king
said he would see the lord chamberlain, and the doctor went.

Then Irene gave him more bread and wine, and the king ate and drank,
and smiled a feeble smile, the first real one she had seen for many a
day.  He said he felt much better, and would soon be able to take
matters into his own hands again.  He had a strange miserable feeling,
he said, that things were going terribly wrong, although he could not
tell how.  Then the princess told him that Curdie had come, and that at
night, when all was quiet for nobody in the palace must know, he would
pay His Majesty a visit.  Her great-great-grandmother had sent him, she
said.  The king looked strangely upon her, but the strange look passed
into a smile clearer than the first, and irene's heart throbbed with
delight.



CHAPTER 22

The Lord Chamberlain

At noon the lord chamberlain appeared.  With a long, low bow, and paper
in hand, he stepped softly into the room.  Greeting His Majesty with
every appearance of the profoundest respect, and congratulating him on
the evident progress he had made, he declared himself sorry to trouble
him, but there were certain papers, he said, which required his
signature--and therewith drew nearer to the king, who lay looking at
him doubtfully.  He was a lean, long, yellow man, with a small head,
bald over the top, and tufted at the back and about the ears.  He had a
very thin, prominent, hooked nose, and a quantity of loose skin under
his chin and about the throat, which came craning up out of his
neckcloth.  His eyes were very small, sharp, and glittering, and looked
black as jet.  He had hardly enough of a mouth to make a smile with.
His left hand held the paper, and the long, skinny fingers of his right
a pen just dipped in ink.

But the king, who for weeks had scarcely known what he did, was today
so much himself as to be aware that he was not quite himself; and the
moment he saw the paper, he resolved that he would not sign without
understanding and approving of it.  He requested the lord chamberlain
therefore to read it.  His Lordship commenced at once but the
difficulties he seemed to encounter, and the fits of stammering that
seized him, roused the king's suspicion tenfold. He called the princess.

'I trouble His Lordship too much,' he said to her: 'you can read print
well, my child--let me hear how you can read writing.  Take that paper
from His Lordship's hand, and read it to me from beginning to end,
while my lord drinks a glass of my favourite wine, and watches for your
blunders.'

'Pardon me, Your Majesty,' said the lord chamberlain, with as much of a
smile as he was able to extemporize, 'but it were a thousand pities to
put the attainments of Her Royal Highness to a test altogether too
severe.  Your Majesty can scarcely with justice expect the very organs
of her speech to prove capable of compassing words so long, and to her
so unintelligible.'

'I think much of my little princess and her capabilities,' returned the
king, more and more aroused.  'Pray, my lord, permit her to try.'

'Consider, Your Majesty: the thing would be altogether without
precedent.  It would be to make sport of statecraft,' said the lord
chamberlain.

'Perhaps you are right, my lord,' answered the king, with more meaning
than he intended should be manifest, while to his growing joy he felt
new life and power throbbing in heart and brain.  'So this morning we
shall read no further.  I am indeed ill able for business of such
weight.'

'Will Your Majesty please sign your royal name here?' said the lord
chamberlain, preferring the request as a matter of course, and
approaching with the feather end of the pen pointed to a spot where
there was a great red seal.

'Not today, my lord,' replied the king.

'It is of the greatest importance, Your Majesty,' softly insisted the
other.

'I descried no such importance in it,' said the king.

'Your Majesty heard but a part.'

'And I can hear no more today.'

'I trust Your Majesty has ground enough, in a case of necessity like
the present, to sign upon the representation of his loyal subject and
chamberlain?  Or shall I call the lord chancellor?' he added, rising.

'There is no need.  I have the very highest opinion of your judgement,
my lord,' answered the king; 'that is, with respect to means: we might
differ as to ends.'

The lord chamberlain made yet further attempts at persuasion; but they
grew feebler and feebler, and he was at last compelled to retire
without having gained his object.  And well might his annoyance be
keen!  For that paper was the king's will, drawn up by the
attorney-general; nor until they had the king's signature to it was
there much use in venturing farther.  But his worst sense of
discomfiture arose from finding the king with so much capacity left,
for the doctor had pledged himself so to weaken his brain that he
should be as a child in their hands, incapable of refusing anything
requested of him: His Lordship began to doubt the doctor's fidelity to
the conspiracy.

The princess was in high delight.  She had not for weeks heard so many
words, not to say words of such strength and reason, from her father's
lips: day by day he had been growing weaker and more lethargic.  He was
so much exhausted, however, after this effort, that he asked for
another piece of bread and more wine, and fell fast asleep the moment
he had taken them.

The lord chamberlain sent in a rage for Dr Kelman.  He came, and while
professing himself unable to understand the symptoms described by His
Lordship, yet pledged himself again that on the morrow the king should
do whatever was required of him.

The day went on.  When His Majesty was awake, the princess read to
him--one storybook after another; and whatever she read, the king
listened as if he had never heard anything so good before, making out
in it the wisest meanings.  Every now and then he asked for a piece of
bread and a little wine, and every time he ate and drank he slept, and
every time he woke he seemed better than the last time.  The princess
bearing her part, the loaf was eaten up and the flagon emptied before
night.  The butler took the flagon away, and brought it back filled to
the brim, but both were thirsty and hungry when Curdie came again.

Meantime he and Lina, watching and waking alternately, had plenty of
sleep.  In the afternoon, peeping from the recess, they saw several of
the servants enter hurriedly, one after the other, draw wine, drink it,
and steal out; but their business was to take care of the king, not of
his cellar, and they let them drink.  Also, when the butler came to
fill the flagon, they restrained themselves, for the villain's fate was
not yet ready for him.  He looked terribly frightened, and had brought
with him a large candle and a small terrier--which latter indeed
threatened to be troublesome, for he went roving and sniffing about
until he came to the recess where they were.  But as soon as he showed
himself, Lina opened her jaws so wide, and glared at him so horribly,
that, without even uttering a whimper, he tucked his tail between his
legs and ran to his master.  He was drawing the wicked wine at the
moment, and did not see him, else he would doubtless have run too.

When suppertime approached, Curdie took his place at the door into the
servants' hall; but after a long hour's vain watch, he began to fear he
should get nothing: there was so much idling about, as well as coming
and going.  It was hard to bear--chiefly from the attractions of a
splendid loaf, just fresh out of the oven, which he longed to secure
for the king and princess.  At length his chance did arrive: he pounced
upon the loaf and carried it away, and soon after got hold of a pie.

This time, however, both loaf and pie were missed.  The cook was
called.  He declared he had provided both.  One of themselves, he said,
must have carried them away for some friend outside the palace.  Then a
housemaid, who had not long been one of them, said she had seen someone
like a page running in the direction of the cellar with something in
his hands.  Instantly all turned upon the pages, accusing them, one
after another.  All denied, but nobody believed one of them: Where
there is no truth there can be no faith.

To the cellar they all set out to look for the missing pie and loaf.
Lina heard them coming, as well she might, for they were talking and
quarrelling loud, and gave her master warning.  They snatched up
everything, and got all signs of their presence out at the back door
before the servants entered.  When they found nothing, they all turned
on the chambermaid, and accused her, not only of lying against the
pages, but of having taken the things herself.  Their language and
behaviour so disgusted Curdie, who could hear a great part of what
passed, and he saw the danger of discovery now so much increased, that
he began to devise how best at once to rid the palace of the whole pack
of them.  That, however, would be small gain so long as the treacherous
officers of state continued in it.  They must be first dealt with.  A
thought came to him, and the longer he looked at it the better he liked
it.

As soon as the servants were gone, quarrelling and accusing all the
way, they returned and finished their supper.  Then Curdie, who had
long been satisfied that Lina understood almost every word he said,
communicated his plan to her, and knew by the wagging of her tail and
the flashing of her eyes that she comprehended it.  Until they had the
king safe through the worst part of the night, however, nothing could
be done.

They had now merely to go on waiting where they were till the household
should be asleep.  This waiting and waiting was much the hardest thing
Curdie had to do in the whole affair.  He took his mattock and, going
again into the long passage, lighted a candle end and proceeded to
examine the rock on all sides.  But this was not merely to pass the
time: he had a reason for it.  When he broke the stone in the street,
over which the baker fell, its appearance led him to pocket a fragment
for further examination; and since then he had satisfied himself that
it was the kind of stone in which gold is found, and that the yellow
particles in it were pure metal.  If such stone existed here in any
plenty, he could soon make the king rich and independent of his
ill-conditioned subjects. He was therefore now bent on an examination
of the rock; nor had he been at it long before he was persuaded that
there were large quantities of gold in the half-crystalline white
stone, with its veins of opaque white and of green, of which the rock,
so far as he had been able to inspect it, seemed almost entirely to
consist. Every piece he broke was spotted with particles and little
lumps of a lovely greenish yellow--and that was gold.  Hitherto he had
worked only in silver, but he had read, and heard talk, and knew,
therefore, about gold.  As soon as he had got the king free of rogues
and villains, he would have all the best and most honest miners, with
his father at the head of them, to work this rock for the king.

It was a great delight to him to use his mattock once more.  The time
went quickly, and when he left the passage to go to the king's chamber,
he had already a good heap of fragments behind the broken door.



CHAPTER 23

Dr Kelman

As soon as he had reason to hope the way was clear, Curdie ventured
softly into the hall, with Lina behind him.  There was no one asleep on
the bench or floor, but by the fading fire sat a girl weeping.  It was
the same who had seen him carrying off the food, and had been so hardly
used for saying so.  She opened her eyes when he appeared, but did not
seem frightened at him.

'I know why you weep,' said Curdie, 'and I am sorry for you.'

'It is hard not to be believed just because one speaks the truth,' said
the girl, 'but that seems reason enough with some people.  My mother
taught me to speak the truth, and took such pains with me that I should
find it hard to tell a lie, though I could invent many a story these
servants would believe at once; for the truth is a strange thing here,
and they don't know it when they see it. Show it them, and they all
stare as if it were a wicked lie, and that with the lie yet warm that
has just left their own mouths! You are a stranger,' she said, and
burst out weeping afresh, 'but the stranger you are to such a place and
such people the better!'

'I am the person,' said Curdie, whom you saw carrying the things from
the supper table.'  He showed her the loaf.  'If you can trust, as well
as speak the truth, I will trust you.  Can you trust me?'

She looked at him steadily for a moment.

'I can,' she answered.

'One thing more,' said Curdie: 'have you courage as well as truth?'

'I think so.'

'Look my dog in the face and don't cry out.  Come here, Lina.'

Lina obeyed.  The girl looked at her, and laid her hand on Lina's head.

'Now I know you are a true woman,' said curdie.  'I am come to set
things right in this house.  Not one of the servants knows I am here.
Will you tell them tomorrow morning that, if they do not alter their
ways, and give over drinking, and lying, and stealing, and unkindness,
they shall every one of them be driven from the palace?'

'They will not believe me.'

'Most likely; but will you give them the chance?'

'I will.'

'Then I will be your friend.  Wait here till I come again.'

She looked him once more in the face, and sat down.

When he reached the royal chamber, he found His Majesty awake, and very
anxiously expecting him.  He received him with the utmost kindness, and
at once, as it were, put himself in his hands by telling him all he
knew concerning the state he was in.  His voice was feeble, but his eye
was clear, although now and then his words and thoughts seemed to
wander.  Curdie could not be certain that the cause of their not being
intelligible to him did not lie in himself.  The king told him that for
some years, ever since his queen's death, he had been losing heart over
the wickedness of his people.  He had tried hard to make them good, but
they got worse and worse.  Evil teachers, unknown to him, had crept
into the schools; there was a general decay of truth and right
principle at least in the city; and as that set the example to the
nation, it must spread.

The main cause of his illness was the despondency with which the
degeneration of his people affected him.  He could not sleep, and had
terrible dreams; while, to his unspeakable shame and distress, he
doubted almost everybody.  He had striven against his suspicion, but in
vain, and his heart was sore, for his courtiers and councillors were
really kind; only he could not think why none of their ladies came near
his princess.  The whole country was discontented, he heard, and there
were signs of gathering storm outside as well as inside his borders.
The master of the horse gave him sad news of the insubordination of the
army; and his great white horse was dead, they told him; and his sword
had lost its temper: it bent double the last time he tried it!--only
perhaps that was in a dream; and they could not find his shield; and
one of his spurs had lost the rowel.

Thus the poor king went wandering in a maze of sorrows, some of which
were purely imaginary, while others were truer than he understood.  He
told how thieves came at night and tried to take his crown, so that he
never dared let it out of his hands even when he slept; and how, every
night, an evil demon in the shape of his physician came and poured
poison down his throat.  He knew it to be poison, he said, somehow,
although it tasted like wine.

Here he stopped, faint with the unusual exertion of talking.

Curdie seized the flagon, and ran to the wine cellar.

In the servants' hall the girl still sat by the fire, waiting for him.
As he returned he told her to follow him, and left her at the chamber
door until he should rejoin her.  When the king had had a little wine,
he informed him that he had already discovered certain of His Majesty's
enemies, and one of the worst of them was the doctor, for it was no
other demon than the doctor himself who had been coming every night,
and giving him a slow poison.

'So!' said the king.  'Then I have not been suspicious enough, for I
thought it was but a dream!  Is it possible Kelman can be such a
wretch?  Who then am I to trust?'

'Not one in the house, except the princess and myself,' said Curdie.

'I will not go to sleep,' said the king.

'That would be as bad as taking the poison,' said Curdie.  'No, no,
sire; you must show your confidence by leaving all the watching to me,
and doing all the sleeping Your Majesty can.'

The king smiled a contented smile, turned on his side, and was
presently fast asleep.  Then Curdie persuaded the princess also to go
to sleep, and telling Lina to watch, went to the housemaid.  He asked
her if she could inform him which of the council slept in the palace,
and show him their rooms.  She knew every one of them, she said, and
took him the round of all their doors, telling him which slept in each
room.  He then dismissed her, and returning to the king's chamber,
seated himself behind a curtain at the head of the bed, on the side
farthest from the king.  He told Lina to get under the bed, and make no
noise.

About one o'clock the doctor came stealing in.  He looked round for the
princess, and seeing no one, smiled with satisfaction as he approached
the wine where it stood under the lamp.  Having partly filled a glass,
he took from his pocket a small phial, and filled up the glass from it.
The light fell upon his face from above, and Curdie saw the snake in it
plainly visible.  He had never beheld such an evil countenance: the man
hated the king, and delighted in doing him wrong.

With the glass in his hand, he drew near the bed, set it down, and
began his usual rude rousing of His Majesty.  Not at once succeeding,
he took a lancet from his pocket, and was parting its cover with an
involuntary hiss of hate between his closed teeth, when Curdie stooped
and whispered to Lina.

'Take him by the leg, Lina.'  She darted noiselessly upon him. With a
face of horrible consternation, he gave his leg one tug to free it; the
next instant Curdie heard the one scrunch with which she crushed the
bone like a stick of celery.  He tumbled on the floor with a yell.

'Drag him out, Lina,' said Curdie. Lina took him by the collar, and
dragged him out.  Her master followed her to direct her, and they left
the doctor lying across the lord chamberlain's door, where he gave
another horrible yell, and fainted.

The king had waked at his first cry, and by the time Curdie re-entered
he had got at his sword where it hung from the centre of the tester,
had drawn it, and was trying to get out of bed.  But when Curdie told
him all was well, he lay down again as quietly as a child comforted by
his mother from a troubled dream.  Curdie went to the door to watch.

The doctor's yells had aroused many, but not one had yet ventured to
appear.  Bells were rung violently, but none were answered; and in a
minute or two Curdie had what he was watching for.  The door of the
lord chamberlain's room opened, and, pale with hideous terror, His
Lordship peeped out.  Seeing no one, he advanced to step into the
corridor, and tumbled over the doctor.  Curdie ran up, and held out his
hand.  He received in it the claw of a bird of prey--vulture or eagle,
he could not tell which.

His Lordship, as soon as he was on his legs, taking him for one of the
pages abused him heartily for not coming sooner, and threatened him
with dismissal from the king's service for cowardice and neglect.  He
began indeed what bade fair to be a sermon on the duties of a page, but
catching sight of the man who lay at his door, and seeing it was the
doctor, he fell upon Curdie afresh for standing there doing nothing,
and ordered him to fetch immediate assistance.  Curdie left him, but
slipped into the King's chamber, closed and locked the door, and left
the rascals to look after each other.  Ere long he heard hurrying
footsteps, and for a few minutes there was a great muffled tumult of
scuffling feet, low voices and deep groanings; then all was still again.

Irene slept through the whole--so confidently did she rest, knowing
Curdie was in her father's room watching over him.



CHAPTER 24

The Prophecy

Curdie sat and watched every motion of the sleeping king.  All the
night, to his ear, the palace lay as quiet as a nursery of healthful
children.  At sunrise he called the princess.

'How has His Majesty slept?' were her first words as she entered the
room.

'Quite quietly,' answered Curdie; 'that is, since the doctor was got
rid of.'

'How did you manage that?' inquired Irene; and Curdie had to tell all
about it.

'How terrible!' she said.  'Did it not startle the king dreadfully?'

'It did rather.  I found him getting out of bed, sword in hand.'

'The brave old man!' cried the princess.

'Not so old!' said Curdie, 'as you will soon see.  He went off again in
a minute or so; but for a little while he was restless, and once when
he lifted his hand it came down on the spikes of his crown, and he half
waked.'

'But where is the crown?' cried Irene, in sudden terror.

'I stroked his hands,' answered Curdie, 'and took the crown from them;
and ever since he has slept quietly, and again and again smiled in his
sleep.'

'I have never seen him do that,' said the princess.  'But what have you
done with the crown, Curdie?'

'Look,' said Curdie, moving away from the bedside.

Irene followed him--and there, in the middle of the floor, she saw a
strange sight.  Lina lay at full length, fast asleep, her tail
stretched out straight behind her and her forelegs before her: between
the two paws meeting in front of it, her nose just touching it behind,
glowed and flashed the crown, like a nest of the humming birds of
heaven.

Irene gazed, and looked up with a smile.

'But what if the thief were to come, and she not to wake?' she said.
'Shall I try her?'  And as she spoke she stooped toward the crown.

'No, no, no!' cried Curdie, terrified.  'She would frighten you out of
your wits.  I would do it to show you, but she would wake your father.
You have no conception with what a roar she would spring at my throat.
But you shall see how lightly she wakes the moment I speak to her.
Lina!'

She was on her feet the same instant, with her great tail sticking out
straight behind her, just as it had been lying.

'Good dog!' said the princess, and patted her head.  Lina wagged her
tail solemnly, like the boom of an anchored sloop.  Irene took the
crown, and laid it where the king would see it when he woke.

'Now, Princess,' said Curdie, 'I must leave you for a few minutes. You
must bolt the door, please, and not open it to any one.'

Away to the cellar he went with Lina, taking care, as they passed
through the servants' hall, to get her a good breakfast.  In about one
minute she had eaten what he gave her, and looked up in his face: it
was not more she wanted, but work.  So out of the cellar they went
through the passage, and Curdie into the dungeon, where he pulled up
Lina, opened the door, let her out, and shut it again behind her.  As
he reached the door of the king's chamber, Lina was flying out of the
gate of Gwyntystorm as fast as her mighty legs could carry her.

'What's come to the wench?' growled the menservants one to another,
when the chambermaid appeared among them the next morning.  There was
something in her face which they could not understand, and did not like.

'Are we all dirt?' they said.  'What are you thinking about?  Have you
seen yourself in the glass this morning, miss?'

She made no answer.

'Do you want to be treated as you deserve, or will you speak, you
hussy?' said the first woman-cook.  'I would fain know what right you
have to put on a face like that!'

'You won't believe me,' said the girl.

'Of course not.  What is it?'

'I must tell you, whether you believe me or not,' she said.

'Of course you must.'

'It is this, then: if you do not repent of your bad ways, you are all
going to be punished--all turned out of the palace together.'

'A mighty punishment!' said the butler.  'A good riddance, say I, of
the trouble of keeping minxes like you in order!  And why, pray, should
we be turned out?  What have I to repent of now, your holiness?'

'That you know best yourself,' said the girl.

'A pretty piece of insolence!  How should I know, forsooth, what a
menial like you has got against me!  There are people in this
house--oh! I'm not blind to their ways!--but every one for himself, say
I!  Pray, Miss judgement, who gave you such an impertinent message to
His Majesty's household?'

'One who is come to set things right in the king's house.'

'Right, indeed!' cried the butler; but that moment the thought came
back to him of the roar he had heard in the cellar, and he turned pale
and was silent.

The steward took it up next.

'And pray, pretty prophetess,' he said, attempting to chuck her under
the chin, 'what have I got to repent of?'

'That you know best yourself,' said the girl.  'You have but to look
into your books or your heart.'

'Can you tell me, then, what I have to repent of?' said the groom of
the chambers.  'That you know best yourself,' said the girl once more.
'The person who told me to tell you said the servants of this house had
to repent of thieving, and lying, and unkindness, and drinking; and
they will be made to repent of them one way, if they don't do it of
themselves another.'

Then arose a great hubbub; for by this time all the servants in the
house were gathered about her, and all talked together, in towering
indignation.

'Thieving, indeed!' cried one.  'A pretty word in a house where
everything is left lying about in a shameless way, tempting poor
innocent girls!  A house where nobody cares for anything, or has the
least respect to the value of property!'

'I suppose you envy me this brooch of mine,' said another.  'There was
just a half sheet of note paper about it, not a scrap more, in a drawer
that's always open in the writing table in the study! What sort of a
place is that for a jewel?  Can you call it stealing to take a thing
from such a place as that?  Nobody cared a straw about it.  It might as
well have been in the dust hole!  If it had been locked up--then, to be
sure!'

'Drinking!' said the chief porter, with a husky laugh.  'And who
wouldn't drink when he had a chance?  Or who would repent it, except
that the drink was gone?  Tell me that, Miss Innocence.'

'Lying!' said a great, coarse footman.  'I suppose you mean when I told
you yesterday you were a pretty girl when you didn't pout? Lying,
indeed!  Tell us something worth repenting of!  Lying is the way of
Gwyntystorm.  You should have heard Jabez lying to the cook last night!
He wanted a sweetbread for his pup, and pretended it was for the
princess!  Ha! ha! ha!'

'Unkindness!  I wonder who's unkind!  Going and listening to any
stranger against her fellow servants, and then bringing back his wicked
words to trouble them!' said the oldest and worst of the housemaids.
'One of ourselves, too!  Come, you hypocrite!  This is all an invention
of yours and your young man's, to take your revenge of us because we
found you out in a lie last night.  Tell true now: wasn't it the same
that stole the loaf and the pie that sent you with the impudent
message?'

As she said this, she stepped up to the housemaid and gave her, instead
of time to answer, a box on the ear that almost threw her down; and
whoever could get at her began to push and bustle and pinch and punch
her.

'You invite your fate,' she said quietly.

They fell furiously upon her, drove her from the hall with kicks and
blows, hustled her along the passage, and threw her down the stair to
the wine cellar, then locked the door at the top of it, and went back
to their breakfast.

In the meantime the king and the princess had had their bread and wine,
and the princess, with Curdie's help, had made the room as tidy as she
could--they were terribly neglected by the servants. And now Curdie set
himself to interest and amuse the king, and prevent him from thinking
too much, in order that he might the sooner think the better.
Presently, at His Majesty's request, he began from the beginning, and
told everything he could recall of his life, about his father and
mother and their cottage on the mountain, of the inside of the mountain
and the work there, about the goblins and his adventures with them.

When he came to finding the princess and her nurse overtaken by the
twilight on the mountain, Irene took up her share of the tale, and told
all about herself to that point, and then Curdie took it up again; and
so they went on, each fitting in the part that the other did not know,
thus keeping the hoop of the story running straight; and the king
listened with wondering and delighted ears, astonished to find what he
could so ill comprehend, yet fitting so well together from the lips of
two narrators.

At last, with the mission given him by the wonderful princess and his
consequent adventures, Curdie brought up the whole tale to the present
moment.  Then a silence fell, and Irene and Curdie thought the king was
asleep.  But he was far from it; he was thinking about many things.
After a long pause he said:

'Now at last, MY children, I am compelled to believe many things I
could not and do not yet understand--things I used to hear, and
sometimes see, as often as I visited my mother's home.  Once, for
instance, I heard my mother say to her father--speaking of me--"He is a
good, honest boy, but he will be an old man before he understands"; and
my grandfather answered, "Keep up your heart, child: my mother will
look after him."  I thought often of their words, and the many strange
things besides I both heard and saw in that house; but by degrees,
because I could not understand them, I gave up thinking of them.  And
indeed I had almost forgotten them, when you, my child, talking that
day about the Queen Irene and her pigeons, and what you had seen in her
garret, brought them all back to my mind in a vague mass.  But now they
keep coming back to me, one by one, every one for itself; and I shall
just hold my peace, and lie here quite still, and think about them all
till I get well again.'

What he meant they could not quite understand, but they saw plainly
that already he was better.

'Put away my crown,' he said.  'I am tired of seeing it, and have no
more any fear of its safety.'  They put it away together, withdrew from
the bedside, and left him in peace.



CHAPTER 25

The Avengers

There was nothing now to be dreaded from Dr Kelman, but it made Curdie
anxious, as the evening drew near, to think that not a soul belonging
to the court had been to visit the king, or ask how he did, that day.
He feared, in some shape or other, a more determined assault.  He had
provided himself a place in the room, to which he might retreat upon
approach, and whence he could watch; but not once had he had to betake
himself to it.

Towards night the king fell asleep.  Curdie thought more and more
uneasily of the moment when he must again leave them for a little
while.  Deeper and deeper fell the shadows.  No one came to light the
lamp.  The princess drew her chair close to Curdie: she would rather it
were not so dark, she said.  She was afraid of something--she could not
tell what; nor could she give any reason for her fear but that all was
so dreadfully still.

When it had been dark about an hour, Curdie thought Lina might have
returned; and reflected that the sooner he went the less danger was
there of any assault while he was away.  There was more risk of his own
presence being discovered, no doubt, but things were now drawing to a
crisis, and it must be run.  So, telling the princess to lock all the
doors of the bedchamber, and let no one in, he took his mattock, and
with here a run, and there a halt under cover, gained the door at the
head of the cellar stair in safety.  To his surprise he found it
locked, and the key was gone.  There was no time for deliberation.  He
felt where the lock was, and dealt it a tremendous blow with his
mattock.  It needed but a second to dash the door open.  Someone laid a
hand on his arm.

'Who is it?' said Curdie.

'I told you they wouldn't believe me, sir,' said the housemaid.  'I
have been here all day.'

He took her hand, and said, 'You are a good, brave girl.  Now come with
me, lest your enemies imprison you again.'

He took her to the cellar, locked the door, lighted a bit of candle,
gave her a little wine, told her to wait there till he came, and went
out the back way.

Swiftly he swung himself up into the dungeon.  Lina had done her part.
The place was swarming with creatures--animal forms wilder and more
grotesque than ever ramped in nightmare dream.  Close by the hole,
waiting his coming, her green eyes piercing the gulf below, Lina had
but just laid herself down when he appeared.  All about the vault and
up the slope of the rubbish heap lay and stood and squatted the
forty-nine whose friendship Lina had conquered in the wood.  They all
came crowding about Curdie.

He must get them into the cellar as quickly as ever he could.  But when
he looked at the size of some of them, he feared it would be a long
business to enlarge the hole sufficiently to let them through.  At it
he rushed, hitting vigorously at the edge with his mattock.  At the
very first blow came a splash from the water beneath, but ere he could
heave a third, a creature like a tapir, only that the grasping point of
its proboscis was hard as the steel of Curdie's hammer, pushed him
gently aside, making room for another creature, with a head like a
great club, which it began banging upon the floor with terrible force
and noise.  After about a minute of this battery, the tapir came up
again, shoved Clubhead aside, and putting its own head into the hole
began gnawing at the sides of it with the finger of its nose, in such a
fashion that the fragments fell in a continuous gravelly shower into
the water.  In a few minutes the opening was large enough for the
biggest creature among them to get through it.

Next came the difficulty of letting them down: some were quite light,
but the half of them were too heavy for the rope, not to say for his
arms.  The creatures themselves seemed to be puzzling where or how they
were to go.  One after another of them came up, looked down through the
hole, and drew back.  Curdie thought if he let Lina down, perhaps that
would suggest something; possibly they did not see the opening on the
other side.  He did so, and Lina stood lighting up the entrance of the
passage with her gleaming eyes.

One by one the creatures looked down again, and one by one they drew
back, each standing aside to glance at the next, as if to say, Now you
have a look.  At last it came to the turn of the serpent with the long
body, the four short legs behind, and the little wings before.  No
sooner had he poked his head through than he poked it farther
through--and farther, and farther yet, until there was little more than
his legs left in the dungeon.  By that time he had got his head and
neck well into the passage beside Lina.  Then his legs gave a great
waddle and spring, and he tumbled himself, far as there was betwixt
them, heels over head into the passage.

'That is all very well for you, Mr Legserpent!' thought Curdie to
himself; 'but what is to be done with the rest?'  He had hardly time to
think it, however, before the creature's head appeared again through
the floor.  He caught hold of the bar of iron to which Curdie's rope
was tied, and settling it securely across the narrowest part of the
irregular opening, held fast to it with his teeth.  It was plain to
Curdie, from the universal hardness among them, that they must all, at
one time or another, have been creatures of the mines.

He saw at once what this one was after.  The beast had planted his feet
firmly upon the floor of the passage, and stretched his long body up
and across the chasm to serve as a bridge for the rest. Curdie mounted
instantly upon his neck, threw his arms round him as far as they would
go, and slid down in ease and safety, the bridge just bending a little
as his weight glided over it.  But he thought some of the creatures
would try the legserpent's teeth.

One by one the oddities followed, and slid down in safety.  When they
seemed to be all landed, he counted them: there were but forty-eight.
Up the rope again he went, and found one which had been afraid to trust
himself to the bridge, and no wonder! for he had neither legs nor head
nor arms nor tail: he was just a round thing, about a foot in diameter,
with a nose and mouth and eyes on one side of the ball.  He had made
his journey by rolling as swiftly as the fleetest of them could run.
The back of the legserpent not being flat, he could not quite trust
himself to roll straight and not drop into the gulf.  Curdie took him
in his arms, and the moment he looked down through the hole, the bridge
made itself again, and he slid into the passage in safety, with
Ballbody in his bosom.

He ran first to the cellar to warn the girl not to be frightened at the
avengers of wickedness.  Then he called to Lina to bring in her friends.

One after another they came trooping in, till the cellar seemed full of
them.  The housemaid regarded them without fear.

'Sir,' she said, 'there is one of the pages I don't take to be a bad
fellow.'

'Then keep him near you,' said Curdie.  'And now can you show me a way
to the king's chamber not through the servants' hall?'

'There is a way through the chamber of the colonel of the guard,' she
answered, 'but he is ill, and in bed.'

'Take me that way,' said Curdie.

By many ups and downs and windings and turnings she brought him to a
dimly lighted room, where lay an elderly man asleep.  His arm was
outside the coverlid, and Curdie gave his hand a hurried grasp as he
went by.  His heart beat for joy, for he had found a good, honest,
human hand.

'I suppose that is why he is ill,' he said to himself.

It was now close upon suppertime, and when the girl stopped at the door
of the king's chamber, he told her to go and give the servants one
warning more.

'Say the messenger sent you,' he said.  'I will be with you very soon.'

The king was still asleep.  Curdie talked to the princess for a few
minutes, told her not to be frightened whatever noises she heard, only
to keep her door locked till he came, and left her.



CHAPTER 26

The Vengeance

By the time the girl reached the servants' hall they were seated at
supper.  A loud, confused exclamation arose when she entered.  No one
made room for her; all stared with unfriendly eyes.  A page, who
entered the next minute by another door, came to her side.

'Where do you come from, hussy?' shouted the butler, and knocked his
fist on the table with a loud clang.

He had gone to fetch wine, had found the stair door broken open and the
cellar door locked, and had turned and fled.  Among his fellows,
however, he had now regained what courage could be called his.

'From the cellar,' she replied.  'The messenger broke open the door,
and sent me to you again.'

'The messenger!  Pooh!  What messenger?'

'The same who sent me before to tell you to repent.'

'What!  Will you go fooling it still?  Haven't you had enough of it?'
cried the butler in a rage, and starting to his feet, drew near
threateningly.

'I must do as I am told,' said the girl.

'Then why don't you do as I tell you, and hold your tongue?' said the
butler.  'Who wants your preachments?  If anybody here has anything to
repent Of, isn't that enough--and more than enough for him--but you
must come bothering about, and stirring up, till not a drop of quiet
will settle inside him?  You come along with me, young woman; we'll see
if we can't find a lock somewhere in the house that'll hold you in!'

'Hands off, Mr Butler!' said the page, and stepped between.

'Oh, ho!' cried the butler, and pointed his fat finger at him. 'That's
you, is it, my fine fellow?  So it's you that's up to her tricks, is
it?'

The youth did not answer, only stood with flashing eyes fixed on him,
until, growing angrier and angrier, but not daring a step nearer, he
burst out with a rude but quavering authority:

'Leave the house, both of you!  Be off, or I'll have Mr Steward to talk
to you.  Threaten your masters, indeed!  Out of the house with you, and
show us the way you tell us of!'

Two or three of the footmen got up and ranged themselves behind the
butler.

'Don't say I threaten you, Mr Butler,' expostulated the girl from
behind the page.  'The messenger said I was to tell you again, and give
you one chance more.'

'Did the messenger mention me in particular?' asked the butler, looking
the page unsteadily in the face.

'No, sir,' answered the girl.

'I thought not!  I should like to hear him!'

'Then hear him now,' said Curdie, who that moment entered at the
opposite corner of the hall.  'I speak of the butler in particular when
I say that I know more evil of him than of any of the rest. He will not
let either his own conscience or my messenger speak to him: I therefore
now speak myself.  I proclaim him a villain, and a traitor to His
Majesty the king.  But what better is any one of you who cares only for
himself, eats, drinks, takes good money, and gives vile service in
return, stealing and wasting the king's property, and making of the
palace, which ought to be an example of order and sobriety, a disgrace
to the country?'

For a moment all stood astonished into silence by this bold speech from
a stranger.  True, they saw by his mattock over his shoulder that he
was nothing but a miner boy, yet for a moment the truth told
notwithstanding.  Then a great roaring laugh burst from the biggest of
the footmen as he came shouldering his way through the crowd toward
Curdie.

'Yes, I'm right,' he cried; 'I thought as much!  This messenger,
forsooth, is nothing but a gallows bird--a fellow the city marshal was
going to hang, but unfortunately put it off till he should be starved
enough to save rope and be throttled with a pack thread. He broke
prison, and here he is preaching!'  As he spoke, he stretched out his
great hand to lay hold of him.  Curdie caught it in his left hand, and
heaved his mattock with the other.  Finding, however, nothing worse
than an ox hoof, he restrained himself, stepped back a pace or two,
shifted his mattock to his left hand, and struck him a little smart
blow on the shoulder.  His arm dropped by his side, he gave a roar, and
drew back.

His fellows came crowding upon Curdie.  Some called to the dogs; others
swore; the women screamed; the footmen and pages got round him in a
half circle, which he kept from closing by swinging his mattock, and
here and there threatening a blow.

'Whoever confesses to having done anything wrong in this house, however
small, however great, and means to do better, let him come to this
corner of the room,' he cried.

None moved but the page, who went toward him skirting the wall. When
they caught sight of him, the crowd broke into a hiss of derision.

'There!  See!  Look at the sinner!  He confesses!  Actually confesses!
Come, what is it you stole?  The barefaced hypocrite! There's your sort
to set up for reproving other people!  Where's the other now?'

But the maid had left the room, and they let the page pass, for he
looked dangerous to stop.  Curdie had just put him betwixt him and the
wall, behind the door, when in rushed the butler with the huge kitchen
poker, the point of which he had blown red-hot in the fire, followed by
the cook with his longest spit.  Through the crowd, which scattered
right and left before them, they came down upon Curdie.  Uttering a
shrill whistle, he caught the poker a blow with his mattock, knocking
the point to the ground, while the page behind him started forward, and
seizing the point of the spit, held on to it with both hands, the cook
kicking him furiously.

Ere the butler could raise the poker again, or the cook recover the
spit, with a roar to terrify the dead, Lina dashed into the room, her
eyes flaming like candles.  She went straight at the butler. He was
down in a moment, and she on the top of him, wagging her tail over him
like a lioness.

'Don't kill him, Lina,' said Curdie.

'Oh, Mr Miner!' cried the butler.

'Put your foot on his mouth, Lina,' said Curdie.  'The truth Fear tells
is not much better than her lies.'

The rest of the creatures now came stalking, rolling, leaping, gliding,
hobbling into the room, and each as he came took the next place along
the wall, until, solemn and grotesque, all stood ranged, awaiting
orders.

And now some of the culprits were stealing to the doors nearest them.
Curdie whispered to the two creatures next him.  Off went Ballbody,
rolling and bounding through the crowd like a spent cannon shot, and
when the foremost reached the door to the corridor, there he lay at the
foot of it grinning; to the other door scuttled a scorpion, as big as a
huge crab.  The rest stood so still that some began to think they were
only boys dressed up to look awful; they persuaded themselves they were
only another part of the housemaid's and page's vengeful contrivance,
and their evil spirits began to rise again.  Meantime Curdie had, with
a second sharp blow from the hammer of his mattock, disabled the cook,
so that he yielded the spit with a groan.  He now turned to the
avengers.

'Go at them,' he said.

The whole nine-and-forty obeyed at once, each for himself, and after
his own fashion.  A scene of confusion and terror followed. The crowd
scattered like a dance of flies.  The creatures had been instructed not
to hurt much, but to hunt incessantly, until everyone had rushed from
the house.  The women shrieked, and ran hither and thither through the
hall, pursued each by her own horror, and snapped at by every other in
passing.  If one threw herself down in hysterical despair, she was
instantly poked or clawed or nibbled up again.

Though they were quite as frightened at first, the men did not run so
fast; and by and by some of them finding they were only glared at, and
followed, and pushed, began to summon up courage once more, and with
courage came impudence.  The tapir had the big footman in charge: the
fellow stood stock-still, and let the beast come up to him, then put
out his finger and playfully patted his nose.  The tapir gave the nose
a little twist, and the finger lay on the floor.

Then indeed did the footman run.

Gradually the avengers grew more severe, and the terrors of the
imagination were fast yielding to those of sensuous experience, when a
page, perceiving one of the doors no longer guarded, sprang at it, and
ran out.  Another and another followed.  Not a beast went after, until,
one by one, they were every one gone from the hall, and the whole crew
in the kitchen.

There they were beginning to congratulate themselves that all was over,
when in came the creatures trooping after them, and the second act of
their terror and pain began.  They were flung about in all directions;
their clothes were torn from them; they were pinched and scratched any-
and everywhere; Ballbody kept rolling up them and over them, confining
his attentions to no one in particular; the scorpion kept grabbing at
their legs with his huge pincers; a three-foot centipede kept screwing
up their bodies, nipping as he went; varied as numerous were their
woes.  Nor was it long before the last of them had fled from the
kitchen to the sculleries.

But thither also they were followed, and there again they were hunted
about.  They were bespattered with the dirt of their own neglect; they
were soused in the stinking water that had boiled greens; they were
smeared with rancid dripping; their faces were rubbed in maggots: I
dare not tell all that was done to them.  At last they got the door
into a back yard open, and rushed out.  Then first they knew that the
wind was howling and the rain falling in sheets.  But there was no rest
for them even there.  Thither also were they followed by the inexorable
avengers, and the only door here was a door out of the palace: out
every soul of them was driven, and left, some standing, some lying,
some crawling, to the farther buffeting of the waterspouts and
whirlwinds ranging every street of the city.  The door was flung to
behind them, and they heard it locked and bolted and barred against
them.



CHAPTER 27

More Vengeance

As soon as they were gone, Curdie brought the creatures back to the
servants' hall, and told them to eat up everything on the table. It was
a sight to see them all standing round it--except such as had to get
upon it--eating and drinking, each after its fashion, without a smile,
or a word, or a glance of fellowship in the act. A very few moments
served to make everything eatable vanish, and then Curdie requested
them to clean house, and the page who stood by to assist them.

Every one set about it except Ballbody: he could do nothing at
cleaning, for the more he rolled, the more he spread the dirt. Curdie
was curious to know what he had been, and how he had come to be such as
he was: but he could only conjecture that he was a gluttonous alderman
whom nature had treated homeopathically. And now there was such a
cleaning and clearing out of neglected places, such a burying and
burning of refuse, such a rinsing of jugs, such a swilling of sinks,
and such a flushing of drains as would have delighted the eyes of all
true housekeepers and lovers of cleanliness generally.

Curdie meantime was with the king, telling him all he had done. They
had heard a little noise, but not much, for he had told the avengers to
repress outcry as much as possible; and they had seen to it that the
more anyone cried out the more he had to cry out upon, while the
patient ones they scarcely hurt at all.

Having promised His Majesty and Her Royal Highness a good breakfast,
Curdie now went to finish the business.  The courtiers must be dealt
with.  A few who were the worst, and the leaders of the rest, must be
made examples of; the others should be driven to the street.

He found the chiefs of the conspiracy holding a final consultation in
the smaller room off the hall.  These were the lord chamberlain, the
attorney-general, the master of the horse, and the king's private
secretary: the lord chancellor and the rest, as foolish as faithless,
were but the tools of these.

The housemaid had shown him a little closet, opening from a passage
behind, where he could overhear all that passed in that room; and now
Curdie heard enough to understand that they had determined, in the dead
of that night, rather in the deepest dark before the morning, to bring
a certain company of soldiers into the palace, make away with the king,
secure the princess, announce the sudden death of His Majesty, read as
his the will they had drawn up, and proceed to govern the country at
their ease, and with results: they would at once levy severer taxes,
and pick a quarrel with the most powerful of their neighbours.
Everything settled, they agreed to retire, and have a few hours' quiet
sleep first--all but the secretary, who was to sit up and call them at
the proper moment. Curdie allowed them half an hour to get to bed, and
then set about completing his purgation of the palace.

First he called Lina, and opened the door of the room where the
secretary sat.  She crept in, and laid herself down against it. When
the secretary, rising to stretch his legs, caught sight of her eyes, he
stood frozen with terror.  She made neither motion nor sound.
Gathering courage, and taking the thing for a spectral illusion, he
made a step forward.  She showed her other teeth, with a growl neither
more than audible nor less than horrible.  The secretary sank fainting
into a chair.  He was not a brave man, and besides, his conscience had
gone over to the enemy, and was sitting against the door by Lina.

To the lord chamberlain's door next, Curdie conducted the legserpent,
and let him in.

Now His Lordship had had a bedstead made for himself, sweetly fashioned
of rods of silver gilt: upon it the legserpent found him asleep, and
under it he crept.  But out he came on the other side, and crept over
it next, and again under it, and so over it, under it, over it, five or
six times, every time leaving a coil of himself behind him, until he
had softly folded all his length about the lord chamberlain and his
bed.  This done, he set up his head, looking down with curved neck
right over His Lordship's, and began to hiss in his face.

He woke in terror unspeakable, and would have started up but the moment
he moved, the legserpent drew his coils closer, and closer still, and
drew and drew until the quaking traitor heard the joints of his
bedstead grinding and gnarring.  Presently he persuaded himself that it
was only a horrid nightmare, and began to struggle with all his
strength to throw it off.  Thereupon the legserpent gave his hooked
nose such a bite that his teeth met through it--but it was hardly
thicker than the bowl of a spoon; and then the vulture knew that he was
in the grasp of his enemy the snake, and yielded.

As soon as he was quiet the legserpent began to untwist and retwist, to
uncoil and recoil himself, swinging and swaying, knotting and relaxing
himself with strangest curves and convolutions, always, however,
leaving at least one coil around his victim.  At last he undid himself
entirely, and crept from the bed. Then first the lord chamberlain
discovered that his tormentor had bent and twisted the bedstead, legs
and canopy and all, so about him that he was shut in a silver cage out
of which it was impossible for him to find a way.  Once more, thinking
his enemy was gone, he began to shout for help.  But the instant he
opened his mouth his keeper darted at him and bit him, and after three
or four such essays, he lay still.

The master of the horse Curdie gave in charge to the tapir.  When the
soldier saw him enter--for he was not yet asleep--he sprang from his
bed, and flew at him with his sword.  But the creature's hide was
invulnerable to his blows, and he pecked at his legs with his proboscis
until he jumped into bed again, groaning, and covered himself up; after
which the tapir contented himself with now and then paying a visit to
his toes.

As for the attorney-general, Curdie led to his door a huge spider,
about two feet long in the body, which, having made an excellent
supper, was full of webbing.  The attorney-general had not gone to bed,
but sat in a chair asleep before a great mirror.  He had been trying
the effect of a diamond star which he had that morning taken from the
jewel room.  When he woke he fancied himself paralysed; every limb,
every finger even, was motionless: coils and coils of broad spider
ribbon bandaged his members to his body, and all to the chair.  In the
glass he saw himself wound about with slavery infinite.  On a footstool
a yard off sat the spider glaring at him.

Clubhead had mounted guard over the butler, where he lay tied hand and
foot under the third cask.  From that cask he had seen the wine run
into a great bath, and therein he expected to be drowned.  The doctor,
with his crushed leg, needed no one to guard him.

And now Curdie proceeded to the expulsion of the rest.  Great men or
underlings, he treated them all alike.  From room to room over the
house he went, and sleeping or waking took the man by the hand. Such
was the state to which a year of wicked rule had reduced the moral
condition of the court, that in it all he found but three with human
hands.  The possessors of these he allowed to dress themselves and
depart in peace.  When they perceived his mission, and how he was
backed, they yielded.

Then commenced a general hunt, to clear the house of the vermin. Out of
their beds in their night clothing, out of their rooms, gorgeous
chambers or garret nooks, the creatures hunted them.  Not one was
allowed to escape.  Tumult and noise there was little, for fear was too
deadly for outcry.  Ferreting them out everywhere, following them
upstairs and downstairs, yielding no instant of repose except upon the
way out, the avengers persecuted the miscreants, until the last of them
was shivering outside the palace gates, with hardly sense enough left
to know where to turn.

When they set out to look for shelter, they found every inn full of the
servants expelled before them, and not one would yield his place to a
superior suddenly levelled with himself.  Most houses refused to admit
them on the ground of the wickedness that must have drawn on them such
a punishment; and not a few would have been left in the streets all
night, had not Derba, roused by the vain entreaties at the doors on
each side of her cottage, opened hers, and given up everything to them.
The lord chancellor was only too glad to share a mattress with a
stableboy, and steal his bare feet under his jacket.

In the morning Curdie appeared, and the outcasts were in terror,
thinking he had come after them again.  But he took no notice of them:
his object was to request Derba to go to the palace: the king required
her services.  She need take no trouble about her cottage, he said; the
palace was henceforward her home: she was the king's chatelaine over
men and maidens of his household.  And this very morning she must cook
His Majesty a nice breakfast.



CHAPTER 28

The Preacher

Various reports went undulating through the city as to the nature of
what had taken place in the palace.  The people gathered, and stared at
the house, eyeing it as if it had sprung up in the night. But it looked
sedate enough, remaining closed and silent, like a house that was dead.
They saw no one come out or go in.  Smoke arose from a chimney or two;
there was hardly another sign of life. It was not for some little time
generally understood that the highest officers of the crown as well as
the lowest menials of the palace had been dismissed in disgrace: for
who was to recognize a lord chancellor in his nightshirt?  And what
lord chancellor would, so attired in the street, proclaim his rank and
office aloud? Before it was day most of the courtiers crept down to the
river, hired boats, and betook themselves to their homes or their
friends in the country.  It was assumed in the city that the domestics
had been discharged upon a sudden discovery of general and unpardonable
peculation; for, almost everybody being guilty of it himself, petty
dishonesty was the crime most easily credited and least easily passed
over in Gwyntystorm.

Now that same day was Religion day, and not a few of the clergy, always
glad to seize on any passing event to give interest to the dull and
monotonic grind of their intellectual machines, made this remarkable
one the ground of discourse to their congregations. More especially
than the rest, the first priest of the great temple where was the royal
pew, judged himself, from his relation to the palace, called upon to
'improve the occasion', for they talked ever about improvement at
Gwyntystorm, all the time they were going down hill with a rush.

The book which had, of late years, come to be considered the most
sacred, was called The Book of Nations, and consisted of proverbs, and
history traced through custom: from it the first priest chose his text;
and his text was, 'Honesty Is the Best Policy.'  He was considered a
very eloquent man, but I can offer only a few of the larger bones of
his sermon.

The main proof of the verity of their religion, he said, was that
things always went well with those who profess it; and its first
fundamental principle, grounded in inborn invariable instinct, was,
that every One should take care of that One.  This was the first duty
of Man.  If every one would but obey this law, number one, then would
every one be perfectly cared for--one being always equal to one.  But
the faculty of care was in excess of need, and all that overflowed, and
would otherwise run to waste, ought to be gently turned in the
direction of one's neighbour, seeing that this also wrought for the
fulfilling of the law, inasmuch as the reaction of excess so directed
was upon the director of the same, to the comfort, that is, and
well-being of the original self.  To be just and friendly was to build
the warmest and safest of all nests, and to be kind and loving was to
line it with the softest of all furs and feathers, for the one
precious, comfort-loving self there to lie, revelling in downiest
bliss.  One of the laws therefore most binding upon men because of its
relation to the first and greatest of all duties, was embodied in the
Proverb he had just read; and what stronger proof of its wisdom and
truth could they desire than the sudden and complete vengeance which
had fallen upon those worse than ordinary sinners who had offended
against the king's majesty by forgetting that 'Honesty Is the Best
Policy'?

At this point of the discourse the head of the legserpent rose from the
floor of the temple, towering above the pulpit, above the priest, then
curving downward, with open mouth slowly descended upon him.  Horror
froze the sermon-pump.  He stared upward aghast. The great teeth of the
animal closed upon a mouthful of the sacred vestments, and slowly he
lifted the preacher from the pulpit, like a handful of linen from a
washtub, and, on his four solemn stumps, bore him out of the temple,
dangling aloft from his jaws.  At the back of it he dropped him into
the dust hole among the remnants of a library whose age had destroyed
its value in the eyes of the chapter.  They found him burrowing in it,
a lunatic henceforth--whose madness presented the peculiar feature,
that in its paroxysms he jabbered sense.

Bone-freezing horror pervaded Gwyntystorm.  If their best and wisest
were treated with such contempt, what might not the rest of them look
for?  Alas for their city!  Their grandly respectable city!  Their
loftily reasonable city!  Where it was all to end, who could tell!

But something must be done.  Hastily assembling, the priests chose a
new first priest, and in full conclave unanimously declared and
accepted that the king in his retirement had, through the practice of
the blackest magic, turned the palace into a nest of demons in the
midst of them.  A grand exorcism was therefore indispensable.

In the meantime the fact came out that the greater part of the
courtiers had been dismissed as well as the servants, and this fact
swelled the hope of the Party of Decency, as they called themselves.
Upon it they proceeded to act, and strengthened themselves on all sides.

The action of the king's bodyguard remained for a time uncertain. But
when at length its officers were satisfied that both the master of the
horse and their colonel were missing, they placed themselves under the
orders of the first priest.

Every one dated the culmination of the evil from the visit of the miner
and his mongrel; and the butchers vowed, if they could but get hold of
them again, they would roast both of them alive.  At once they formed
themselves into a regiment, and put their dogs in training for attack.

Incessant was the talk, innumerable were the suggestions, and great was
the deliberation.  The general consent, however, was that as soon as
the priests should have expelled the demons, they would depose the
king, and attired in all his regal insignia, shut him in a cage for
public show; then choose governors, with the lord chancellor at their
head, whose first duty should be to remit every possible tax; and the
magistrates, by the mouth of the city marshal, required all able-bodied
citizens, in order to do their part toward the carrying out of these
and a multitude of other reforms, to be ready to take arms at the first
summons.

Things needful were prepared as speedily as possible, and a mighty
ceremony, in the temple, in the market place, and in front of the
palace, was performed for the expulsion of the demons.  This over, the
leaders retired to arrange an attack upon the palace.

But that night events occurred which, proving the failure of their
first, induced the abandonment of their second, intent.  Certain of the
prowling order of the community, whose numbers had of late been
steadily on the increase, reported frightful things.  Demons of
indescribable ugliness had been espied careering through the midnight
streets and courts.  A citizen--some said in the very act of
housebreaking, but no one cared to look into trifles at such a
crisis--had been seized from behind, he could not see by what, and
soused in the river.  A well-known receiver of stolen goods had had his
shop broken open, and when he came down in the morning had found
everything in ruin on the pavement.  The wooden image of justice over
the door of the city marshal had had the arm that held the sword bitten
off.  The gluttonous magistrate had been pulled from his bed in the
dark, by beings of which he could see nothing but the flaming eyes, and
treated to a bath of the turtle soup that had been left simmering by
the side of the kitchen fire.  Having poured it over him, they put him
again into his bed, where he soon learned how a mummy must feel in its
cerements.

Worst of all, in the market place was fixed up a paper, with the king's
own signature, to the effect that whoever henceforth should show
inhospitality to strangers, and should be convicted of the same, should
be instantly expelled the city; while a second, in the butchers'
quarter, ordained that any dog which henceforth should attack a
stranger should be immediately destroyed.  It was plain, said the
butchers, that the clergy were of no use; they could not exorcise
demons!  That afternoon, catching sight of a poor old fellow in rags
and tatters, quietly walking up the street, they hounded their dogs
upon him, and had it not been that the door of Derba's cottage was
standing open, and was near enough for him to dart in and shut it ere
they reached him, he would have been torn in pieces.

And thus things went on for some days.



CHAPTER 29

Barbara

In the meantime, with Derba to minister to his wants, with Curdie to
protect him, and Irene to nurse him, the king was getting rapidly
stronger.  Good food was what he most wanted and of that, at least of
certain kinds of it, there was plentiful store in the palace.
Everywhere since the cleansing of the lower regions of it, the air was
clean and sweet, and under the honest hands of the one housemaid the
king's chamber became a pleasure to his eyes.  With such changes it was
no wonder if his heart grew lighter as well as his brain clearer.

But still evil dreams came and troubled him, the lingering result of
the wicked medicines the doctor had given him.  Every night, sometimes
twice or thrice, he would wake up in terror, and it would be minutes
ere he could come to himself.  The consequence was that he was always
worse in the morning, and had loss to make up during the day.  While he
slept, Irene or Curdie, one or the other, must still be always by his
side.

One night, when it was Curdie's turn with the king, he heard a cry
somewhere in the house, and as there was no other child, concluded,
notwithstanding the distance of her grandmother's room, that it must be
Barbara.  Fearing something might be wrong, and noting the king's sleep
more quiet than usual, he ran to see.  He found the child in the middle
of the floor, weeping bitterly, and Derba slumbering peacefully in bed.
The instant she saw him the night-lost thing ceased her crying, smiled,
and stretched out her arms to him.  Unwilling to wake the old woman,
who had been working hard all day, he took the child, and carried her
with him.  She clung to him so, pressing her tear-wet radiant face
against his, that her little arms threatened to choke him.

When he re-entered the chamber, he found the king sitting up in bed,
fighting the phantoms of some hideous dream.  Generally upon such
occasions, although he saw his watcher, he could not dissociate him
from the dream, and went raving on.  But the moment his eyes fell upon
little Barbara, whom he had never seen before, his soul came into them
with a rush, and a smile like the dawn of an eternal day overspread his
countenance; the dream was nowhere, and the child was in his heart.  He
stretched out his arms to her, the child stretched out hers to him, and
in five minutes they were both asleep, each in the other's embrace.

From that night Barbara had a crib in the king's chamber, and as often
as he woke, Irene or Curdie, whichever was watching, took the sleeping
child and laid her in his arms, upon which, invariably and instantly,
the dream would vanish.  A great part of the day too she would be
playing on or about the king's bed; and it was a delight to the heart
of the princess to see her amusing herself with the crown, now sitting
upon it, now rolling it hither and thither about the room like a hoop.
Her grandmother entering once while she was pretending to make porridge
in it, held up her hands in horror-struck amazement; but the king would
not allow her to interfere, for the king was now Barbara's playmate,
and his crown their plaything.

The colonel of the guard also was growing better.  Curdie went often to
see him.  They were soon friends, for the best people understand each
other the easiest, and the grim old warrior loved the miner boy as if
he were at once his son and his angel.  He was very anxious about his
regiment.  He said the officers were mostly honest men, he believed,
but how they might be doing without him, or what they might resolve, in
ignorance of the real state of affairs, and exposed to every
misrepresentation, who could tell? Curdie proposed that he should send
for the major, offering to be the messenger.  The colonel agreed, and
Curdie went--not without his mattock, because of the dogs.

But the officers had been told by the master of the horse that their
colonel was dead, and although they were amazed he should be buried
without the attendance of his regiment, they never doubted the
information.  The handwriting itself of their colonel was insufficient,
counteracted by the fresh reports daily current, to destroy the lie.
The major regarded the letter as a trap for the next officer in
command, and sent his orderly to arrest the messenger.  But Curdie had
had the wisdom not to wait for an answer.

The king's enemies said that he had first poisoned the good colonel of
the guard, and then murdered the master of the horse, and other
faithful councillors; and that his oldest and most attached domestics
had but escaped from the palace with their lives--not all of them, for
the butler was missing.  Mad or wicked, he was not only unfit to rule
any longer, but worse than unfit to have in his power and under his
influence the young princess, only hope of Gwyntystorm and the kingdom.

The moment the lord chancellor reached his house in the country and had
got himself clothed, he began to devise how yet to destroy his master;
and the very next morning set out for the neighbouring kingdom of
Borsagrass to invite invasion, and offer a compact with its monarch.



CHAPTER 30

Peter

At the cottage in the mountain everything for a time went on just as
before.  It was indeed dull without Curdie, but as often as they looked
at the emerald it was gloriously green, and with nothing to fear or
regret, and everything to hope, they required little comforting.  One
morning, however, at last, Peter, who had been consulting the gem,
rather now from habit than anxiety, as a farmer his barometer in
undoubtful weather, turned suddenly to his wife, the stone in his hand,
and held it up with a look of ghastly dismay.

'Why, that's never the emerald!' said Joan.

'It is,' answered Peter; 'but it were small blame to any one that took
it for a bit of bottle glass!'

For, all save one spot right in the centre, of intensest and most
brilliant green, it looked as if the colour had been burnt out of it.

'Run, run, Peter!' cried his wife.  'Run and tell the old princess.  It
may not be too late.  The boy must be lying at death's door.'

Without a word Peter caught up his mattock, darted from the cottage,
and was at the bottom of the hill in less time than he usually took to
get halfway.

The door of the king's house stood open; he rushed in and up the stair.
But after wandering about in vain for an hour, opening door after door,
and finding no way farther up, the heart of the old man had well-nigh
failed him.  Empty rooms, empty rooms!--desertion and desolation
everywhere.

At last he did come upon the door to the tower stair.  Up he darted.
Arrived at the top, he found three doors, and, one after the other,
knocked at them all.  But there was neither voice nor hearing.  Urged
by his faith and his dread, slowly, hesitatingly, he opened one.  It
revealed a bare garret room, nothing in it but one chair and one
spinning wheel.  He closed it, and opened the next--to start back in
terror, for he saw nothing but a great gulf, a moonless night, full of
stars, and, for all the stars, dark, dark!--a fathomless abyss.  He
opened the third door, and a rush like the tide of a living sea invaded
his ears.  Multitudinous wings flapped and flashed in the sun, and,
like the ascending column from a volcano, white birds innumerable shot
into the air, darkening the day with the shadow of their cloud, and
then, with a sharp sweep, as if bent sideways by a sudden wind, flew
northward, swiftly away, and vanished.  The place felt like a tomb.
There seemed no breath of life left in it.

Despair laid hold upon him; he rushed down thundering with heavy feet.
Out upon him darted the housekeeper like an ogress-spider, and after
her came her men; but Peter rushed past them, heedless and
careless--for had not the princess mocked him?--and sped along the road
to Gwyntystorm.  What help lay in a miner's mattock, a man's arm, a
father's heart, he would bear to his boy.

Joan sat up all night waiting his return, hoping and hoping.  The
mountain was very still, and the sky was clear; but all night long the
miner sped northward, and the heart of his wife was troubled.



CHAPTER 31

The Sacrifice

Things in the palace were in a strange condition: the king playing with
a child and dreaming wise dreams, waited upon by a little princess with
the heart of a queen, and a youth from the mines, who went nowhere, not
even into the king's chamber, without his mattock on his shoulder and a
horrible animal at his heels; in a room nearby the colonel of his
guard, also in bed, without a soldier to obey him; in six other rooms,
far apart, six miscreants, each watched by a beast-jailer; ministers to
them all, an old woman and a page; and in the wine cellar, forty-three
animals, creatures more grotesque than ever brain of man invented.
None dared approach its gates, and seldom one issued from them.

All the dwellers in the city were united in enmity to the palace. It
swarmed with evil spirits, they said, whereas the evil spirits were in
the city, unsuspected.  One consequence of their presence was that,
when the rumour came that a great army was on the march against
Gwyntystorm, instead of rushing to their defences, to make new gates,
free portcullises and drawbridges, and bar the river, each band flew
first to their treasures, burying them in their cellars and gardens,
and hiding them behind stones in their chimneys; and, next to
rebellion, signing an invitation to His Majesty of Borsagrass to enter
at their open gates, destroy their king, and annex their country to his
own.

The straits of isolation were soon found in the palace: its invalids
were requiring stronger food, and what was to be done? For if the
butchers sent meat to the palace, was it not likely enough to be
poisoned?  Curdie said to Derba he would think of some plan before
morning.

But that same night, as soon as it was dark, Lina came to her master,
and let him understand she wanted to go out.  He unlocked a little
private postern for her, left it so that she could push it open when
she returned, and told the crocodile to stretch himself across it
inside.  Before midnight she came back with a young deer.

Early the next morning the legserpent crept out of the wine cellar,
through the broken door behind, shot into the river, and soon appeared
in the kitchen with a splendid sturgeon.  Every night Lina went out
hunting, and every morning Legserpent went out fishing, and both
invalids and household had plenty to eat.  As to news, the page, in
plain clothes, would now and then venture out into the market place,
and gather some.

One night he came back with the report that the army of the king of
Borsagrass had crossed the border.  Two days after, he brought the news
that the enemy was now but twenty miles from Gwyntystorm.

The colonel of the guard rose, and began furbishing his armour--but
gave it over to the page, and staggered across to the barracks, which
were in the next street.  The sentry took him for a ghost or worse, ran
into the guardroom, bolted the door, and stopped his ears.  The poor
colonel, who was yet hardly able to stand, crawled back despairing.

For Curdie, he had already, as soon as the first rumour reached him,
resolved, if no other instructions came, and the king continued unable
to give orders, to call Lina and the creatures, and march to meet the
enemy.  If he died, he died for the right, and there was a right end of
it.  He had no preparations to make, except a good sleep.

He asked the king to let the housemaid take his place by His Majesty
that night, and went and lay down on the floor of the corridor, no
farther off than a whisper would reach from the door of the chamber.
There, with an old mantle of the king's thrown over him, he was soon
fast asleep.

Somewhere about the middle of the night, he woke suddenly, started to
his feet, and rubbed his eyes.  He could not tell what had waked him.
But could he be awake, or was he not dreaming?  The curtain of the
king's door, a dull red ever before, was glowing a gorgeous, a radiant
purple; and the crown wrought upon it in silks and gems was flashing as
if it burned!  What could it mean?  Was the king's chamber on fire?  He
darted to the door and lifted the curtain. Glorious terrible sight!

A long and broad marble table, that stood at one end of the room, had
been drawn into the middle of it, and thereon burned a great fire, of a
sort that Curdie knew--a fire of glowing, flaming roses, red and white.
In the midst of the roses lay the king, moaning, but motionless.  Every
rose that fell from the table to the floor, someone, whom Curdie could
not plainly see for the brightness, lifted and laid burning upon the
king's face, until at length his face too was covered with the live
roses, and he lay all within the fire, moaning still, with now and then
a shuddering sob.

And the shape that Curdie saw and could not see, wept over the king as
he lay in the fire, and often she hid her face in handfuls of her
shadowy hair, and from her hair the water of her weeping dropped like
sunset rain in the light of the roses.  At last she lifted a great
armful of her hair, and shook it over the fire, and the drops fell from
it in showers, and they did not hiss in the flames, but there arose
instead as it were the sound of running brooks.

And the glow of the red fire died away, and the glow of the white fire
grew grey, and the light was gone, and on the table all was
black--except the face of the king, which shone from under the burnt
roses like a diamond in the ashes of a furnace.

Then Curdie, no longer dazzled, saw and knew the old princess.  The
room was lighted with the splendour of her face, of her blue eyes, of
her sapphire crown.  Her golden hair went streaming out from her
through the air till it went off in mist and light.  She was large and
strong as a Titaness.  She stooped over the table-altar, put her mighty
arms under the living sacrifice, lifted the king, as if he were but a
little child, to her bosom, walked with him up the floor, and laid him
in his bed.  Then darkness fell.

The miner boy turned silent away, and laid himself down again in the
corridor.  An absolute joy filled his heart, his bosom, his head, his
whole body.  All was safe; all was well.  With the helve of his mattock
tight in his grasp, he sank into a dreamless sleep.



CHAPTER 32

The King's Army

He woke like a giant refreshed with wine.

When he went into the king's chamber, the housemaid sat where he had
left her, and everything in the room was as it had been the night
before, save that a heavenly odour of roses filled the air of it.  He
went up to the bed.  The king opened his eyes, and the soul of perfect
health shone out of them.  Nor was Curdie amazed in his delight.

'Is it not time to rise, Curdie?' said the king.

'It is, Your Majesty.  Today we must be doing,' answered Curdie.

'What must we be doing today, Curdie?'

'Fighting, sire.'

'Then fetch me my armour--that of plated steel, in the chest there.
You will find the underclothing with it.'

As he spoke, he reached out his hand for his sword, which hung in the
bed before him, drew it, and examined the blade.

'A little rusty!' he said, 'but the edge is there.  We shall polish it
ourselves today--not on the wheel.  Curdie, my son, I wake from a
troubled dream.  A glorious torture has ended it, and I live.  I know
now well how things are, but you shall explain them to me as I get on
my armour.  No, I need no bath.  I am clean.  Call the colonel of the
guard.'

In complete steel the old man stepped into the chamber.  He knew it
not, but the old princess had passed through his room in the night.

'Why, Sir Bronzebeard!' said the king, 'you are dressed before me! You
need no valet, old man, when there is battle in the wind!'

'Battle, sire!' returned the colonel.  'Where then are our soldiers?'

'Why, there and here,' answered the king, pointing to the colonel
first, and then to himself.  'Where else, man?  The enemy will be upon
us ere sunset, if we be not upon him ere noon.  What other thing was in
your brave brain when you donned your armour, friend?'

'Your Majesty's orders, sire,' answered Sir Bronzebeard.

The king smiled and turned to Curdie.

'And what was in yours, Curdie, for your first word was of battle?'

'See, Your Majesty,' answered Curdie; 'I have polished my mattock. If
Your Majesty had not taken the command, I would have met the enemy at
the head of my beasts, and died in comfort, or done better.'

'Brave boy!' said the king.  'He who takes his life in his hand is the
only soldier.  You shall head your beasts today.  Sir Bronzebeard, will
you die with me if need be?'

'Seven times, my king,' said the colonel.

'Then shall we win this battle!' said the king.  'Curdie, go and bind
securely the six, that we lose not their guards.  Can you find me a
horse, think you, Sir Bronzebeard?  Alas! they told me my white charger
was dead.'

'I will go and fright the varletry with my presence, and secure, I
trust, a horse for Your Majesty, and one for myself.'

'And look you, brother!' said the king; 'bring one for my miner boy
too, and a sober old charger for the princess, for she too must go to
the battle, and conquer with us.'

'Pardon me, sire,' said Curdie; 'a miner can fight best on foot. I
might smite my horse dead under me with a missed blow.  And besides
that, I must be near to my beasts.'

'As you will,' said the king.  'Three horses then, Sir Bronzebeard.'

The colonel departed, doubting sorely in his heart how to accoutre and
lead from the barrack stables three horses, in the teeth of his
revolted regiment.

In the hall he met the housemaid.

'Can you lead a horse?' he asked.

'Yes, sir.'

'Are you willing to die for the king?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Can you do as you are bid?'

'I can keep on trying, sir.'

'Come then.  Were I not a man I would be a woman such as you.'

When they entered the barrack yard, the soldiers scattered like autumn
leaves before a blast of winter.  They went into the stable
unchallenged--and lo! in a stall, before the colonel's eyes, stood the
king's white charger, with the royal saddle and bridle hung high beside
him!

'Traitorous thieves!' muttered the old man in his beard, and went along
the stalls, looking for his own black charger.  Having found him, he
returned to saddle first the king's.  But the maid had already the
saddle upon him, and so girt that the colonel could thrust no finger
tip between girth and skin.  He left her to finish what she had so well
begun, and went and made ready his own.  He then chose for the princess
a great red horse, twenty years old, which he knew to possess every
equine virtue.  This and his own he led to the palace, and the maid led
the king's.

The king and Curdie stood in the court, the king in full armour of
silvered steel, with a circlet of rubies and diamonds round his helmet.
He almost leaped for joy when he saw his great white charger come in,
gentle as a child to the hand of the housemaid. But when the horse saw
his master in his armour, he reared and bounded in jubilation, yet did
not break from the hand that held him.  Then out came the princess
attired and ready, with a hunting knife her father had given her by her
side.  They brought her mother's saddle, splendent with gems and gold,
set it on the great red horse, and lifted her to it.  But the saddle
was so big, and the horse so tall, that the child found no comfort in
them.

'Please, King Papa,' she said, 'can I not have my white pony?'

'I did not think of him, little one,' said the king.  'Where is he?'

'In the stable,' answered the maid.  'I found him half starved, the
only horse within the gates, the day after the servants were driven
out.  He has been well fed since.'

'Go and fetch him,' said the king.

As the maid appeared with the pony, from a side door came Lina and the
forty-nine, following Curdie.

'I will go with Curdie and the Uglies,' cried the princess; and as soon
as she was mounted she got into the middle of the pack.

So out they set, the strangest force that ever went against an enemy.
The king in silver armour sat stately on his white steed, with the
stones flashing on his helmet; beside him the grim old colonel, armed
in steel, rode his black charger; behind the king, a little to the
right, Curdie walked afoot, his mattock shining in the sun; Lina
followed at his heel; behind her came the wonderful company of Uglies;
in the midst of them rode the gracious little Irene, dressed in blue,
and mounted on the prettiest of white ponies; behind the colonel, a
little to the left, walked the page, armed in a breastplate, headpiece,
and trooper's sword he had found in the palace, all much too big for
him, and carrying a huge brass trumpet which he did his best to blow;
and the king smiled and seemed pleased with his music, although it was
but the grunt of a brazen unrest.  Alongside the beasts walked Derba
carrying Barbara--their refuge the mountains, should the cause of the
king be lost; as soon as they were over the river they turned aside to
ascend the Cliff, and there awaited the forging of the day's history.
Then first Curdie saw that the housemaid, whom they had all forgotten,
was following, mounted on the great red horse, and seated in the royal
saddle.

Many were the eyes unfriendly of women that had stared at them from
door and window as they passed through the city; and low laughter and
mockery and evil words from the lips of children had rippled about
their ears; but the men were all gone to welcome the enemy, the
butchers the first, the king's guard the last.  And now on the heels of
the king's army rushed out the women and children also, to gather
flowers and branches, wherewith to welcome their conquerors.

About a mile down the river, Curdie, happening to look behind him, saw
the maid, whom he had supposed gone with Derba, still following on the
great red horse.  The same moment the king, a few paces in front of
him, caught sight of the enemy's tents, pitched where, the cliffs
receding, the bank of the river widened to a little plain.



CHAPTER 33

The Battle

He commanded the page to blow his trumpet; and, in the strength of the
moment, the youth uttered a right warlike defiance.

But the butchers and the guard, who had gone over armed to the enemy,
thinking that the king had come to make his peace also, and that it
might thereafter go hard with them, rushed at once to make short work
with him, and both secure and commend themselves.  The butchers came on
first--for the guards had slackened their saddle girths--brandishing
their knives, and talking to their dogs. Curdie and the page, with Lina
and her pack, bounded to meet them. Curdie struck down the foremost
with his mattock.  The page, finding his sword too much for him, threw
it away and seized the butcher's knife, which as he rose he plunged
into the foremost dog. Lina rushed raging and gnashing among them.  She
would not look at a dog so long as there was a butcher on his legs, and
she never stopped to kill a butcher, only with one grind of her jaws
crushed a leg of him.  When they were all down, then indeed she flashed
among the dogs.

Meantime the king and the colonel had spurred toward the advancing
guard.  The king clove the major through skull and collar bone, and the
colonel stabbed the captain in the throat.  Then a fierce combat
commenced--two against many.  But the butchers and their dogs quickly
disposed of, up came Curdie and his beasts.  The horses of the guard,
struck with terror, turned in spite of the spur, and fled in confusion.

Thereupon the forces of Borsagrass, which could see little of the
affair, but correctly imagined a small determined body in front of
them, hastened to the attack.  No sooner did their first advancing wave
appear through the foam of the retreating one, than the king and the
colonel and the page, Curdie and the beasts, went charging upon them.
Their attack, especially the rush of the Uglies, threw the first line
into great confusion, but the second came up quickly; the beasts could
not be everywhere, there were thousands to one against them, and the
king and his three companions were in the greatest possible danger.

A dense cloud came over the sun, and sank rapidly toward the earth. The
cloud moved all together, and yet the thousands of white flakes of
which it was made up moved each for itself in ceaseless and rapid
motion: those flakes were the wings of pigeons.  Down swooped the birds
upon the invaders; right in the face of man and horse they flew with
swift-beating wings, blinding eyes and confounding brain.  Horses
reared and plunged and wheeled.  All was at once in confusion.  The men
made frantic efforts to seize their tormentors, but not one could they
touch; and they outdoubled them in numbers. Between every wild clutch
came a peck of beak and a buffet of pinion in the face.  Generally the
bird would, with sharp-clapping wings, dart its whole body, with the
swiftness of an arrow, against its singled mark, yet so as to glance
aloft the same instant, and descend skimming; much as the thin stone,
shot with horizontal cast of arm, having touched and torn the surface
of the lake, ascends to skim, touch, and tear again.  So mingled the
feathered multitude in the grim game of war.  It was a storm in which
the wind was birds, and the sea men.  And ever as each bird arrived at
the rear of the enemy, it turned, ascended, and sped to the front to
charge again.

The moment the battle began, the princess's pony took fright, and
turned and fled.  But the maid wheeled her horse across the road and
stopped him; and they waited together the result of the battle.

And as they waited, it seemed to the princess right strange that the
pigeons, every one as it came to the rear, and fetched a compass to
gather force for the reattack, should make the head of her attendant on
the red horse the goal around which it turned; so that about them was
an unintermittent flapping and flashing of wings, and a curving,
sweeping torrent of the side-poised wheeling bodies of birds.  Strange
also it seemed that the maid should be constantly waving her arm toward
the battle.  And the time of the motion of her arm so fitted with the
rushes of birds, that it looked as if the birds obeyed her gesture, and
she was casting living javelins by the thousand against the enemy.  The
moment a pigeon had rounded her head, it went off straight as bolt from
bow, and with trebled velocity.

But of these strange things, others besides the princess had taken
note.  From a rising ground whence they watched the battle in growing
dismay, the leaders of the enemy saw the maid and her motions, and,
concluding her an enchantress, whose were the airy legions humiliating
them, set spurs to their horses, made a circuit, outflanked the king,
and came down upon her.  But suddenly by her side stood a stalwart old
man in the garb of a miner, who, as the general rode at her, sword in
hand, heaved his swift mattock, and brought it down with such force on
the forehead of his charger, that he fell to the ground like a log.
His rider shot over his head and lay stunned.  Had not the great red
horse reared and wheeled, he would have fallen beneath that of the
general.

With lifted sabre, one of his attendant officers rode at the miner. But
a mass of pigeons darted in the faces of him and his horse, and the
next moment he lay beside his commander.

The rest of them turned and fled, pursued by the birds.

'Ah, friend Peter!' said the maid; 'thou hast come as I told thee!
Welcome and thanks!'

By this time the battle was over.  The rout was general.  The enemy
stormed back upon their own camp, with the beasts roaring in the midst
of them, and the king and his army, now reinforced by one, pursuing.
But presently the king drew rein.

'Call off your hounds, Curdie, and let the pigeons do the rest,' he
shouted, and turned to see what had become of the princess.

In full panic fled the invaders, sweeping down their tents, stumbling
over their baggage, trampling on their dead and wounded, ceaselessly
pursued and buffeted by the white-winged army of heaven.  Homeward they
rushed the road they had come, straight for the borders, many dropping
from pure fatigue, and lying where they fell.  And still the pigeons
were in their necks as they ran.  At length to the eyes of the king and
his army nothing was visible save a dust cloud below, and a bird cloud
above.  Before night the bird cloud came back, flying high over
Gwyntystorm.  Sinking swiftly, it disappeared among the ancient roofs
of the palace.



CHAPTER 34

Judgement

The king and his army returned, bringing with them one prisoner only,
the lord chancellor.  Curdie had dragged him from under a fallen tent,
not by the hand of a man, but by the foot of a mule.

When they entered the city, it was still as the grave.  The citizens
had fled home.  'We must submit,' they cried, 'or the king and his
demons will destroy us.'  The king rode through the streets in silence,
ill-pleased with his people.  But he stopped his horse in the midst of
the market place, and called, in a voice loud and clear as the cry of a
silver trumpet, 'Go and find your own.  Bury your dead, and bring home
your wounded.'  Then he turned him gloomily to the palace.

Just as they reached the gates, Peter, who, as they went, had been
telling his tale to Curdie, ended it with the words:

'And so there I was, in the nick of time to save the two princesses!'

'The two princesses, Father!  The one on the great red horse was the
housemaid,' said Curdie, and ran to open the gates for the king.

They found Derba returned before them, and already busy preparing them
food.  The king put up his charger with his own hands, rubbed him down,
and fed him.

When they had washed, and eaten and drunk, he called the colonel, and
told Curdie and the page to bring out the traitors and the beasts, and
attend him to the market place.

By this time the people were crowding back into the city, bearing their
dead and wounded.  And there was lamentation in Gwyntystorm, for no one
could comfort himself, and no one had any to comfort him.  The nation
was victorious, but the people were conquered.

The king stood in the centre of the market place, upon the steps of the
ancient cross.  He had laid aside his helmet and put on his crown, but
he stood all armed beside, with his sword in his hand. He called the
people to him, and, for all the terror of the beasts, they dared not
disobey him.  Those, even, who were carrying their wounded laid them
down, and drew near trembling.

Then the king said to Curdie and the page:

'Set the evil men before me.'

He looked upon them for a moment in mingled anger and pity, then turned
to the people and said:

'Behold your trust!  Ye slaves, behold your leaders!  I would have
freed you, but ye would not be free.  Now shall ye be ruled with a rod
of iron, that ye may learn what freedom is, and love it and seek it.
These wretches I will send where they shall mislead you no longer.'

He made a sign to Curdie, who immediately brought up the legserpent.
To the body of the animal they bound the lord chamberlain, speechless
with horror.  The butler began to shriek and pray, but they bound him
on the back of Clubhead.  One after another, upon the largest of the
creatures they bound the whole seven, each through the unveiling terror
looking the villain he was.  Then said the king:

'I thank you, my good beasts; and I hope to visit you ere long. Take
these evil men with you, and go to your place.'

Like a whirlwind they were in the crowd, scattering it like dust. Like
hounds they rushed from the city, their burdens howling and raving.

What became of them I have never heard.

Then the king turned once more to the people and said, 'Go to your
houses'; nor vouchsafed them another word.  They crept home like
chidden hounds.

The king returned to the palace.  He made the colonel a duke, and the
page a knight, and Peter he appointed general of all his mines. But to
Curdie he said:

'You are my own boy, Curdie.  My child cannot choose but love you, and
when you are grown up--if you both will--you shall marry each other,
and be king and queen when I am gone.  Till then be the king's Curdie.'

Irene held out her arms to Curdie.  He raised her in his, and she
kissed him.

'And my Curdie too!' she said.

Thereafter the people called him Prince Conrad; but the king always
called him either just Curdie, or my miner boy.

They sat down to supper, and Derba and the knight and the housemaid
waited, and Barbara sat at the king's left hand.  The housemaid poured
out the wine; and as she poured for Curdie red wine that foamed in the
cup, as if glad to see the light whence it had been banished so long,
she looked him in the eyes.  And Curdie started, and sprang from his
seat, and dropped on his knees, and burst into tears.  And the maid
said with a smile, such as none but one could smile:

'Did I not tell you, Curdie, that it might be you would not know me
when next you saw me?'

Then she went from the room, and in a moment returned in royal purple,
with a crown of diamonds and rubies, from under which her hair went
flowing to the floor, all about her ruby-slippered feet. Her face was
radiant with joy, the joy overshadowed by a faint mist as of
unfulfilment.  The king rose and kneeled on one knee before her.  All
kneeled in like homage.  Then the king would have yielded her his royal
chair.  But she made them all sit down, and with her own hands placed
at the table seats for Derba and the page.  Then in ruby crown and
royal purple she served them all.



CHAPTER 35

The End

The king sent Curdie out into his dominions to search for men and women
that had human hands.  And many such he found, honest and true, and
brought them to his master.  So a new and upright court was formed, and
strength returned to the nation.

But the exchequer was almost empty, for the evil men had squandered
everything, and the king hated taxes unwillingly paid.  Then came
Curdie and said to the king that the city stood upon gold.  And the
king sent for men wise in the ways of the earth, and they built
smelting furnaces, and Peter brought miners, and they mined the gold,
and smelted it, and the king coined it into money, and therewith
established things well in the land.

The same day on which he found his boy, Peter set out to go home. When
he told the good news to Joan, his wife, she rose from her chair and
said, 'Let us go.'  And they left the cottage, and repaired to
Gwyntystorm.  And on a mountain above the city they built themselves a
warm house for their old age, high in the clear air.

As Peter mined one day, at the back of the king's wine Cellar, he broke
into a cavern crusted with gems, and much wealth flowed therefrom, and
the king used it wisely.

Queen Irene--that was the right name of the old princess--was
thereafter seldom long absent from the palace.  Once or twice when she
was missing, Barbara, who seemed to know of her sometimes when nobody
else had a notion whither she had gone, said she was with the dear old
Uglies in the wood.  Curdie thought that perhaps her business might be
with others there as well.  All the uppermost rooms in the palace were
left to her use, and when any one was in need of her help, up thither
he must go.  But even when she was there, he did not always succeed in
finding her.  She, however, always knew that such a one had been
looking for her.

Curdie went to find her one day.  As he ascended the last stair, to
meet him came the well-known scent of her roses; and when he opened the
door, lo! there was the same gorgeous room in which his touch had been
glorified by her fire!  And there burned the fire--a huge heap of red
and white roses.  Before the hearth stood the princess, an old
grey-haired woman, with Lina a little behind her, slowly wagging her
tail, and looking like a beast of prey that can hardly so long restrain
itself from springing as to be sure of its victim. The queen was
casting roses, more and more roses, upon the fire. At last she turned
and said, 'Now Lina!'--and Lina dashed burrowing into the fire.  There
went up a black smoke and a dust, and Lina was never more seen in the
palace.

Irene and Curdie were married.  The old king died, and they were king
and queen.  As long as they lived Gwyntystorm was a better city, and
good people grew in it.  But they had no children, and when they died
the people chose a king.  And the new king went mining and mining in
the rock under the city, and grew more and more eager after the gold,
and paid less and less heed to his people.  Rapidly they sank toward
their old wickedness.  But still the king went on mining, and coining
gold by the pailful, until the people were worse even than in the old
time.  And so greedy was the king after gold, that when at last the ore
began to fail, he caused the miners to reduce the pillars which Peter
and they that followed him had left standing to bear the city.  And
from the girth of an oak of a thousand years, they chipped them down to
that of a fir tree of fifty.

One day at noon, when life was at its highest, the whole city fell with
a roaring crash.  The cries of men and the shrieks of women went up
with its dust, and then there was a great silence.

Where the mighty rock once towered, crowded with homes and crowned with
a palace, now rushes and raves a stone-obstructed rapid of the river.
All around spreads a wilderness of wild deer, and the very name of
Gwyntystorm had ceased from the lips of men.





CHAPTER 1

Why the Princess Has a Story About Her

There was once a little princess whose father was king over a great
country full of mountains and valleys.  His palace was built upon one
of the mountains, and was very grand and beautiful.  The princess,
whose name was Irene, was born there, but she was sent soon after her
birth, because her mother was not very strong, to be brought up by
country people in a large house, half castle, half farmhouse, on the
side of another mountain, about half-way between its base and its peak.

The princess was a sweet little creature, and at the time my story
begins was about eight years old, I think, but she got older very fast.
Her face was fair and pretty, with eyes like two bits of night sky,
each with a star dissolved in the blue.  Those eyes you would have
thought must have known they came from there, so often were they turned
up in that direction.  The ceiling of her nursery was blue, with stars
in it, as like the sky as they could make it. But I doubt if ever she
saw the real sky with the stars in it, for a reason which I had better
mention at once.

These mountains were full of hollow places underneath; huge caverns,
and winding ways, some with water running through them, and some
shining with all colours of the rainbow when a light was taken in.
There would not have been much known about them, had there not been
mines there, great deep pits, with long galleries and passages running
off from them, which had been dug to get at the ore of which the
mountains were full.  In the course of digging, the miners came upon
many of these natural caverns.  A few of them had far-off openings out
on the side of a mountain, or into a ravine.

Now in these subterranean caverns lived a strange race of beings,
called by some gnomes, by some kobolds, by some goblins.  There was a
legend current in the country that at one time they lived above ground,
and were very like other people.  But for some reason or other,
concerning which there were different legendary theories, the king had
laid what they thought too severe taxes upon them, or had required
observances of them they did not like, or had begun to treat them with
more severity, in some way or other, and impose stricter laws; and the
consequence was that they had all disappeared from the face of the
country.  According to the legend, however, instead of going to some
other country, they had all taken refuge in the subterranean caverns,
whence they never came out but at night, and then seldom showed
themselves in any numbers, and never to many people at once.  It was
only in the least frequented and most difficult parts of the mountains
that they were said to gather even at night in the open air.  Those who
had caught sight of any of them said that they had greatly altered in
the course of generations; and no wonder, seeing they lived away from
the sun, in cold and wet and dark places.  They were now, not
ordinarily ugly, but either absolutely hideous, or ludicrously
grotesque both in face and form.  There was no invention, they said, of
the most lawless imagination expressed by pen or pencil, that could
surpass the extravagance of their appearance.  But I suspect those who
said so had mistaken some of their animal companions for the goblins
themselves--of which more by and by.  The goblins themselves were not
so far removed from the human as such a description would imply.  And
as they grew misshapen in body they had grown in knowledge and
cleverness, and now were able to do things no mortal could see the
possibility of.  But as they grew in cunning, they grew in mischief,
and their great delight was in every way they could think of to annoy
the people who lived in the open-air storey above them.  They had
enough of affection left for each other to preserve them from being
absolutely cruel for cruelty's sake to those that came in their way;
but still they so heartily cherished the ancestral grudge against those
who occupied their former possessions and especially against the
descendants of the king who had caused their expulsion, that they
sought every opportunity of tormenting them in ways that were as odd as
their inventors; and although dwarfed and misshapen, they had strength
equal to their cunning.  In the process of time they had got a king and
a government of their own, whose chief business, beyond their own
simple affairs, was to devise trouble for their neighbours.  It will
now be pretty evident why the little princess had never seen the sky at
night.  They were much too afraid of the goblins to let her out of the
house then, even in company with ever so many attendants; and they had
good reason, as we shall see by and by.



CHAPTER 2

The Princess Loses Herself

I have said the Princess Irene was about eight years old when my story
begins.  And this is how it begins.

One very wet day, when the mountain was covered with mist which was
constantly gathering itself together into raindrops, and pouring down
on the roofs of the great old house, whence it fell in a fringe of
water from the eaves all round about it, the princess could not of
course go out.  She got very tired, so tired that even her toys could
no longer amuse her.  You would wonder at that if I had time to
describe to you one half of the toys she had.  But then, you wouldn't
have the toys themselves, and that makes all the difference: you can't
get tired of a thing before you have it.  It was a picture, though,
worth seeing--the princess sitting in the nursery with the sky ceiling
over her head, at a great table covered with her toys.  If the artist
would like to draw this, I should advise him not to meddle with the
toys.  I am afraid of attempting to describe them, and I think he had
better not try to draw them.  He had better not.  He can do a thousand
things I can't, but I don't think he could draw those toys.  No man
could better make the princess herself than he could, though--leaning
with her back bowed into the back of the chair, her head hanging down,
and her hands in her lap, very miserable as she would say herself, not
even knowing what she would like, except it were to go out and get
thoroughly wet, and catch a particularly nice cold, and have to go to
bed and take gruel.  The next moment after you see her sitting there,
her nurse goes out of the room.

Even that is a change, and the princess wakes up a little, and looks
about her.  Then she tumbles off her chair and runs out of the door,
not the same door the nurse went out of, but one which opened at the
foot of a curious old stair of worm-eaten oak, which looked as if never
anyone had set foot upon it.  She had once before been up six steps,
and that was sufficient reason, in such a day, for trying to find out
what was at the top of it.

Up and up she ran--such a long way it seemed to her!--until she came to
the top of the third flight.  There she found the landing was the end
of a long passage.  Into this she ran.  It was full of doors on each
side.  There were so many that she did not care to open any, but ran on
to the end, where she turned into another passage, also full of doors.
When she had turned twice more, and still saw doors and only doors
about her, she began to get frightened.  It was so silent!  And all
those doors must hide rooms with nobody in them!  That was dreadful.
Also the rain made a great trampling noise on the roof.  She turned and
started at full speed, her little footsteps echoing through the sounds
of the rain--back for the stairs and her safe nursery.  So she thought,
but she had lost herself long ago.  It doesn't follow that she was
lost, because she had lost herself, though.

She ran for some distance, turned several times, and then began to be
afraid.  Very soon she was sure that she had lost the way back. Rooms
everywhere, and no stair!  Her little heart beat as fast as her little
feet ran, and a lump of tears was growing in her throat. But she was
too eager and perhaps too frightened to cry for some time.  At last her
hope failed her.  Nothing but passages and doors everywhere!  She threw
herself on the floor, and burst into a wailing cry broken by sobs.

She did not cry long, however, for she was as brave as could be
expected of a princess of her age.  After a good cry, she got up, and
brushed the dust from her frock.  Oh, what old dust it was! Then she
wiped her eyes with her hands, for princesses don't always have their
handkerchiefs in their pockets, any more than some other little girls I
know of.  Next, like a true princess, she resolved on going wisely to
work to find her way back: she would walk through the passages, and
look in every direction for the stair. This she did, but without
success.  She went over the same ground again an again without knowing
it, for the passages and doors were all alike.  At last, in a corner,
through a half-open door, she did see a stair.  But alas! it went the
wrong way: instead of going down, it went up.  Frightened as she was,
however, she could not help wishing to see where yet further the stair
could lead.  It was very narrow, and so steep that she went on like a
four-legged creature on her hands and feet.



CHAPTER 3

The Princess and--We Shall See Who

When she came to the top, she found herself in a little square place,
with three doors, two opposite each other, and one opposite the top of
the stair.  She stood for a moment, without an idea in her little head
what to do next.  But as she stood, she began to hear a curious humming
sound.  Could it be the rain?  No.  It was much more gentle, and even
monotonous than the sound of the rain, which now she scarcely heard.
The low sweet humming sound went on, sometimes stopping for a little
while and then beginning again.  It was more like the hum of a very
happy bee that had found a rich well of honey in some globular flower,
than anything else I can think of at this moment.  Where could it come
from?  She laid her ear first to one of the doors to hearken if it was
there--then to another.  When she laid her ear against the third door,
there could be no doubt where it came from: it must be from something
in that room.  What could it be?  She was rather afraid, but her
curiosity was stronger than her fear, and she opened the door very
gently and peeped in.  What do you think she saw?  A very old lady who
sat spinning.

Perhaps you will wonder how the princess could tell that the old lady
was an old lady, when I inform you that not only was she beautiful, but
her skin was smooth and white.  I will tell you more.  Her hair was
combed back from her forehead and face, and hung loose far down and all
over her back.  That is not much like an old lady--is it?  Ah! but it
was white almost as snow.  And although her face was so smooth, her
eyes looked so wise that you could not have helped seeing she must be
old.  The princess, though she could not have told you why, did think
her very old indeed--quite fifty, she said to herself.  But she was
rather older than that, as you shall hear.

While the princess stared bewildered, with her head just inside the
door, the old lady lifted hers, and said, in a sweet, but old and
rather shaky voice, which mingled very pleasantly with the continued
hum of her wheel:

'Come in, my dear; come in.  I am glad to see you.'

That the princess was a real princess you might see now quite plainly;
for she didn't hang on to the handle of the door, and stare without
moving, as I have known some do who ought to have been princesses but
were only rather vulgar little girls.  She did as she was told, stepped
inside the door at once, and shut it gently behind her.

'Come to me, my dear,' said the old lady.

And again the princess did as she was told.  She approached the old
lady--rather slowly, I confess--but did not stop until she stood by her
side, and looked up in her face with her blue eyes and the two melted
stars in them.

'Why, what have you been doing with your eyes, child?' asked the old
lady.

'Crying,' answered the princess.

'Why, child?'

'Because I couldn't find my way down again.'

'But you could find your way up.'

'Not at first--not for a long time.'

'But your face is streaked like the back of a zebra.  Hadn't you a
handkerchief to wipe your eyes with?'

'No.'

'Then why didn't you come to me to wipe them for you?'

'Please, I didn't know you were here.  I will next time.'

'There's a good child!' said the old lady.

Then she stopped her wheel, and rose, and, going out of the room,
returned with a little silver basin and a soft white towel, with which
she washed and wiped the bright little face.  And the princess thought
her hands were so smooth and nice!

When she carried away the basin and towel, the little princess wondered
to see how straight and tall she was, for, although she was so old, she
didn't stoop a bit.  She was dressed in black velvet with thick white
heavy-looking lace about it; and on the black dress her hair shone like
silver.  There was hardly any more furniture in the room than there
might have been in that of the poorest old woman who made her bread by
her spinning.  There was no carpet on the floor--no table
anywhere--nothing but the spinning-wheel and the chair beside it.  When
she came back, she sat down and without a word began her spinning once
more, while Irene, who had never seen a spinning-wheel, stood by her
side and looked on.  When the old lady had got her thread fairly going
again, she said to the princess, but without looking at her:

'Do you know my name, child?'

'No, I don't know it,' answered the princess.

'My name is Irene.'

'That's my name!' cried the princess.

'I know that.  I let you have mine.  I haven't got your name. You've
got mine.'

'How can that be?' asked the princess, bewildered.  'I've always had my
name.'

'Your papa, the king, asked me if I had any objection to your having
it; and, of course, I hadn't.  I let you have it with pleasure.'

'It was very kind of you to give me your name--and such a pretty one,'
said the princess.

'Oh, not so very kind!' said the old lady.  'A name is one of those
things one can give away and keep all the same.  I have a good many
such things.  Wouldn't you like to know who I am, child?'

'Yes, that I should--very much.'

'I'm your great-great-grandmother,' said the lady.

'What's that?' asked the princess.

'I'm your father's mother's father's mother.'

'Oh, dear! I can't understand that,' said the princess.

'I dare say not.  I didn't expect you would.  But that's no reason why
I shouldn't say it.'

'Oh, no!' answered the princess.

'I will explain it all to you when you are older,' the lady went on.
'But you will be able to understand this much now: I came here to take
care of you.'

'Is it long since you came?  Was it yesterday?  Or was it today,
because it was so wet that I couldn't get out?'

'I've been here ever since you came yourself.'

'What a long time!' said the princess.  'I don't remember it at all.'

'No.  I suppose not.'

'But I never saw you before.'

'No.  But you shall see me again.'

'Do you live in this room always?'

'I don't sleep in it.  I sleep on the opposite side of the landing. I
sit here most of the day.'

'I shouldn't like it.  My nursery is much prettier.  You must be a
queen too, if you are my great big grand-mother.'

'Yes, I am a queen.'

'Where is your crown, then?' 'In my bedroom.'

'I should like to see it.'

'You shall some day--not today.'

'I wonder why nursie never told me.'

'Nursie doesn't know.  She never saw me.'

'But somebody knows that you are in the house?'

'No; nobody.'

'How do you get your dinner, then?'

'I keep poultry--of a sort.'

'Where do you keep them?'

'I will show you.'

'And who makes the chicken broth for you?'

'I never kill any of MY chickens.'

'Then I can't understand.'

'What did you have for breakfast this morning?' asked the lady.

'Oh! I had bread and milk, and an egg--I dare say you eat their eggs.'

'Yes, that's it.  I eat their eggs.'

'Is that what makes your hair so white?'

'No, my dear.  It's old age.  I am very old.'

'I thought so.  Are you fifty?'

'Yes--more than that.'

'Are you a hundred?'

'Yes--more than that.  I am too old for you to guess.  Come and see my
chickens.'

Again she stopped her spinning.  She rose, took the princess by the
hand, led her out of the room, and opened the door opposite the stair.
The princess expected to see a lot of hens and chickens, but instead of
that, she saw the blue sky first, and then the roofs of the house, with
a multitude of the loveliest pigeons, mostly white, but of all colours,
walking about, making bows to each other, and talking a language she
could not understand.  She clapped her hands with delight, and up rose
such a flapping of wings that she in her turn was startled.

'You've frightened my poultry,' said the old lady, smiling.

'And they've frightened me,' said the princess, smiling too.  'But what
very nice poultry!  Are the eggs nice?'

'Yes, very nice.' 'What a small egg-spoon you must have!  Wouldn't it
be better to keep hens, and get bigger eggs?'

'How should I feed them, though?'

'I see,' said the princess.  'The pigeons feed themselves.  They've got
wings.'

'Just so.  If they couldn't fly, I couldn't eat their eggs.'

'But how do you get at the eggs?  Where are their nests?'

The lady took hold of a little loop of string in the wall at the side
of the door and, lifting a shutter, showed a great many pigeon-holes
with nests, some with young ones and some with eggs in them.  The birds
came in at the other side, and she took out the eggs on this side.  She
closed it again quickly, lest the young ones should be frightened.

'Oh, what a nice way!' cried the princess.  'Will you give me an egg to
eat?  I'm rather hungry.'

'I will some day, but now you must go back, or nursie will be miserable
about you.  I dare say she's looking for you everywhere.'

'Except here,' answered the princess.  'Oh, how surprised she will be
when I tell her about my great big grand-grand-mother!'

'Yes, that she will!' said the old lady with a curious smile. 'Mind you
tell her all about it exactly.'

'That I will.  Please will you take me back to her?'

'I can't go all the way, but I will take you to the top of the stair,
and then you must run down quite fast into your own room.'

The little princess put her hand in the old lady's, who, looking this
way and that, brought her to the top of the first stair, and thence to
the bottom of the second, and did not leave her till she saw her
half-way down the third.  When she heard the cry of her nurse's
pleasure at finding her, she turned and walked up the stairs again,
very fast indeed for such a very great grandmother, and sat down to her
spinning with another strange smile on her sweet old face.

About this spinning of hers I will tell you more another time.

Guess what she was spinning.



CHAPTER 4

What the Nurse Thought of It

'Why, where can you have been, princess?' asked the nurse, taking her
in her arms.  'It's very unkind of you to hide away so long. I began to
be afraid--'  Here she checked herself.

'What were you afraid of, nursie?' asked the princess.

'Never mind,' she answered.  'Perhaps I will tell you another day. Now
tell me where you have been.'

'I've been up a long way to see my very great, huge, old grandmother,'
said the princess.

'What do you mean by that?' asked the nurse, who thought she was making
fun.

'I mean that I've been a long way up and up to see My GREAT
grandmother.  Ah, nursie, you don't know what a beautiful mother of
grandmothers I've got upstairs.  She is such an old lady, with such
lovely white hair--as white as my silver cup.  Now, when I think of it,
I think her hair must be silver.'

'What nonsense you are talking, princess!' said the nurse.

'I'm not talking nonsense,' returned Irene, rather offended.  'I will
tell you all about her.  She's much taller than you, and much prettier.'

'Oh, I dare say!' remarked the nurse.

'And she lives upon pigeons' eggs.'

'Most likely,' said the nurse.

'And she sits in an empty room, spin-spinning all day long.'

'Not a doubt of it,' said the nurse.

'And she keeps her crown in her bedroom.'

'Of course--quite the proper place to keep her crown in.  She wears it
in bed, I'll be bound.'

'She didn't say that.  And I don't think she does.  That wouldn't be
comfortable--would it?  I don't think my papa wears his crown for a
night-cap.  Does he, nursie?'

'I never asked him.  I dare say he does.'

'And she's been there ever since I came here--ever so many years.'

'Anybody could have told you that,' said the nurse, who did not believe
a word Irene was saying.

'Why didn't you tell me, then?'

'There was no necessity.  You could make it all up for yourself.'

'You don't believe me, then!' exclaimed the princess, astonished and
angry, as she well might be.

'Did you expect me to believe you, princess?' asked the nurse coldly.
'I know princesses are in the habit of telling make-believes, but you
are the first I ever heard of who expected to have them believed,' she
added, seeing that the child was strangely in earnest.

The princess burst into tears.

'Well, I must say,' remarked the nurse, now thoroughly vexed with her
for crying, 'it is not at all becoming in a princess to tell stories
and expect to be believed just because she is a princess.'

'But it's quite true, I tell you.'

'You've dreamt it, then, child.'

'No, I didn't dream it.  I went upstairs, and I lost myself, and if I
hadn't found the beautiful lady, I should never have found myself.'

'Oh, I dare say!'

'Well, you just come up with me, and see if I'm not telling the truth.'

'Indeed I have other work to do.  It's your dinnertime, and I won't
have any more such nonsense.'

The princess wiped her eyes, and her face grew so hot that they were
soon quite dry.  She sat down to her dinner, but ate next to nothing.
Not to be believed does not at all agree with princesses: for a real
princess cannot tell a lie.  So all the afternoon she did not speak a
word.  Only when the nurse spoke to her, she answered her, for a real
princess is never rude--even when she does well to be offended.

Of course the nurse was not comfortable in her mind--not that she
suspected the least truth in Irene's story, but that she loved her
dearly, and was vexed with herself for having been cross to her. She
thought her crossness was the cause of the princess's unhappiness, and
had no idea that she was really and deeply hurt at not being believed.
But, as it became more and more plain during the evening in her every
motion and look, that, although she tried to amuse herself with her
toys, her heart was too vexed and troubled to enjoy them, her nurse's
discomfort grew and grew.  When bedtime came, she undressed and laid
her down, but the child, instead of holding up her little mouth to be
kissed, turned away from her and lay still.  Then nursie's heart gave
way altogether, and she began to cry.  At the sound of her first sob
the princess turned again, and held her face to kiss her as usual.  But
the nurse had her handkerchief to her eyes, and did not see the
movement.

'Nursie,' said the princess, 'why won't you believe me?'

'Because I can't believe you,' said the nurse, getting angry again.

'Ah! then, you can't help it,' said Irene, 'and I will not be vexed
with you any more.  I will give you a kiss and go to sleep.'

'You little angel!' cried the nurse, and caught her out of bed, and
walked about the room with her in her arms, kissing and hugging her.

'You will let me take you to see my dear old great big grandmother,
won't you?' said the princess, as she laid her down again.

'And you won't say I'm ugly, any more--will you, princess?' 'Nursie, I
never said you were ugly.  What can you mean?'

'Well, if you didn't say it, you meant it.'

'Indeed, I never did.'

'You said I wasn't so pretty as that--'

'As my beautiful grandmother--yes, I did say that; and I say it again,
for it's quite true.'

'Then I do think you are unkind!' said the nurse, and put her
handkerchief to her eyes again.

'Nursie, dear, everybody can't be as beautiful as every other body, you
know.  You are very nice-looking, but if you had been as beautiful as
my grandmother--'

'Bother your grandmother!' said the nurse.

'Nurse, that's very rude.  You are not fit to be spoken to till you can
behave better.'

The princess turned away once more, and again the nurse was ashamed of
herself.

'I'm sure I beg your pardon, princess,' she said, though still in an
offended tone.  But the princess let the tone pass, and heeded only the
words.

'You won't say it again, I am sure,' she answered, once more turning
towards her nurse.  'I was only going to say that if you had been twice
as nice-looking as you are, some king or other would have married you,
and then what would have become of me?'

'You are an angel!' repeated the nurse, again embracing her. 'Now,'
insisted Irene, 'you will come and see my grandmother--won't you?'

'I will go with you anywhere you like, my cherub,' she answered; and in
two minutes the weary little princess was fast asleep.



CHAPTER 5

The Princess Lets Well Alone

When she woke the next morning, the first thing she heard was the rain
still falling.  Indeed, this day was so like the last that it would
have been difficult to tell where was the use of It.  The first thing
she thought of, however, was not the rain, but the lady in the tower;
and the first question that occupied her thoughts was whether she
should not ask the nurse to fulfil her promise this very morning, and
go with her to find her grandmother as soon as she had had her
breakfast.  But she came to the conclusion that perhaps the lady would
not be pleased if she took anyone to see her without first asking
leave; especially as it was pretty evident, seeing she lived on
pigeons' eggs, and cooked them herself, that she did not want the
household to know she was there.  So the princess resolved to take the
first opportunity of running up alone and asking whether she might
bring her nurse.  She believed the fact that she could not otherwise
convince her she was telling the truth would have much weight with her
grandmother.

The princess and her nurse were the best of friends all dressing-time,
and the princess in consequence ate an enormous little breakfast.

'I wonder, Lootie'--that was her pet name for her nurse--'what pigeons'
eggs taste like?' she said, as she was eating her egg--not quite a
common one, for they always picked out the pinky ones for her.

'We'll get you a pigeon's egg, and you shall judge for yourself,' said
the nurse.

'Oh, no, no!' returned Irene, suddenly reflecting they might disturb
the old lady in getting it, and that even if they did not, she would
have one less in consequence.

'What a strange creature you are,' said the nurse--'first to want a
thing and then to refuse it!'

But she did not say it crossly, and the princess never minded any
remarks that were not unfriendly.

'Well, you see, Lootie, there are reasons,' she returned, and said no
more, for she did not want to bring up the subject of their former
strife, lest her nurse should offer to go before she had had her
grandmother's permission to bring her.  Of course she could refuse to
take her, but then she would believe her less than ever.

Now the nurse, as she said herself afterwards, could not be every
moment in the room; and as never before yesterday had the princess
given her the smallest reason for anxiety, it had not yet come into her
head to watch her more closely.  So she soon gave her a chance, and,
the very first that offered, Irene was off and up the stairs again.

This day's adventure, however, did not turn out like yesterday's,
although it began like it; and indeed to-day is very seldom like
yesterday, if people would note the differences--even when it rains.
The princess ran through passage after passage, and could not find the
stair of the tower.  My own suspicion is that she had not gone up high
enough, and was searching on the second instead of the third floor.
When she turned to go back, she failed equally in her search after the
stair.  She was lost once more.

Something made it even worse to bear this time, and it was no wonder
that she cried again.  Suddenly it occurred to her that it was after
having cried before that she had found her grandmother's stair.  She
got up at once, wiped her eyes, and started upon a fresh quest.

This time, although she did not find what she hoped, she found what was
next best: she did not come on a stair that went up, but she came upon
one that went down.  It was evidently not the stair she had come up,
yet it was a good deal better than none; so down she went, and was
singing merrily before she reached the bottom. There, to her surprise,
she found herself in the kitchen.  Although she was not allowed to go
there alone, her nurse had often taken her, and she was a great
favourite with the servants.  So there was a general rush at her the
moment she appeared, for every one wanted to have her; and the report
of where she was soon reached the nurse's ears.  She came at once to
fetch her; but she never suspected how she had got there, and the
princess kept her own counsel.

Her failure to find the old lady not only disappointed her, but made
her very thoughtful.  Sometimes she came almost to the nurse's opinion
that she had dreamed all about her; but that fancy never lasted very
long.  She wondered much whether she should ever see her again, and
thought it very sad not to have been able to find her when she
particularly wanted her.  She resolved to say nothing more to her nurse
on the subject, seeing it was so little in her power to prove her words.



CHAPTER 6

The Little Miner

The next day the great cloud still hung over the mountain, and the rain
poured like water from a full sponge.  The princess was very fond of
being out of doors, and she nearly cried when she saw that the weather
was no better.  But the mist was not of such a dark dingy grey; there
was light in it; and as the hours went on it grew brighter and
brighter, until it was almost too brilliant to look at; and late in the
afternoon the sun broke out so gloriously that Irene clapped her hands,
crying:

'See, see, Lootie!  The sun has had his face washed.  Look how bright
he is!  Do get my hat, and let us go out for a walk.  Oh, dear! oh,
dear! how happy I am!'

Lootie was very glad to please the princess.  She got her hat and
cloak, and they set out together for a walk up the mountain; for the
road was so hard and steep that the water could not rest upon it, and
it was always dry enough for walking a few minutes after the rain
ceased.  The clouds were rolling away in broken pieces, like great,
overwoolly sheep, whose wool the sun had bleached till it was almost
too white for the eyes to bear.  Between them the sky shone with a
deeper and purer blue, because of the rain.  The trees on the roadside
were hung all over with drops, which sparkled in the sun like jewels.
The only things that were no brighter for the rain were the brooks that
ran down the mountain; they had changed from the clearness of crystal
to a muddy brown; but what they lost in colour they gained in sound--or
at least in noise, for a brook when it is swollen is not so musical as
before.  But Irene was in raptures with the great brown streams
tumbling down everywhere; and Lootie shared in her delight, for she too
had been confined to the house for three days.

At length she observed that the sun was getting low, and said it was
time to be going back.  She made the remark again and again, but, every
time, the princess begged her to go on just a little farther and a
little farther; reminding her that it was much easier to go downhill,
and saying that when they did turn they would be at home in a moment.
So on and on they did go, now to look at a group of ferns over whose
tops a stream was pouring in a watery arch, now to pick a shining stone
from a rock by the wayside, now to watch the flight of some bird.
Suddenly the shadow of a great mountain peak came up from behind, and
shot in front of them.  When the nurse saw it, she started and shook,
and catching hold of the princess's hand turned and began to run down
the hill.

'What's all the haste, nursie?' asked Irene, running alongside of her.

'We must not be out a moment longer.'

'But we can't help being out a good many moments longer.'

It was too true.  The nurse almost cried.  They were much too far from
home.  It was against express orders to be out with the princess one
moment after the sun was down; and they were nearly a mile up the
mountain!  If His Majesty, Irene's papa, were to hear of it, Lootie
would certainly be dismissed; and to leave the princess would break her
heart.  It was no wonder she ran.  But Irene was not in the least
frightened, not knowing anything to be frightened at.  She kept on
chattering as well as she could, but it was not easy.

'Lootie! Lootie! why do you run so fast?  It shakes my teeth when I
talk.'

'Then don't talk,' said Lootie.

'But the princess went on talking.  She was always saying: 'Look, look,
Lootie!' but Lootie paid no more heed to anything she said, only ran on.

'Look, look, Lootie!  Don't you see that funny man peeping over the
rock?'

Lootie only ran the faster.  They had to pass the rock, and when they
came nearer, the princess saw it was only a lump of the rock itself
that she had taken for a man.

'Look, look, Lootie!  There's such a curious creature at the foot of
that old tree.  Look at it, Lootie!  It's making faces at us, I do
think.'

Lootie gave a stifled cry, and ran faster still--so fast that Irene's
little legs could not keep up with her, and she fell with a crash.  It
was a hard downhill road, and she had been running very fast--so it was
no wonder she began to cry.  This put the nurse nearly beside herself;
but all she could do was to run on, the moment she got the princess on
her feet again.

'Who's that laughing at me?' said the princess, trying to keep in her
sobs, and running too fast for her grazed knees.

'Nobody, child,' said the nurse, almost angrily.

But that instant there came a burst of coarse tittering from somewhere
near, and a hoarse indistinct voice that seemed to say: 'Lies! lies!
lies!'

'Oh!' cried the nurse with a sigh that was almost a scream, and ran on
faster than ever.

'Nursie! Lootie! I can't run any more.  Do let us walk a bit.'

'What am I to do?' said the nurse.  'Here, I will carry you.'

She caught her up; but found her much too heavy to run with, and had to
set her down again.  Then she looked wildly about her, gave a great
cry, and said:

'We've taken the wrong turning somewhere, and I don't know where we
are.  We are lost, lost!'

The terror she was in had quite bewildered her.  It was true enough
they had lost the way.  They had been running down into a little valley
in which there was no house to be seen.

Now Irene did not know what good reason there was for her nurse's
terror, for the servants had all strict orders never to mention the
goblins to her, but it was very discomposing to see her nurse in such a
fright.  Before, however, she had time to grow thoroughly alarmed like
her, she heard the sound of whistling, and that revived her.  Presently
she saw a boy coming up the road from the valley to meet them.  He was
the whistler; but before they met his whistling changed to singing.
And this is something like what he sang:

  'Ring! dod! bang!
  Go the hammers' clang!
  Hit and turn and bore!
  Whizz and puff and roar!
  Thus we rive the rocks,
  Force the goblin locks.--
  See the shining ore!
  One, two, three--
  Bright as gold can be!
  Four, five, six--
  Shovels, mattocks, picks!
  Seven, eight, nine--
  Light your lamp at mine.
  Ten, eleven, twelve--
  Loosely hold the helve.
  We're the merry miner-boys,
  Make the goblins hold their noise.'


'I wish YOU would hold your noise,' said the nurse rudely, for the very
word GOBLIN at such a time and in such a place made her tremble.  It
would bring the goblins upon them to a certainty, she thought, to defy
them in that way.  But whether the boy heard her or not, he did not
stop his singing.


  'Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen--
  This is worth the siftin';
  Sixteen, seventeen, eighteen--
  There's the match, and lay't in.
  Nineteen, twenty--
  Goblins in a plenty.'


'Do be quiet,' cried the nurse, in a whispered shriek.  But the boy,
who was now close at hand, still went on.

  'Hush! scush! scurry!
  There you go in a hurry!
  Gobble! gobble! goblin!
  There you go a wobblin';
  Hobble, hobble, hobblin'--
  Cobble! cobble! cobblin'!
  Hob-bob-goblin!--
  Huuuuuh!'


'There!' said the boy, as he stood still opposite them.  'There!
that'll do for them.  They can't bear singing, and they can't stand
that song.  They can't sing themselves, for they have no more voice
than a crow; and they don't like other people to sing.'

The boy was dressed in a miner's dress, with a curious cap on his head.
He was a very nice-looking boy, with eyes as dark as the mines in which
he worked and as sparkling as the crystals in their rocks.  He was
about twelve years old.  His face was almost too pale for beauty, which
came of his being so little in the open air and the sunlight--for even
vegetables grown in the dark are white; but he looked happy, merry
indeed--perhaps at the thought of having routed the goblins; and his
bearing as he stood before them had nothing clownish or rude about it.

'I saw them,' he went on, 'as I came up; and I'm very glad I did. I
knew they were after somebody, but I couldn't see who it was. They
won't touch you so long as I'm with you.'

'Why, who are you?' asked the nurse, offended at the freedom with which
he spoke to them.

'I'm Peter's son.'

'Who's Peter?'

'Peter the miner.'

'I don't know him.' 'I'm his son, though.'

'And why should the goblins mind you, pray?'

'Because I don't mind them.  I'm used to them.'

'What difference does that make?'

'If you're not afraid of them, they're afraid of you.  I'm not afraid
of them.  That's all.  But it's all that's wanted--up here, that is.
It's a different thing down there.  They won't always mind that song
even, down there.  And if anyone sings it, they stand grinning at him
awfully; and if he gets frightened, and misses a word, or says a wrong
one, they--oh! don't they give it him!'

'What do they do to him?' asked Irene, with a trembling voice.

'Don't go frightening the princess,' said the nurse.

'The princess!' repeated the little miner, taking off his curious cap.
'I beg your pardon; but you oughtn't to be out so late. Everybody knows
that's against the law.'

'Yes, indeed it is!' said the nurse, beginning to cry again.  'And I
shall have to suffer for it.'

'What does that matter?' said the boy.  'It must be your fault.  It is
the princess who will suffer for it.  I hope they didn't hear you call
her the princess.  If they did, they're sure to know her again: they're
awfully sharp.'

'Lootie! Lootie!' cried the princess.  'Take me home.'

'Don't go on like that,' said the nurse to the boy, almost fiercely.
'How could I help it?  I lost my way.'

'You shouldn't have been out so late.  You wouldn't have lost your way
if you hadn't been frightened,' said the boy.  'Come along. I'll soon
set you right again.  Shall I carry your little Highness?'

'Impertinence!' murmured the nurse, but she did not say it aloud, for
she thought if she made him angry he might take his revenge by telling
someone belonging to the house, and then it would be sure to come to
the king's ears.  'No, thank you,' said Irene.  'I can walk very well,
though I can't run so fast as nursie.  If you will give me one hand,
Lootie will give me another, and then I shall get on famously.'

They soon had her between them, holding a hand of each.

'Now let's run,' said the nurse.

'No, no!' said the little miner.  'That's the worst thing you can do.
If you hadn't run before, you would not have lost your way. And if you
run now, they will be after you in a moment.'

'I don't want to run,' said Irene.

'You don't think of me,' said the nurse.

'Yes, I do, Lootie.  The boy says they won't touch us if we don't run.'

'Yes, but if they know at the house that I've kept you out so late I
shall be turned away, and that would break my heart.'

'Turned away, Lootie!  Who would turn you away?'

'Your papa, child.'

'But I'll tell him it was all my fault.  And you know it was, Lootie.'

'He won't mind that.  I'm sure he won't.'

'Then I'll cry, and go down on my knees to him, and beg him not to take
away my own dear Lootie.'

The nurse was comforted at hearing this, and said no more.  They went
on, walking pretty fast, but taking care not to run a step.

'I want to talk to you,' said Irene to the little miner; 'but it's so
awkward!  I don't know your name.'

'My name's Curdie, little princess.'

'What a funny name! Curdie!  What more?'

'Curdie Peterson.  What's your name, please?'

'Irene.'

'What more?'

'I don't know what more.  What more is my name, Lootie?'

'Princesses haven't got more than one name.  They don't want it.'

'Oh, then, Curdie, you must call me just Irene and no more.'

'No, indeed,' said the nurse indignantly.  'He shall do no such thing.'

'What shall he call me, then, Lootie?'

'Your Royal Highness.' 'My Royal Highness!  What's that?  No, no,
Lootie.  I won't be called names.  I don't like them.  You told me once
yourself it's only rude children that call names; and I'm sure Curdie
wouldn't be rude.  Curdie, my name's Irene.'

'Well, Irene,' said Curdie, with a glance at the nurse which showed he
enjoyed teasing her; 'it is very kind of you to let me call you
anything.  I like your name very much.'

He expected the nurse to interfere again; but he soon saw that she was
too frightened to speak.  She was staring at something a few yards
before them in the middle of the path, where it narrowed between rocks
so that only one could pass at a time.

'It is very much kinder of you to go out of your way to take us home,'
said Irene.

'I'm not going out of my way yet,' said Curdie.  'It's on the other
side of those rocks the path turns off to my father's.'

'You wouldn't think of leaving us till we're safe home, I'm sure,'
gasped the nurse.

'Of course not,' said Curdie.

'You dear, good, kind Curdie!  I'll give you a kiss when we get home,'
said the princess.

The nurse gave her a great pull by the hand she held.  But at that
instant the something in the middle of the way, which had looked like a
great lump of earth brought down by the rain, began to move. One after
another it shot out four long things, like two arms and two legs, but
it was now too dark to tell what they were.  The nurse began to tremble
from head to foot.  Irene clasped Curdie's hand yet faster, and Curdie
began to sing again:

  'One, two--
  Hit and hew!
  Three, four--
  Blast and bore!
  Five, six--
  There's a fix!
  Seven, eight--
  Hold it straight!
  Nine, ten--
  Hit again!
  Hurry! scurry!
  Bother! smother!
  There's a toad
  In the road!
  Smash it!
  Squash it!
  Fry it!
  Dry it!
  You're another!
  Up and off!
  There's enough!--
  Huuuuuh!'


As he uttered the last words, Curdie let go his hold of his companion,
and rushed at the thing in the road as if he would trample it under his
feet.  It gave a great spring, and ran straight up one of the rocks
like a huge spider.  Curdie turned back laughing, and took Irene's hand
again.  She grasped his very tight, but said nothing till they had
passed the rocks.  A few yards more and she found herself on a part of
the road she knew, and was able to speak again.

'Do you know, Curdie, I don't quite like your song: it sounds to me
rather rude,' she said.

'Well, perhaps it is,' answered Curdie.  'I never thought of that; it's
a way we have.  We do it because they don't like it.'

'Who don't like it?'

'The cobs, as we call them.'

'Don't!' said the nurse.

'Why not?' said Curdie.

'I beg you won't.  Please don't.'

'Oh! if you ask me that way, of course, I won't; though I don't a bit
know why.  Look! there are the lights of your great house down below.
You'll be at home in five minutes now.'

Nothing more happened.  They reached home in safety.  Nobody had missed
them, or even known they had gone out; and they arrived at the door
belonging to their part of the house without anyone seeing them.  The
nurse was rushing in with a hurried and not over-gracious good night to
Curdie; but the princess pulled her hand from hers, and was just
throwing her arms round Curdie's neck, when she caught her again and
dragged her away.

'Lootie! Lootie! I promised a kiss,' cried Irene.

'A princess mustn't give kisses.  It's not at all proper,' said Lootie.

'But I promised,' said the princess.

'There's no occasion; he's only a miner-boy.'

'He's a good boy, and a brave boy, and he has been very kind to us.
Lootie! Lootie! I promised.'

'Then you shouldn't have promised.'

'Lootie, I promised him a kiss.'

'Your Royal Highness,' said Lootie, suddenly grown very respectful,
'must come in directly.'

'Nurse, a princess must not break her word,' said Irene, drawing
herself up and standing stock-still.

Lootie did not know which the king might count the worst--to let the
princess be out after sunset, or to let her kiss a miner-boy. She did
not know that, being a gentleman, as many kings have been, he would
have counted neither of them the worse.  However much he might have
disliked his daughter to kiss the miner-boy, he would not have had her
break her word for all the goblins in creation. But, as I say, the
nurse was not lady enough to understand this, and so she was in a great
difficulty, for, if she insisted, someone might hear the princess cry
and run to see, and then all would come out.  But here Curdie came
again to the rescue.

'Never mind, Princess Irene,' he said.  'You mustn't kiss me tonight.
But you shan't break your word.  I will come another time.  You may be
sure I will.'

'Oh, thank you, Curdie!' said the princess, and stopped crying.

'Good night, Irene; good night, Lootie,' said Curdie, and turned and
was out of sight in a moment.

'I should like to see him!' muttered the nurse, as she carried the
princess to the nursery.

'You will see him,' said Irene.  'You may be sure Curdie will keep his
word.  He's sure to come again.'

'I should like to see him!' repeated the nurse, and said no more. She
did not want to open a new cause of strife with the princess by saying
more plainly what she meant.  Glad enough that she had succeeded both
in getting home unseen, and in keeping the princess from kissing the
miner's boy, she resolved to watch her far better in future.  Her
carelessness had already doubled the danger she was in.  Formerly the
goblins were her only fear; now she had to protect her charge from
Curdie as well.



CHAPTER 7

The Mines

Curdie went home whistling.  He resolved to say nothing about the
princess for fear of getting the nurse into trouble, for while he
enjoyed teasing her because of her absurdity, he was careful not to do
her any harm.  He saw no more of the goblins, and was soon fast asleep
in his bed.

He woke in the middle of the night, and thought he heard curious noises
outside.  He sat up and listened; then got up, and, opening the door
very quietly, went out.  When he peeped round the corner, he saw, under
his own window, a group of stumpy creatures, whom he at once recognized
by their shape.  Hardly, however, had he begun his 'One, two, three!'
when they broke asunder, scurried away, and were out of sight.  He
returned laughing, got into bed again, and was fast asleep in a moment.

Reflecting a little over the matter in the morning, he came to the
conclusion that, as nothing of the kind had ever happened before, they
must be annoyed with him for interfering to protect the princess.  By
the time he was dressed, however, he was thinking of something quite
different, for he did not value the enmity of the goblins in the least.
As soon as they had had breakfast, he set off with his father for the
mine.

They entered the hill by a natural opening under a huge rock, where a
little stream rushed out.  They followed its course for a few yards,
when the passage took a turn, and sloped steeply into the heart of the
hill.  With many angles and windings and branchings-off, and sometimes
with steps where it came upon a natural gulf, it led them deep into the
hill before they arrived at the place where they were at present
digging out the precious ore. This was of various kinds, for the
mountain was very rich in the better sorts of metals.  With flint and
steel, and tinder-box, they lighted their lamps, then fixed them on
their heads, and were soon hard at work with their pickaxes and shovels
and hammers.  Father and son were at work near each other, but not in
the same gang--the passages out of which the ore was dug, they called
gangs--for when the lode, or vein of ore, was small, one miner would
have to dig away alone in a passage no bigger than gave him just room
to work--sometimes in uncomfortable cramped positions.  If they stopped
for a moment they could hear everywhere around them, some nearer, some
farther off, the sounds of their companions burrowing away in all
directions in the inside of the great mountain--some boring holes in
the rock in order to blow it up with gunpowder, others shovelling the
broken ore into baskets to be carried to the mouth of the mine, others
hitting away with their pickaxes. Sometimes, if the miner was in a very
lonely part, he would hear only a tap-tapping, no louder than that of a
woodpecker, for the sound would come from a great distance off through
the solid mountain rock.

The work was hard at best, for it is very warm underground; but it was
not particularly unpleasant, and some of the miners, when they wanted
to earn a little more money for a particular purpose, would stop behind
the rest and work all night.  But you could not tell night from day
down there, except from feeling tired and sleepy; for no light of the
sun ever came into those gloomy regions.  Some who had thus remained
behind during the night, although certain there were none of their
companions at work, would declare the next morning that they heard,
every time they halted for a moment to take breath, a tap-tapping all
about them, as if the mountain were then more full of miners than ever
it was during the day; and some in consequence would never stay
overnight, for all knew those were the sounds of the goblins.  They
worked only at night, for the miners' night was the goblins' day.
Indeed, the greater number of the miners were afraid of the goblins;
for there were strange stories well known amongst them of the treatment
some had received whom the goblins had surprised at their work during
the night.  The more courageous of them, however, amongst them Peter
Peterson and Curdie, who in this took after his father, had stayed in
the mine all night again and again, and although they had several times
encountered a few stray goblins, had never yet failed in driving them
away.  As I have indicated already, the chief defence against them was
verse, for they hated verse of every kind, and some kinds they could
not endure at all.  I suspect they could not make any themselves, and
that was why they disliked it so much.  At all events, those who were
most afraid of them were those who could neither make verses themselves
nor remember the verses that other people made for them; while those
who were never afraid were those who could make verses for themselves;
for although there were certain old rhymes which were very effectual,
yet it was well known that a new rhyme, if of the right sort, was even
more distasteful to them, and therefore more effectual in putting them
to flight.

Perhaps my readers may be wondering what the goblins could be about,
working all night long, seeing they never carried up the ore and sold
it; but when I have informed them concerning what Curdie learned the
very next night, they will be able to understand.

For Curdie had determined, if his father would permit him, to remain
there alone this night--and that for two reasons: first, he wanted to
get extra wages that he might buy a very warm red petticoat for his
mother, who had begun to complain of the cold of the mountain air
sooner than usual this autumn; and second, he had just a faint hope of
finding out what the goblins were about under his window the night
before.

When he told his father, he made no objection, for he had great
confidence in his boy's courage and resources.

'I'm sorry I can't stay with you,' said Peter; 'but I want to go and
pay the parson a visit this evening, and besides I've had a bit of a
headache all day.'

'I'm sorry for that, father,' said Curdie.

'Oh, it's not much.  You'll be sure to take care of yourself, won't
you?'

'Yes, father; I will.  I'll keep a sharp look-out, I promise you.'
Curdie was the only one who remained in the mine.  About six o'clock
the rest went away, everyone bidding him good night, and telling him to
take care of himself; for he was a great favourite with them all.

'Don't forget your rhymes,' said one.

'No, no,'answered Curdie.

'It's no matter if he does,' said another, 'for he'll only have to make
a new one.'

'Yes: but he mightn't be able to make it fast enough,' said another;
'and while it was cooking in his head, they might take a mean advantage
and set upon him.'

'I'll do my best,' said Curdie.  'I'm not afraid.' 'We all know that,'
they returned, and left him.



CHAPTER 8

The Goblins

For some time Curdie worked away briskly, throwing all the ore he had
disengaged on one side behind him, to be ready for carrying out in the
morning.  He heard a good deal of goblin-tapping, but it all sounded
far away in the hill, and he paid it little heed.  Towards midnight he
began to feel rather hungry; so he dropped his pickaxe, got out a lump
of bread which in the morning he had laid in a damp hole in the rock,
sat down on a heap of ore, and ate his supper. Then he leaned back for
five minutes' rest before beginning his work again, and laid his head
against the rock.  He had not kept the position for one minute before
he heard something which made him sharpen his ears.  It sounded like a
voice inside the rock. After a while he heard it again.  It was a
goblin voice--there could be no doubt about that--and this time he
could make out the words.

'Hadn't we better be moving?'it said.

A rougher and deeper voice replied:

'There's no hurry.  That wretched little mole won't be through tonight,
if he work ever so hard.  He's not by any means at the thinnest place.'

'But you still think the lode does come through into our house?' said
the first voice.

'Yes, but a good bit farther on than he has got to yet.  If he had
struck a stroke more to the side just here,' said the goblin, tapping
the very stone, as it seemed to Curdie, against which his head lay, 'he
would have been through; but he's a couple of yards past it now, and if
he follow the lode it will be a week before it leads him in.  You see
it back there--a long way.  Still, perhaps, in case of accident it
would be as well to be getting out of this. Helfer, you'll take the
great chest.  That's your business, you know.'

'Yes, dad,' said a third voice.  'But you must help me to get it on my
back.  It's awfully heavy, you know.'

'Well, it isn't just a bag of smoke, I admit.  But you're as strong as
a mountain, Helfer.'

'You say so, dad.  I think myself I'm all right.  But I could carry ten
times as much if it wasn't for my feet.'

'That is your weak point, I confess, my boy.' 'Ain't it yours too,
father?'

'Well, to be honest, it's a goblin weakness.  Why they come so soft, I
declare I haven't an idea.'

'Specially when your head's so hard, you know, father.'

'Yes my boy.  The goblin's glory is his head.  To think how the fellows
up above there have to put on helmets and things when they go fighting!
Ha! ha!'

'But why don't we wear shoes like them, father?  I should like
it--especially when I've got a chest like that on my head.'

'Well, you see, it's not the fashion.  The king never wears shoes.'

'The queen does.'

'Yes; but that's for distinction.  The first queen, you see--I mean the
king's first wife--wore shoes, of course, because she came from
upstairs; and so, when she died, the next queen would not be inferior
to her as she called it, and would wear shoes too.  It was all pride.
She is the hardest in forbidding them to the rest of the women.'

'I'm sure I wouldn't wear them--no, not for--that I wouldn't!' said the
first voice, which was evidently that of the mother of the family.  'I
can't think why either of them should.'

'Didn't I tell you the first was from upstairs?' said the other. 'That
was the only silly thing I ever knew His Majesty guilty of. Why should
he marry an outlandish woman like that-one of our natural enemies too?'

'I suppose he fell in love with her.' 'Pooh! pooh!  He's just as happy
now with one of his own people.'

'Did she die very soon?  They didn't tease her to death, did they?'

'Oh, dear, no!  The king worshipped her very footmarks.'

'What made her die, then?  Didn't the air agree with her?'

'She died when the young prince was born.'

'How silly of her!  We never do that.  It must have been because she
wore shoes.'

'I don't know that.'

'Why do they wear shoes up there?'

'Ah, now that's a sensible question, and I will answer it.  But in
order to do so, I must first tell you a secret.  I once saw the queen's
feet.'

'Without her shoes?'

'Yes--without her shoes.'

'No!  Did you?  How was it?'

'Never you mind how it was.  She didn't know I saw them.  And what do
you think!--they had toes!'

'Toes!  What's that?'

'You may well ask!  I should never have known if I had not seen the
queen's feet.  Just imagine! the ends of her feet were split up into
five or six thin pieces!'

'Oh, horrid!  How could the king have fallen in love with her?'

'You forget that she wore shoes.  That is just why she wore them. That
is why all the men, and women too, upstairs wear shoes.  They can't
bear the sight of their own feet without them.'

'Ah! now I understand.  If ever you wish for shoes again, Helfer, I'll
hit your feet--I will.'

'No, no, mother; pray don't.'

'Then don't you.'

'But with such a big box on my head--'

A horrid scream followed, which Curdie interpreted as in reply to a
blow from his mother upon the feet of her eldest goblin.

'Well, I never knew so much before!' remarked a fourth voice.

'Your knowledge is not universal quite yet,' said the father.  'You
were only fifty last month.  Mind you see to the bed and bedding. As
soon as we've finished our supper, we'll be up and going.  Ha! ha! ha!'

'What are you laughing at, husband?'

'I'm laughing to think what a mess the miners will find themselves
in--somewhere before this day ten years.'

'Why, what do you mean?'

'Oh, nothing.'

'Oh, yes, you do mean something.  You always do mean something.'

'It's more than you do, then, wife.' 'That may be; but it's not more
than I find out, you know.'

'Ha! ha!  You're a sharp one.  What a mother you've got, Helfer!'

'Yes, father.'

'Well, I suppose I must tell you.  They're all at the palace consulting
about it tonight; and as soon as we've got away from this thin place
I'm going there to hear what night they fix upon. I should like to see
that young ruffian there on the other side, struggling in the agonies
of--'

He dropped his voice so low that Curdie could hear only a growl. The
growl went on in the low bass for a good while, as inarticulate as if
the goblin's tongue had been a sausage; and it was not until his wife
spoke again that it rose to its former pitch.

'But what shall we do when you are at the palace?' she asked.

'I will see you safe in the new house I've been digging for you for the
last two months.  Podge, you mind the table and chairs.  I commit them
to your care.  The table has seven legs--each chair three.  I shall
require them all at your hands.'

After this arose a confused conversation about the various household
goods and their transport; and Curdie heard nothing more that was of
any importance.

He now knew at least one of the reasons for the constant sound of the
goblin hammers and pickaxes at night.  They were making new houses for
themselves, to which they might retreat when the miners should threaten
to break into their dwellings.  But he had learned two things of far
greater importance.  The first was, that some grievous calamity was
preparing, and almost ready to fall upon the heads of the miners; the
second was--the one weak point of a goblin's body; he had not known
that their feet were so tender as he had now reason to suspect.  He had
heard it said that they had no toes: he had never had opportunity of
inspecting them closely enough, in the dusk in which they always
appeared, to satisfy himself whether it was a correct report.  Indeed,
he had not been able even to satisfy himself as to whether they had no
fingers, although that also was commonly said to be the fact.  One of
the miners, indeed, who had had more schooling than the rest, was wont
to argue that such must have been the primordial condition of humanity,
and that education and handicraft had developed both toes and
fingers--with which proposition Curdie had once heard his father
sarcastically agree, alleging in support of it the probability that
babies' gloves were a traditional remnant of the old state of things;
while the stockings of all ages, no regard being paid in them to the
toes, pointed in the same direction.  But what was of importance was
the fact concerning the softness of the goblin feet, which he foresaw
might be useful to all miners.  What he had to do in the meantime,
however, was to discover, if possible, the special evil design the
goblins had now in their heads.

Although he knew all the gangs and all the natural galleries with which
they communicated in the mined part of the mountain, he had not the
least idea where the palace of the king of the gnomes was; otherwise he
would have set out at once on the enterprise of discovering what the
said design was.  He judged, and rightly, that it must lie in a farther
part of the mountain, between which and the mine there was as yet no
communication.  There must be one nearly completed, however; for it
could be but a thin partition which now separated them.  If only he
could get through in time to follow the goblins as they retreated!  A
few blows would doubtless be sufficient--just where his ear now lay;
but if he attempted to strike there with his pickaxe, he would only
hasten the departure of the family, put them on their guard, and
perhaps lose their involuntary guidance.  He therefore began to feel
the wall With his hands, and soon found that some of the stones were
loose enough to be drawn out with little noise.

Laying hold of a large one with both his hands, he drew it gently out,
and let it down softly.

'What was that noise?' said the goblin father.

Curdie blew out his light, lest it should shine through.

'It must be that one miner that stayed behind the rest,' said the
mother.

'No; he's been gone a good while.  I haven't heard a blow for an hour.
Besides, it wasn't like that.'

'Then I suppose it must have been a stone carried down the brook
inside.'

'Perhaps.  It will have more room by and by.'

Curdie kept quite still.  After a little while, hearing nothing but the
sounds of their preparations for departure, mingled with an occasional
word of direction, and anxious to know whether the removal of the stone
had made an opening into the goblins' house, he put in his hand to
feel.  It went in a good way, and then came in contact with something
soft.  He had but a moment to feel it over, it was so quickly
withdrawn: it was one of the toeless goblin feet.  The owner of it gave
a cry of fright.

'What's the matter, Helfer?' asked his mother.

'A beast came out of the wall and licked my foot.'

'Nonsense!  There are no wild beasts in our country,' said his father.

'But it was, father.  I felt it.'

'Nonsense, I say.  Will you malign your native realms and reduce them
to a level with the country upstairs?  That is swarming with wild
beasts of every description.'

'But I did feel it, father.'

'I tell you to hold your tongue.  You are no patriot.'

Curdie suppressed his laughter, and lay still as a mouse--but no
stiller, for every moment he kept nibbling away with his fingers at the
edges of the hole.  He was slowly making it bigger, for here the rock
had been very much shattered with the blasting.

There seemed to be a good many in the family, to judge from the mass of
confused talk which now and then came through the hole; but when all
were speaking together, and just as if they had bottle-brushes--each at
least one--in their throats, it was not easy to make out much that was
said.  At length he heard once more what the father goblin was saying.

'Now, then,' he said, 'get your bundles on your backs.  Here, Helfer,
I'll help you up with your chest.'

'I wish it was my chest, father.'

'Your turn will come in good time enough!  Make haste.  I must go to
the meeting at the palace tonight.  When that's over, we can come back
and clear out the last of the things before our enemies return in the
morning.  Now light your torches, and come along. What a distinction it
is, to provide our own light, instead of being dependent on a thing
hung up in the air--a most disagreeable contrivance--intended no doubt
to blind us when we venture out under its baleful influence!  Quite
glaring and vulgar, I call it, though no doubt useful to poor creatures
who haven't the wit to make light for themselves.'

Curdie could hardly keep himself from calling through to know whether
they made the fire to light their torches by.  But a moment's
reflection showed him that they would have said they did, inasmuch as
they struck two stones together, and the fire came.



CHAPTER 9

The Hall of the Goblin Palace

A sound of many soft feet followed, but soon ceased.  Then Curdie flew
at the hole like a tiger, and tore and pulled.  The sides gave way, and
it was soon large enough for him to crawl through.  He would not betray
himself by rekindling his lamp, but the torches of the retreating
company, which he found departing in a straight line up a long avenue
from the door of their cave, threw back light enough to afford him a
glance round the deserted home of the goblins.  To his surprise, he
could discover nothing to distinguish it from an ordinary natural cave
in the rock, upon many of which he had come with the rest of the miners
in the progress of their excavations.  The goblins had talked of coming
back for the rest of their household gear: he saw nothing that would
have made him suspect a family had taken shelter there for a single
night.  The floor was rough and stony; the walls full of projecting
corners; the roof in one place twenty feet high, in another endangering
his forehead; while on one side a stream, no thicker than a needle, it
is true, but still sufficient to spread a wide dampness over the wall,
flowed down the face of the rock.  But the troop in front of him was
toiling under heavy burdens.  He could distinguish Helfer now and then,
in the flickering light and shade, with his heavy chest on his bending
shoulders; while the second brother was almost buried in what looked
like a great feather bed.  'Where do they get the feathers?' thought
Curdie; but in a moment the troop disappeared at a turn of the way, and
it was now both safe and necessary for Curdie to follow them, lest they
should be round the next turning before he saw them again, for so he
might lose them altogether.  He darted after them like a greyhound.
When he reached the corner and looked cautiously round, he saw them
again at some distance down another long passage.  None of the
galleries he saw that night bore signs of the work of man--or of goblin
either.  Stalactites, far older than the mines, hung from their roofs;
and their floors were rough with boulders and large round stones,
showing that there water must have once run.  He waited again at this
corner till they had disappeared round the next, and so followed them a
long way through one passage after another.  The passages grew more and
more lofty, and were more and more covered in the roof with shining
stalactites.

It was a strange enough procession which he followed.  But the
strangest part of it was the household animals which crowded amongst
the feet of the goblins.  It was true they had no wild animals down
there--at least they did not know of any; but they had a wonderful
number of tame ones.  I must, however, reserve any contributions
towards the natural history of these for a later position in my story.

At length, turning a corner too abruptly, he had almost rushed into the
middle of the goblin family; for there they had already set down all
their burdens on the floor of a cave considerably larger than that
which they had left.  They were as yet too breathless to speak, else he
would have had warning of their arrest.  He started back, however,
before anyone saw him, and retreating a good way, stood watching till
the father should come out to go to the palace.

Before very long, both he and his son Helfer appeared and kept on in
the same direction as before, while Curdie followed them again with
renewed precaution.  For a long time he heard no sound except something
like the rush of a river inside the rock; but at length what seemed the
far-off noise of a great shouting reached his ears, which, however,
presently ceased.  After advancing a good way farther, he thought he
heard a single voice.  It sounded clearer and clearer as he went on,
until at last he could almost distinguish the words.  In a moment or
two, keeping after the goblins round another corner, he once more
started back--this time in amazement.

He was at the entrance of a magnificent cavern, of an oval shape, once
probably a huge natural reservoir of water, now the great palace hall
of the goblins.  It rose to a tremendous height, but the roof was
composed of such shining materials, and the multitude of torches
carried by the goblins who crowded the floor lighted up the place so
brilliantly, that Curdie could see to the top quite well.  But he had
no idea how immense the place was until his eyes had got accustomed to
it, which was not for a good many minutes. The rough projections on the
walls, and the shadows thrown upwards from them by the torches, made
the sides of the chamber look as if they were crowded with statues upon
brackets and pedestals, reaching in irregular tiers from floor to roof.
The walls themselves were, in many parts, of gloriously shining
substances, some of them gorgeously coloured besides, which powerfully
contrasted with the shadows.  Curdie could not help wondering whether
his rhymes would be of any use against such a multitude of goblins as
filled the floor of the hall, and indeed felt considerably tempted to
begin his shout of 'One, two, three!', but as there was no reason for
routing them and much for endeavouring to discover their designs, he
kept himself perfectly quiet, and peering round the edge of the
doorway, listened with both his sharp ears.

At the other end of the hall, high above the heads of the multitude,
was a terrace-like ledge of considerable height, caused by the receding
of the upper part of the cavern-wall.  Upon this sat the king and his
court: the king on a throne hollowed out of a huge block of green
copper ore, and his court upon lower seats around it.  The king had
been making them a speech, and the applause which followed it was what
Curdie had heard.  One of the court was now addressing the multitude.
What he heard him say was to the following effect: 'Hence it appears
that two plans have been for some time together working in the strong
head of His Majesty for the deliverance of his people.  Regardless of
the fact that we were the first possessors of the regions they now
inhabit; regardless equally of the fact that we abandoned that region
from the loftiest motives; regardless also of the self-evident fact
that we excel them so far in mental ability as they excel us in
stature, they look upon us as a degraded race and make a mockery of all
our finer feelings.  But, the time has almost arrived when--thanks to
His Majesty's inventive genius--it will be in our power to take a
thorough revenge upon them once for all, in respect of their unfriendly
behaviour.'

'May it please Your Majesty--' cried a voice close by the door, which
Curdie recognized as that of the goblin he had followed.

'Who is he that interrupts the Chancellor?' cried another from near the
throne.

'Glump,' answered several voices.

'He is our trusty subject,' said the king himself, in a slow and
stately voice: 'let him come forward and speak.'

A lane was parted through the crowd, and Glump, having ascended the
platform and bowed to the king, spoke as follows:

'Sire, I would have held my peace, had I not known that I only knew how
near was the moment, to which the Chancellor had just referred.

In all probability, before another day is past, the enemy will have
broken through into my house--the partition between being even now not
more than a foot in thickness.'

'Not quite so much,' thought Curdie to himself.

'This very evening I have had to remove my household effects; therefore
the sooner we are ready to carry out the plan, for the execution of
which His Majesty has been making such magnificent preparations, the
better.  I may just add, that within the last few days I have perceived
a small outbreak in my dining-room, which, combined with observations
upon the course of the river escaping where the evil men enter, has
convinced me that close to the spot must be a deep gulf in its channel.
This discovery will, I trust, add considerably to the otherwise immense
forces at His Majesty's disposal.'

He ceased, and the king graciously acknowledged his speech with a bend
of his head; whereupon Glump, after a bow to His Majesty, slid down
amongst the rest of the undistinguished multitude.  Then the Chancellor
rose and resumed.

'The information which the worthy Glump has given us,' he said, 'might
have been of considerable import at the present moment, but for that
other design already referred to, which naturally takes precedence.
His Majesty, unwilling to proceed to extremities, and well aware that
such measures sooner or later result in violent reactions, has
excogitated a more fundamental and comprehensive measure, of which I
need say no more.  Should His Majesty be successful--as who dares to
doubt?--then a peace, all to the advantage of the goblin kingdom, will
be established for a generation at least, rendered absolutely secure by
the pledge which His Royal Highness the prince will have and hold for
the good behaviour of her relatives.  Should His Majesty fail--which
who shall dare even to imagine in his most secret thoughts?--then will
be the time for carrying out with rigour the design to which Glump
referred, and for which our preparations are even now all but
completed.  The failure of the former will render the latter
imperative.'

Curdie, perceiving that the assembly was drawing to a close and that
there was little chance of either plan being more fully discovered, now
thought it prudent to make his escape before the goblins began to
disperse, and slipped quietly away.

There was not much danger of meeting any goblins, for all the men at
least were left behind him in the palace; but there was considerable
danger of his taking a wrong turning, for he had now no light, and had
therefore to depend upon his memory and his hands.  After he had left
behind him the glow that issued from the door of Glump's new abode, he
was utterly without guide, so far as his eyes were concerned.

He was most anxious to get back through the hole before the goblins
should return to fetch the remains of their furniture.  It was not that
he was in the least afraid of them, but, as it was of the utmost
importance that he should thoroughly discover what the plans they were
cherishing were, he must not occasion the slightest suspicion that they
were watched by a miner.

He hurried on, feeling his way along the walls of rock.  Had he not
been very courageous, he must have been very anxious, for he could not
but know that if he lost his way it would be the most difficult thing
in the world to find it again.  Morning would bring no light into these
regions; and towards him least of all, who was known as a special
rhymester and persecutor, could goblins be expected to exercise
courtesy.  Well might he wish that he had brought his lamp and
tinder-box with him, of which he had not thought when he crept so
eagerly after the goblins!  He wished it all the more when, after a
while, he found his way blocked up, and could get no farther.  It was
of no use to turn back, for he had not the least idea where he had
begun to go wrong.  Mechanically, however, he kept feeling about the
walls that hemmed him in.  His hand came upon a place where a tiny
stream of water was running down the face of the rock.  'What a stupid
I am!' he said to himself.  'I am actually at the end of my journey!
And there are the goblins coming back to fetch their things!' he added,
as the red glimmer of their torches appeared at the end of the long
avenue that led up to the cave.  In a moment he had thrown himself on
the floor, and wriggled backwards through the hole.  The floor on the
other side was several feet lower, which made it easier to get back.
It was all he could do to lift the largest stone he had taken out of
the hole, but he did manage to shove it in again.  He sat down on the
ore-heap and thought.

He was pretty sure that the latter plan of the goblins was to inundate
the mine by breaking outlets for the water accumulated in the natural
reservoirs of the mountain, as well as running through portions of it.
While the part hollowed by the miners remained shut off from that
inhabited by the goblins, they had had no opportunity of injuring them
thus; but now that a passage was broken through, and the goblins' part
proved the higher in the mountain, it was clear to Curdie that the mine
could be destroyed in an hour.  Water was always the chief danger to
which the miners were exposed.  They met with a little choke-damp
sometimes, but never with the explosive firedamp so common in
coal-mines.  Hence they were careful as soon as they saw any appearance
of water. As the result of his reflections while the goblins were busy
in their old home, it seemed to Curdie that it would be best to build
up the whole of this gang, filling it with stone, and clay or lie, so
that there should be no smallest channel for the water to get into.
There was not, however, any immediate danger, for the execution of the
goblins' plan was contingent upon the failure of that unknown design
which was to take precedence of it; and he was most anxious to keep the
door of communication open, that he might if possible discover what the
former plan was.  At the same time they could not resume their
intermitted labours for the inundation without his finding it out; when
by putting all hands to the work, the one existing outlet might in a
single night be rendered impenetrable to any weight of water; for by
filling the gang entirely up, their embankment would be buttressed by
the sides of the mountain itself.

As soon as he found that the goblins had again retired, he lighted his
lamp, and proceeded to fill the hole he had made with such stones as he
could withdraw when he pleased.  He then thought it better, as he might
have occasion to be up a good many nights after this, to go home and
have some sleep.

How pleasant the night air felt upon the outside of the mountain after
what he had gone through in the inside of it!  He hurried up the hill
without meeting a single goblin on the way, and called and tapped at
the window until he woke his father, who soon rose and let him in.  He
told him the whole story; and, just as he had expected, his father
thought it best to work that lode no farther, but at the same time to
pretend occasionally to be at work there still in order that the
goblins might have no suspicions.  Both father and son then went to bed
and slept soundly until the morning.



CHAPTER 10

The Princess's King-Papa

The weather continued fine for weeks, and the little princess went out
every day.  So long a period of fine weather had indeed never been
known upon that mountain.  The only uncomfortable thing was that her
nurse was so nervous and particular about being in before the sun was
down that often she would take to her heels when nothing worse than a
fleecy cloud crossing the sun threw a shadow on the hillside; and many
an evening they were home a full hour before the sunlight had left the
weather-cock on the stables.  If it had not been for such odd behaviour
Irene would by this time have almost forgotten the goblins.  She never
forgot Curdie, but him she remembered for his own sake, and indeed
would have remembered him if only because a princess never forgets her
debts until they are paid.

One splendid sunshiny day, about an hour after noon, Irene, who was
playing on a lawn in the garden, heard the distant blast of a bugle.
She jumped up with a cry of joy, for she knew by that particular blast
that her father was on his way to see her.  This part of the garden lay
on the slope of the hill and allowed a full view of the country below.
So she shaded her eyes with her hand and looked far away to catch the
first glimpse of shining armour. In a few moments a little troop came
glittering round the shoulder of a hill.  Spears and helmets were
sparkling and gleaming, banners were flying, horses prancing, and again
came the bugle-blast which was to her like the voice of her father
calling across the distance: 'Irene, I'm coming.'

On and on they came until she could clearly distinguish the king. He
rode a white horse and was taller than any of the men with him. He wore
a narrow circle of gold set with jewels around his helmet, and as he
came still nearer Irene could discern the flashing of the stones in the
sun.  It was a long time since he had been to see her, and her little
heart beat faster and faster as the shining troop approached, for she
loved her king-papa very dearly and was nowhere so happy as in his
arms.  When they reached a certain point, after which she could see
them no more from the garden, she ran to the gate, and there stood till
up they came, clanging and stamping, with one more bright bugle-blast
which said: 'Irene, I am come.'

By this time the people of the house were all gathered at the gate, but
Irene stood alone in front of them.  When the horsemen pulled up she
ran to the side of the white horse and held up her arms. The king
stopped and took her hands.  In an instant she was on the saddle and
clasped in his great strong arms.

I wish I could describe the king so that you could see him in your
mind.  He had gentle, blue eyes, but a nose that made him look like an
eagle.  A long dark beard, streaked with silvery lines, flowed from his
mouth almost to his waist, and as Irene sat on the saddle and hid her
glad face upon his bosom it mingled with the golden hair which her
mother had given her, and the two together were like a cloud with
streaks of the sun woven through it.  After he had held her to his
heart for a minute he spoke to his white horse, and the great beautiful
creature, which had been prancing so proudly a little while before,
walked as gently as a lady--for he knew he had a little lady on his
back--through the gate and up to the door of the house.  Then the king
set her on the ground and, dismounting, took her hand and walked with
her into the great hall, which was hardly ever entered except when he
came to see his little princess.  There he sat down, with two of his
counsellors who had accompanied him, to have some refreshment, and
Irene sat on his right hand and drank her milk out of a wooden bowl
curiously carved.

After the king had eaten and drunk he turned to the princess and said,
stroking her hair:

'Now, my child, what shall we do next?'

This was the question he almost always put to her first after their
meal together; and Irene had been waiting for it with some impatience,
for now, she thought, she should be able to settle a question which
constantly perplexed her.

'I should like you to take me to see my great old grandmother.'

The king looked grave And said:

'What does my little daughter mean?'

'I mean the Queen Irene that lives up in the tower--the very old lady,
you know, with the long hair of silver.'

The king only gazed at his little princess with a look which she could
not understand.

'She's got her crown in her bedroom,' she went on; 'but I've not been
in there yet.  You know she's there, don't you?'

'No,' said the king, very quietly.

'Then it must all be a dream,' said Irene.  'I half thought it was; but
I couldn't be sure.  Now I am sure of it.  Besides, I couldn't find her
the next time I went up.'

At that moment a snow-white pigeon flew in at an open window and
settled upon Irene's head.  She broke into a merry laugh, cowered a
little, and put up her hands to her head, saying:

'Dear dovey, don't peck me.  You'll pull out my hair with your long
claws if you don't mind.'

The king stretched out his hand to take the pigeon, but it spread its
wings and flew again through the open window, when its Whiteness made
one flash in the sun and vanished.  The king laid his hand on his
princess's head, held it back a little, gazed in her face, smiled half
a smile, and sighed half a sigh.

'Come, my child; we'll have a walk in the garden together,' he said.

'You won't come up and see my huge, great, beautiful grandmother, then,
king-papa?' said the princess.

'Not this time,' said the king very gently.  'She has not invited me,
you know, and great old ladies like her do not choose to be visited
without leave asked and given.'

The garden was a very lovely place.  Being upon a Mountainside there
were parts in it where the rocks came through in great masses, and all
immediately about them remained quite wild.  Tufts of heather grew upon
them, and other hardy mountain plants and flowers, while near them
would be lovely roses and lilies and all pleasant garden flowers.  This
mingling of the wild mountain with the civilized garden was very
quaint, and it was impossible for any number of gardeners to make such
a garden look formal and stiff.

Against one of these rocks was a garden seat, shadowed from the
afternoon sun by the overhanging of the rock itself.  There was a
little winding path up to the top of the rock, and on top another seat;
but they sat on the seat at its foot because the sun was hot; and there
they talked together of many things.  At length the king said:

'You were out late one evening, Irene.'

'Yes, papa.  It was my fault; and Lootie was very sorry.'

'I must talk to Lootie about it,' said the king.

'Don't speak loud to her, please, papa,' said Irene.  'She's been so
afraid of being late ever since!  Indeed she has not been naughty.  It
was only a mistake for once.'

'Once might be too often,' murmured the king to himself, as he stroked
his child's head.

I can't tell you how he had come to know.  I am sure Curdie had not
told him.  Someone about the palace must have seen them, after all.

He sat for a good while thinking.  There was no sound to be heard
except that of a little stream which ran merrily out of an opening in
the rock by where they sat, and sped away down the hill through the
garden.  Then he rose and, leaving Irene where she was, went into the
house and sent for Lootie, with whom he had a talk that made her cry.

When in the evening he rode away upon his great white horse, he left
six of his attendants behind him, with orders that three of them should
watch outside the house every night, walking round and round it from
sunset to sunrise.  It was clear he was not quite comfortable about the
princess.



CHAPTER 11

The Old Lady's Bedroom

Nothing more happened worth telling for some time.  The autumn came and
went by.  There were no more flowers in the garden.  The wind blew
strong, and howled among the rocks.  The rain fell, and drenched the
few yellow and red leaves that could not get off the bare branches.
Again and again there would be a glorious morning followed by a pouring
afternoon, and sometimes, for a week together, there would be rain,
nothing but rain, all day, and then the most lovely cloudless night,
with the sky all out in full-blown stars--not one missing.  But the
princess could not see much of them, for she went to bed early.  The
winter drew on, and she found things growing dreary.  When it was too
stormy to go out, and she had got tired of her toys, Lootie would take
her about the house, sometimes to the housekeeper's room, where the
housekeeper, who was a good, kind old woman, made much of
her--sometimes to the servants' hall or the kitchen, where she was not
princess merely, but absolute queen, and ran a great risk of being
spoiled. Sometimes she would run off herself to the room where the
men-at-arms whom the king had left sat, and they showed her their arms
and accoutrements and did what they could to amuse her.  Still at times
she found it very dreary, and often and often wished that her huge
great grandmother had not been a dream.

One morning the nurse left her with the housekeeper for a while. To
amuse her she turned out the contents of an old cabinet upon the table.
The little princess found her treasures, queer ancient ornaments, and
many things the use of which she could not imagine, far more
interesting than her own toys, and sat playing with them for two hours
or more.  But, at length, in handling a curious old-fashioned brooch,
she ran the pin of it into her thumb, and gave a little scream with the
sharpness of the pain, but would have thought little more of it had not
the pain increased and her thumb begun to swell.  This alarmed the
housekeeper greatly.  The nurse was fetched; the doctor was sent for;
her hand was poulticed, and long before her usual time she was put to
bed.  The pain still continued, and although she fell asleep and
dreamed a good many dreams, there was the pain always in every dream.
At last it woke her UP.

The moon was shining brightly into the room.  The poultice had fallen
off her hand and it was burning hot.  She fancied if she could hold it
into the moonlight that would cool it.  So she got out of bed, without
waking the nurse who lay at the other end of the room, and went to the
window.  When she looked out she saw one of the men-at-arms walking in
the garden with the moonlight glancing on his armour.  She was just
going to tap on the window and call him, for she wanted to tell him all
about it, when she bethought herself that that might wake Lootie, and
she would put her into her bed again.  So she resolved to go to the
window of another room, and call him from there.  It was so much nicer
to have somebody to talk to than to lie awake in bed with the burning
pain in her hand.  She opened the door very gently and went through the
nursery, which did not look into the garden, to go to the other window.
But when she came to the foot of the old staircase there was the moon
shining down from some window high up, and making the worm-eaten oak
look very strange and delicate and lovely.  In a moment she was putting
her little feet one after the other in the silvery path up the stair,
looking behind as she went, to see the shadow they made in the middle
of the silver.  Some little girls would have been afraid to find
themselves thus alone in the middle of the night, but Irene was a
princess.

As she went slowly up the stair, not quite sure that she was not
dreaming, suddenly a great longing woke up in her heart to try once
more whether she could not find the old lady with the silvery hair. 'If
she is a dream,' she said to herself, 'then I am the likelier to find
her, if I am dreaming.'

So up and up she went, stair after stair, until she Came to the many
rooms--all just as she had seen them before.  Through passage after
passage she softly sped, comforting herself that if she should lose her
way it would not matter much, because when she woke she would find
herself in her own bed with Lootie not far off. But, as if she had
known every step of the way, she walked straight to the door at the
foot of the narrow stair that led to the tower.

'What if I should realreality-really find my beautiful old grandmother
up there!' she said to herself as she crept up the steep steps.

When she reached the top she stood a moment listening in the dark, for
there was no moon there.  Yes! it was! it was the hum of the
spinning-wheel!  What a diligent grandmother to work both day and
night!  She tapped gently at the door.

'Come in, Irene,'said the sweet voice.

The princess opened the door and entered.  There was the moonlight
streaming in at the window, and in the middle of the moonlight sat the
old lady in her black dress with the white lace, and her silvery hair
mingling with the moonlight, so that you could not have told which was
which.  'Come in, Irene,' she said again.  'Can you tell me what I am
spinning?'

'She speaks,' thought Irene, 'just as if she had seen me five minutes
ago, or yesterday at the farthest. --No,' she answered; 'I don't know
what you are spinning.  Please, I thought you were a dream.  Why
couldn't I find you before, great-great-grandmother?'

'That you are hardly old enough to understand.  But you would have
found me sooner if you hadn't come to think I was a dream.  I will give
you one reason though why you couldn't find me.  I didn't want you to
find me.'

'Why, please?'

'Because I did not want Lootie to know I was here.'

'But you told me to tell Lootie.'

'Yes.  But I knew Lootie would not believe you.  If she were to see me
sitting spinning here, she wouldn't believe me, either.'

'Why?'

'Because she couldn't.  She would rub her eyes, and go away and say she
felt queer, and forget half of it and more, and then say it had been
all a dream.'

'Just like me,' said Irene, feeling very much ashamed of herself.

'Yes, a good deal like you, but not just like you; for you've come
again; and Lootie wouldn't have come again.  She would have said, No,
no--she had had enough of such nonsense.'

'Is it naughty of Lootie, then?'

'It would be naughty of you.  I've never done anything for Lootie.'

'And you did wash my face and hands for me,' said Irene, beginning to
cry.

The old lady smiled a sweet smile and said:

'I'm not vexed with you, my child--nor with Lootie either.  But I don't
want you to say anything more to Lootie about me.  If she should ask
you, you must just be silent.  But I do not think she will ask you.'

All the time they talked the old lady kept on spinning.

'You haven't told me yet what I am spinning,' she said.

'Because I don't know.  It's very pretty stuff.'

It was indeed very pretty stuff.  There was a good bunch of it on the
distaff attached to the spinning-wheel, and in the moonlight it shone
like--what shall I say it was like?  It was not white enough for
silver--yes, it was like silver, but shone grey rather than white, and
glittered only a little.  And the thread the old lady drew out from it
was so fine that Irene could hardly see it. 'I am spinning this for
you, my child.'

'For me!  What am I to do with it, please?'

'I will tell you by and by.  But first I will tell you what it is. It
is spider-web--of a particular kind.  My pigeons bring it me from over
the great sea.  There is only one forest where the spiders live who
make this particular kind--the finest and strongest of any.  I have
nearly finished my present job.  What is on the rock now will be
enough.  I have a week's work there yet, though,' she added, looking at
the bunch.

'Do you work all day and all night, too,
great-great-great-great-grandmother?' said the princess, thinking to be
very polite with so many greats.

'I am not quite so great as all that,' she answered, smiling almost
merrily.  'If you call me grandmother, that will do.  No, I don't work
every night--only moonlit nights, and then no longer than the moon
shines upon my wheel.  I shan't work much longer tonight.'

'And what will you do next, grandmother?' 'Go to bed.  Would you like
to see my bedroom?'

'Yes, that I should.'

'Then I think I won't work any longer tonight.  I shall be in good
time.'

The old lady rose, and left her wheel standing just as it was.  You see
there was no good in putting it away, for where there was not any
furniture there was no danger of being untidy.

Then she took Irene by the hand, but it was her bad hand and Irene gave
a little cry of pain.  'My child!' said her grandmother, 'what is the
matter?'

Irene held her hand into the moonlight, that the old lady might see it,
and told her all about it, at which she looked grave.  But she only
said: 'Give me your other hand'; and, having led her out upon the
little dark landing, opened the door on the opposite side of it.  What
was Irene's surprise to see the loveliest room she had ever seen in her
life!  It was large and lofty, and dome-shaped. From the centre hung a
lamp as round as a ball, shining as if with the brightest moonlight,
which made everything visible in the room, though not so clearly that
the princess could tell what many of the things were.  A large oval bed
stood in the middle, with a coverlid of rose colour, and velvet
curtains all round it of a lovely pale blue.  The walls were also
blue--spangled all over with what looked like stars of silver.

The old lady left her and, going to a strange-looking cabinet, opened
it and took out a curious silver casket.  Then she sat down on a low
chair and, calling Irene, made her kneel before her while she looked at
her hand.  Having examined it, she opened the casket, and took from it
a little ointment.  The sweetest odour filled the room--like that of
roses and lilies--as she rubbed the ointment gently all over the hot
swollen hand.  Her touch was so pleasant and cool that it seemed to
drive away the pain and heat wherever it came.

'Oh, grandmother! it is so nice!' said Irene.  'Thank you; thank you.'

Then the old lady went to a chest of drawers, and took out a large
handkerchief of gossamer-like cambric, which she tied round her hand.

'I don't think I can let you go away tonight,' she said.  'Would you
like to sleep with me?'

'Oh, yes, yes, dear grandmother,' said Irene, and would have clapped
her hands, forgetting that she could not.

'You won't be afraid, then, to go to bed with such an old woman?'

'No.  You are so beautiful, grandmother.'

'But I am very old.'

'And I suppose I am very young.  You won't mind sleeping with such a
very young woman, grandmother?'

'You sweet little pertness!' said the old lady, and drew her towards
her, and kissed her on the forehead and the cheek and the mouth.  Then
she got a large silver basin, and having poured some water into it made
Irene sit on the chair, and washed her feet. This done, she was ready
for bed.  And oh, what a delicious bed it was into which her
grandmother laid her!  She hardly could have told she was lying upon
anything: she felt nothing but the softness.

The old lady having undressed herself lay down beside her.

'Why don't you put out your moon?' asked the princess.

'That never goes out, night or day,' she answered.  'In the darkest
night, if any of my pigeons are out on a message, they always see my
moon and know where to fly to.'

'But if somebody besides the pigeons were to see it--somebody about the
house, I mean--they would come to look what it was and find you.'

'The better for them, then,' said the old lady.  'But it does not
happen above five times in a hundred years that anyone does see it.

The greater part of those who do take it for a meteor, wink their eyes,
and forget it again.  Besides, nobody could find the room except I
pleased.  Besides, again--I will tell you a secret--if that light were
to go out you would fancy yourself lying in a bare garret, on a heap of
old straw, and would not see one of the pleasant things round about you
all the time.'

'I hope it will never go out,' said the princess.

'I hope not.  But it is time we both went to sleep.  Shall I take you
in my arms?'

The little princess nestled close up to the old lady, who took her in
both her arms and held her close to her bosom.

'Oh, dear! this is so nice!' said the princess.  'I didn't know
anything in the world could be so comfortable.  I should like to lie
here for ever.'

'You may if you will,' said the old lady.  'But I must put you to one
trial-not a very hard one, I hope.  This night week you must come back
to me.  If you don't, I do not know when you may find me again, and you
will soon want me very much.'

'Oh! please, don't let me forget.'

'You shall not forget.  The only question is whether you will believe I
am anywhere--whether you will believe I am anything but a dream.  You
may be sure I will do all I can to help you to come. But it will rest
with yourself, after all.  On the night of next Friday, you must come
to me.  Mind now.'

'I will try,' said the princess.

'Then good night,' said the old lady, and kissed the forehead which lay
in her bosom.

In a moment more the little princess was dreaming in the midst of the
loveliest dreams--of summer seas and moonlight and mossy springs and
great murmuring trees, and beds of wild flowers with such odours as she
had never smelled before.  But, after all, no dream could be more
lovely than what she had left behind when she fell asleep.

In the morning she found herself in her own bed.  There was no
handkerchief or anything else on her hand, only a sweet odour lingered
about it.  The swelling had all gone down; the prick of the brooch had
vanished--in fact, her hand was perfectly well.



CHAPTER 12

A Short Chapter About Curdie

Curdie spent many nights in the mine.  His father and he had taken Mrs.
Peterson into the secret, for they knew mother could hold her tongue,
which was more than could be said of all the miners' wives.

But Curdie did not tell her that every night he spent in the mine, part
of it went in earning a new red petticoat for her.

Mrs. Peterson was such a nice good mother!  All mothers are nice and
good more or less, but Mrs. Peterson was nice and good all more and no
less.  She made and kept a little heaven in that poor cottage on the
high hillside for her husband and son to go home to out of the low and
rather dreary earth in which they worked.  I doubt if the princess was
very much happier even in the arms of her huge great-grandmother than
Peter and Curdie were in the arms of Mrs. Peterson.  True, her hands
were hard and chapped and large, but it was with work for them; and
therefore, in the sight of the angels, her hands were so much the more
beautiful.  And if Curdie worked hard to get her a petticoat, she
worked hard every day to get him comforts which he would have missed
much more than she would a new petticoat even in winter.  Not that she
and Curdie ever thought of how much they worked for each other: that
would have spoiled everything.

When left alone in the mine Curdie always worked on for an hour or two
at first, following the lode which, according to Glump, would lead at
last into the deserted habitation.  After that, he would set out on a
reconnoitring expedition.  In order to manage this, or rather the
return from it, better than the first time, he had bought a huge ball
of fine string, having learned the trick from Hop-o'-my-Thumb, whose
history his mother had often told him.  Not that Hop-o'-my-Thumb had
ever used a ball of string--I should be sorry to be supposed so far out
in my classics--but the principle was the same as that of the pebbles.
The end of this string he fastened to his pickaxe, which figured no bad
anchor, and then, with the ball in his hand, unrolling it as he went,
set out in the dark through the natural gangs of the goblins'
territory.  The first night or two he came upon nothing worth
remembering; saw only a little of the home-life of the cobs in the
various caves they called houses; failed in coming upon anything to
cast light upon the foregoing design which kept the inundation for the
present in the background.  But at length, I think on the third or
fourth night, he found, partly guided by the noise of their implements,
a company of evidently the best sappers and miners amongst them, hard
at work.  What were they about?  It could not well be the inundation,
seeing that had in the meantime been postponed to something else.  Then
what was it?  He lurked and watched, every now and then in the greatest
risk of being detected, but without success.  He had again and again to
retreat in haste, a proceeding rendered the more difficult that he had
to gather up his string as he returned upon its course.  It was not
that he was afraid of the goblins, but that he was afraid of their
finding out that they were watched, which might have prevented the
discovery at which he aimed.  Sometimes his haste had to be such that,
when he reached home towards morning, his string, for lack of time to
wind it up as he 'dodged the cobs', would be in what seemed most
hopeless entanglement; but after a good sleep, though a short one, he
always found his mother had got it right again.  There it was, wound in
a most respectable ball, ready for use the moment he should want it!

'I can't think how you do it, mother,' he would say.

'I follow the thread,' she would answer--'just as you do in the mine.'
She never had more to say about it; but the less clever she was with
her words, the more clever she was with her hands; and the less his
mother said, the more Curdie believed she had to say.  But still he had
made no discovery as to what the goblin miners were about.



CHAPTER 13

The Cobs' Creatures

About this time the gentlemen whom the king had left behind him to
watch over the princess had each occasion to doubt the testimony of his
own eyes, for more than strange were the objects to which they would
bear witness.  They were of one sort--creatures--but so grotesque and
misshapen as to be more like a child's drawings upon his slate than
anything natural.  They saw them only at night, while on guard about
the house.  The testimony of the man who first reported having seen one
of them was that, as he was walking slowly round the house, while yet
in the shadow, he caught sight of a creature standing on its hind legs
in the moonlight, with its forefeet upon a window-ledge, staring in at
the window.  Its body might have been that of a dog or wolf, he
thought, but he declared on his honour that its head was twice the size
it ought to have been for the size of its body, and as round as a ball,
while the face, which it turned upon him as it fled, was more like one
carved by a boy upon the turnip inside which he is going to put a
candle than anything else he could think of.  It rushed into the
garden. He sent an arrow after it, and thought he must have struck it;
for it gave an unearthly howl, and he could not find his arrow any more
than the beast, although he searched all about the place where it
vanished.  They laughed at him until he was driven to hold his tongue,
and said he must have taken too long a pull at the ale-jug.

But before two nights were over he had one to side with him, for he,
too, had seen something strange, only quite different from that
reported by the other.  The description the second man gave of the
creature he had seen was yet more grotesque and unlikely.  They were
both laughed at by the rest; but night after night another came over to
their side, until at last there was only one left to laugh at all his
companions.  Two nights more passed, and he saw nothing; but on the
third he came rushing from the garden to the other two before the
house, in such an agitation that they declared--for it was their turn
now--that the band of his helmet was cracking under his chin with the
rising of his hair inside it. Running with him into that part of the
garden which I have already described, they saw a score of creatures,
to not one of which they could give a name, and not one of which was
like another, hideous and ludicrous at once, gambolling on the lawn in
the moonlight. The supernatural or rather subnatural ugliness of their
faces, the length of legs and necks in some, the apparent absence of
both or either in others, made the spectators, although in one consent
as to what they saw, yet doubtful, as I have said, of the evidence of
their own eyes--and ears as well; for the noises they made, although
not loud, were as uncouth and varied as their forms, and could be
described neither as grunts nor squeaks nor roars nor howls nor barks
nor yells nor screams nor croaks nor hisses nor mews nor shrieks, but
only as something like all of them mingled in one horrible dissonance.
Keeping in the shade, the watchers had a few moments to recover
themselves before the hideous assembly suspected their presence; but
all at once, as if by common consent, they scampered off in the
direction of a great rock, and vanished before the men had come to
themselves sufficiently to think of following them.

My readers will suspect what these were; but I will now give them full
information concerning them.  They were, of course, household animals
belonging to the goblins, whose ancestors had taken their ancestors
many centuries before from the upper regions of light into the lower
regions of darkness.  The original stocks of these horrible creatures
were very much the same as the animals now seen about farms and homes
in the country, with the exception of a few of them, which had been
wild creatures, such as foxes, and indeed wolves and small bears, which
the goblins, from their proclivity towards the animal creation, had
caught when cubs and tamed.  But in the course of time all had
undergone even greater changes than had passed upon their owners.  They
had altered--that is, their descendants had altered--into such
creatures as I have not attempted to describe except in the vaguest
manner--the various parts of their bodies assuming, in an apparently
arbitrary and self-willed manner, the most abnormal developments.
Indeed, so little did any distinct type predominate in some of the
bewildering results, that you could only have guessed at any known
animal as the original, and even then, what likeness remained would be
more one of general expression than of definable conformation.  But
what increased the gruesomeness tenfold was that, from constant
domestic, or indeed rather family association with the goblins, their
countenances had grown in grotesque resemblance to the human.

No one understands animals who does not see that every one of them,
even amongst the fishes, it may be with a dimness and vagueness
infinitely remote, yet shadows the human: in the case of these the
human resemblance had greatly increased: while their owners had sunk
towards them, they had risen towards their owners.  But the conditions
of subterranean life being equally unnatural for both, while the
goblins were worse, the creatures had not improved by the
approximation, and its result would have appeared far more ludicrous
than consoling to the warmest lover of animal nature.  I shall now
explain how it was that just then these animals began to show
themselves about the king's country house.

The goblins, as Curdie had discovered, were mining on--at work both day
and night, in divisions, urging the scheme after which he lay in wait.
In the course of their tunnelling they had broken into the channel of a
small stream, but the break being in the top of it, no water had
escaped to interfere with their work.  Some of the creatures, hovering
as they often did about their masters, had found the hole, and had,
with the curiosity which had grown to a passion from the restraints of
their unnatural circumstances, proceeded to explore the channel.  The
stream was the same which ran out by the seat on which Irene and her
king-papa had sat as I have told, and the goblin creatures found it
jolly fun to get out for a romp on a smooth lawn such as they had never
seen in all their poor miserable lives.  But although they had partaken
enough of the nature of their owners to delight in annoying and
alarming any of the people whom they met on the mountain, they were, of
course, incapable of designs of their own, or of intentionally
furthering those of their masters.

For several nights after the men-at-arms were at length of one mind as
to the fact of the visits of some horrible creatures, whether bodily or
spectral they could not yet say, they watched with special attention
that part of the garden where they had last seen them.  Perhaps indeed
they gave in consequence too little attention to the house.  But the
creatures were too cunning to be easily caught; nor were the watchers
quick-eyed enough to descry the head, or the keen eyes in it, which,
from the opening whence the stream issued, would watch them in turn,
ready, the moment they should leave the lawn, to report the place clear.



CHAPTER 14

That Night Week

During the whole of the week Irene had been thinking every other moment
of her promise to the old lady, although even now she could not feel
quite sure that she had not been dreaming.  Could it really be that an
old lady lived up in the top of the house, with pigeons and a
spinning-wheel, and a lamp that never went out?  She was, however, none
the less determined, on the coming Friday, to ascend the three stairs,
walk through the passages with the many doors, and try to find the
tower in which she had either seen or dreamed her grandmother.

Her nurse could not help wondering what had come to the child--she
would sit so thoughtfully silent, and even in the midst of a game with
her would so suddenly fall into a dreamy mood.  But Irene took care to
betray nothing, whatever efforts Lootie might make to get at her
thoughts.  And Lootie had to say to herself: 'What an odd child she
is!' and give it up.

At length the longed-for Friday arrived, and lest Lootie should be
moved to watch her, Irene endeavoured to keep herself as quiet as
possible.  In the afternoon she asked for her doll's house, and went on
arranging and rearranging the various rooms and their inhabitants for a
whole hour.  Then she gave a sigh and threw herself back in her chair.
One of the dolls would not sit, and another would not stand, and they
were all very tiresome.  Indeed, there was one would not even lie down,
which was too bad.  But it was now getting dark, and the darker it got
the more excited Irene became, and the more she felt it necessary to be
composed.

'I see you want your tea, princess,' said the nurse: 'I will go and get
it.  The room feels close: I will open the window a little. The evening
is mild: it won't hurt you.'

'There's no fear of that, Lootie,' said Irene, wishing she had put off
going for the tea till it was darker, when she might have made her
attempt with every advantage.

I fancy Lootie was longer in returning than she had intended; for when
Irene, who had been lost in thought, looked up, she saw it was nearly
dark, and at the same moment caught sight of a pair of eyes, bright
with a green light, glowering at her through the open window.  The next
instant something leaped into the room.  It was like a cat, with legs
as long as a horse's, Irene said, but its body no bigger and its legs
no thicker than those of a cat.  She was too frightened to cry out, but
not too frightened to jump from her chair and run from the room.

It is plain enough to every one of my readers what she ought to have
done--and indeed, Irene thought of it herself; but when she came to the
foot of the old stair, just outside the nursery door, she imagined the
creature running up those long ascents after her, and pursuing her
through the dark passages--which, after all, might lead to no tower!
That thought was too much.  Her heart failed her, and, turning from the
stair, she rushed along to the hall, whence, finding the front door
open, she darted into the court pursued--at least she thought so--by
the creature.  No one happening to see her, on she ran, unable to think
for fear, and ready to run anywhere to elude the awful creature with
the stilt-legs.  Not daring to look behind her, she rushed straight out
of the gate and up the mountain.  It was foolish indeed--thus to run
farther and farther from all who could help her, as if she had been
seeking a fit spot for the goblin creature to eat her in his leisure;
but that is the way fear serves us: it always sides with the thing we
are afraid of.

The princess was soon out of breath with running uphill; but she ran
on, for she fancied the horrible creature just behind her, forgetting
that, had it been after her such long legs as those must have overtaken
her long ago.  At last she could run no longer, and fell, unable even
to scream, by the roadside, where she lay for some time half dead with
terror.  But finding nothing lay hold of her, and her breath beginning
to come back, she ventured at length to get half up and peer anxiously
about her.  It was now so dark she could see nothing.  Not a single
star was out.  She could not even tell in what direction the house lay,
and between her and home she fancied the dreadful creature lying ready
to pounce upon her. She saw now that she ought to have run up the
stairs at once.  It was well she did not scream; for, although very few
of the goblins had come out for weeks, a stray idler or two might have
heard her. She sat down upon a stone, and nobody but one who had done
something wrong could have been more miserable.  She had quite
forgotten her promise to visit her grandmother.  A raindrop fell on her
face.  She looked up, and for a moment her terror was lost in
astonishment.  At first she thought the rising moon had left her place,
and drawn nigh to see what could be the matter with the little girl,
sitting alone, without hat or cloak, on the dark bare mountain; but she
soon saw she was mistaken, for there was no light on the ground at her
feet, and no shadow anywhere.  But a great silver globe was hanging in
the air; and as she gazed at the lovely thing, her courage revived.  If
she were but indoors again, she would fear nothing, not even the
terrible creature with the long legs!  But how was she to find her way
back?  What could that light be?  Could it be--? No, it couldn't.  But
what if it should be--yes--it must be--her great-great-grandmother's
lamp, which guided her pigeons home through the darkest night!  She
jumped up: she had but to keep that light in view and she must find the
house.  Her heart grew strong.  Speedily, yet softly, she walked down
the hill, hoping to pass the watching creature unseen.  Dark as it was,
there was little danger now of choosing the wrong road.  And--which was
most strange--the light that filled her eyes from the lamp, instead of
blinding them for a moment to the object upon which they next fell,
enabled her for a moment to see it, despite the darkness.  By looking
at the lamp and then dropping her eyes, she could see the road for a
yard or two in front of her, and this saved her from several falls, for
the road was very rough.  But all at once, to her dismay, it vanished,
and the terror of the beast, which had left her the moment she began to
return, again laid hold of her heart.  The same instant, however, she
caught the light of the windows, and knew exactly where she was.  It
was too dark to run, but she made what haste she could, and reached the
gate in safety.  She found the house door still open, ran through the
hall, and, without even looking into the nursery, bounded straight up
the stair, and the next, and the next; then turning to the right, ran
through the long avenue of silent rooms, and found her way at once to
the door at the foot of the tower stair.

When first the nurse missed her, she fancied she was playing her a
trick, and for some time took no trouble about her; but at last,
getting frightened, she had begun to search; and when the princess
entered, the whole household was hither and thither over the house,
hunting for her.  A few seconds after she reached the stair of the
tower they had even begun to search the neglected rooms, in which they
would never have thought of looking had they not already searched every
other place they could think of in vain.  But by this time she was
knocking at the old lady's door.



CHAPTER 15

Woven and Then Spun

'Come in, Irene,' said the silvery voice of her grandmother.

The princess opened the door and peeped in.  But the room was quite
dark and there was no sound of the spinning-wheel.  She grew frightened
once more, thinking that, although the room was there, the old lady
might be a dream after all.  Every little girl knows how dreadful it is
to find a room empty where she thought somebody was; but Irene had to
fancy for a moment that the person she came to find was nowhere at all.
She remembered, however, that at night she spun only in the moonlight,
and concluded that must be why there was no sweet, bee-like humming:
the old lady might be somewhere in the darkness.  Before she had time
to think another thought, she heard her voice again, saying as before:
'Come in, Irene.'  From the sound, she understood at once that she was
not in the room beside her.  Perhaps she was in her bedroom.  She
turned across the passage, feeling her way to the other door.  When her
hand fell on the lock, again the old lady spoke:

'Shut the other door behind you, Irene.  I always close the door of my
workroom when I go to my chamber.'

Irene wondered to hear her voice so plainly through the door: having
shut the other, she opened it and went in.  Oh, what a lovely haven to
reach from the darkness and fear through which she had come!  The soft
light made her feel as if she were going into the heart of the milkiest
pearl; while the blue walls and their silver stars for a moment
perplexed her with the fancy that they were in reality the sky which
she had left outside a minute ago covered with rainclouds.

'I've lighted a fire for you, Irene: you're cold and wet,' said her
grandmother.

Then Irene looked again, and saw that what she had taken for a huge
bouquet of red roses on a low stand against the wall was in fact a fire
which burned in the shapes of the loveliest and reddest roses, glowing
gorgeously between the heads and wings of two cherubs of shining
silver.  And when she came nearer, she found that the smell of roses
with which the room was filled came from the fire-roses on the hearth.
Her grandmother was dressed in the loveliest pale blue velvet, over
which her hair, no longer white, but of a rich golden colour, streamed
like a cataract, here falling in dull gathered heaps, there rushing
away in smooth shining falls.  And ever as she looked, the hair seemed
pouring down from her head and vanishing in a golden mist ere it
reached the floor.  It flowed from under the edge of a circle of
shining silver, set with alternated pearls and opals.  On her dress was
no ornament whatever, neither was there a ring on her hand, or a
necklace or carcanet about her neck.  But her slippers glimmered with
the light of the Milky Way, for they were covered with seed-pearls and
opals in one mass.  Her face was that of a woman of three-and-twenty.

The princess was so bewildered with astonishment and admiration that
she could hardly thank her, and drew nigh with timidity, feeling dirty
and uncomfortable.  The lady was seated on a low chair by the side of
the fire, with hands outstretched to take her, but the princess hung
back with a troubled smile.

'Why, what's the matter?' asked her grandmother.  'You haven't been
doing anything wrong--I know that by your face, though it is rather
miserable.  What's the matter, my dear?'

And she still held out her arms.

'Dear grandmother,' said Irene, 'I'm not so sure that I haven't done
something wrong.  I ought to have run up to you at once when the
long-legged cat came in at the window, instead of running out on the
mountain and making myself such a fright.'

'You were taken by surprise, my child, and you are not so likely to do
it again.  It is when people do wrong things wilfully that they are the
more likely to do them again.  Come.'

And still she held out her arms.

'But, grandmother, you're so beautiful and grand with your crown on;
and I am so dirty with mud and rain!  I should quite spoil your
beautiful blue dress.'

With a merry little laugh the lady sprung from her chair, more lightly
far than Irene herself could, caught the child to her bosom, and,
kissing the tear-stained face over and over, sat down with her in her
lap.

'Oh, grandmother!  You'll make yourself such a mess!' cried Irene,
clinging to her.

'You darling! do you think I care more for my dress than for my little
girl?  Besides--look here.'

As she spoke she set her down, and Irene saw to her dismay that the
lovely dress was covered with the mud of her fall on the mountain road.
But the lady stooped to the fire, and taking from it, by the stalk in
her fingers, one of the burning roses, passed it once and again and a
third time over the front of her dress; and when Irene looked, not a
single stain was to be discovered.

'There!' said her grandmother, 'you won't mind coming to me now?'

But Irene again hung back, eying the flaming rose which the lady held
in her hand.

'You're not afraid of the rose--are you?' she said, about to throw it
on the hearth again.

'Oh! don't, please!' cried Irene.  'Won't you hold it to my frock and
my hands and my face?  And I'm afraid my feet and my knees want it too.'

'No, answered her grandmother, smiling a little sadly, as she threw the
rose from her; 'it is too hot for you yet.  It would set your frock in
a flame.  Besides, I don't want to make you clean tonight.

I want your nurse and the rest of the people to see you as you are, for
you will have to tell them how you ran away for fear of the long-legged
cat.  I should like to wash you, but they would not believe you then.
Do you see that bath behind you?'

The princess looked, and saw a large oval tub of silver, shining
brilliantly in the light of the wonderful lamp.

'Go and look into it,' said the lady.

Irene went, and came back very silent with her eyes shining.

'What did you see?' asked her grandmother.

'The sky, and the moon and the stars,' she answered.  'It looked as if
there was no bottom to it.'

The lady smiled a pleased satisfied smile, and was silent also for a
few moments.  Then she said:

'Any time you want a bath, come to me.  I know YOU have a bath every
morning, but sometimes you want one at night, too.'

'Thank you, grandmother; I will--I will indeed,' answered Irene, and
was again silent for some moments thinking.  Then she said: 'How was
it, grandmother, that I saw your beautiful lamp--not the light of it
only--but the great round silvery lamp itself, hanging alone in the
great open air, high up?  It was your lamp I saw--wasn't it?'

'Yes, my child--it was my lamp.'

'Then how was it?  I don't see a window all round.'

'When I please I can make the lamp shine through the walls--shine so
strong that it melts them away from before the sight, and shows itself
as you saw it.  But, as I told you, it is not everybody can see it.'

'How is it that I can, then?  I'm sure I don't know.'

'It is a gift born with you.  And one day I hope everybody will have
it.'

'But how do you make it shine through the walls?'

'Ah! that you would not understand if I were to try ever so much to
make you--not yet--not yet.  But,' added the lady, rising, 'you must
sit in my chair while I get you the present I have been preparing for
you.  I told you my spinning was for you.  It is finished now, and I am
going to fetch it.  I have been keeping it warm under one of my
brooding pigeons.'

Irene sat down in the low chair, and her grandmother left her, shutting
the door behind her.  The child sat gazing, now at the rose fire, now
at the starry walls, now at the silver light; and a great quietness
grew in her heart.  If all the long-legged cats in the world had come
rushing at her then she would not have been afraid of them for a
moment.  How this was she could not tell--she only knew there was no
fear in her, and everything was so right and safe that it could not get
in.

She had been gazing at the lovely lamp for some minutes fixedly:
turning her eyes, she found the wall had vanished, for she was looking
out on the dark cloudy night.  But though she heard the wind blowing,
none of it blew upon her.  In a moment more the clouds themselves
parted, or rather vanished like the wall, and she looked straight into
the starry herds, flashing gloriously in the dark blue.  It was but for
a moment.  The clouds gathered again and shut out the stars; the wall
gathered again and shut out the clouds; and there stood the lady beside
her with the loveliest smile on her face, and a shimmering ball in her
hand, about the size of a pigeon's egg.

'There, Irene; there is my work for you!' she said, holding out the
ball to the princess.

She took it in her hand, and looked at it all over.  It sparkled a
little, and shone here and there, but not much.  It was of a sort of
grey-whiteness, something like spun glass.

'Is this all your spinning, grandmother?' she asked.

'All since you came to the house.  There is more there than you think.'

'How pretty it is!  What am I to do with it, please?'

'That I will now explain to you,' answered the lady, turning from her
and going to her cabinet.  She came back with a small ring in her hand.
Then she took the ball from Irene's, and did something with the
ring--Irene could not tell what.

'Give me your hand,' she said.  Irene held up her right hand.

'Yes, that is the hand I want,' said the lady, and put the ring on the
forefinger of it.

'What a beautiful ring!' said Irene.  'What is the stone called?'

'It is a fire-opal.' 'Please, am I to keep it?'

'Always.' 'Oh, thank you, grandmother!  It's prettier than anything I
ever saw, except those--of all colours-in your--Please, is that your
crown?'

'Yes, it is my crown.  The stone in your ring is of the same sort--only
not so good.  It has only red, but mine have all colours, you see.'

'Yes, grandmother.  I will take such care of it!  But--' she added,
hesitating.

'But what?' asked her grandmother.

'What am I to say when Lootie asks me where I got it?'

'You will ask her where you got it,' answered the lady smiling.

'I don't see how I can do that.'

'You will, though.'

'Of course I will, if you say so.  But, you know, I can't pretend not
to know.'

'Of course not.  But don't trouble yourself about it.  You will see
when the time comes.'

So saying, the lady turned, and threw the little ball into the rose
fire.

'Oh, grandmother!' exclaimed Irene; 'I thought you had spun it for me.'

'So I did, my child.  And you've got it.'

'No; it's burnt in the fire!'

The lady put her hand in the fire, brought out the ball, glimmering as
before, and held it towards her.  Irene stretched out her hand to take
it, but the lady turned and, going to her cabinet, opened a drawer, and
laid the ball in it.

'Have I done anything to vex you, grandmother?' said Irene pitifully.

'No, my darling.  But you must understand that no one ever gives
anything to another properly and really without keeping it.  That ball
is yours.'

'Oh! I'm not to take it with me!  You are going to keep it for me!'

'You are to take it with you.  I've fastened the end of it to the ring
on your finger.'

Irene looked at the ring.

'I can't see it there, grandmother,' she said.

'Feel--a little way from the ring--towards the cabinet,' said the lady.

'Oh! I do feel it!' exclaimed the princess.  'But I can't see it,' she
added, looking close to her outstretched hand.

'No.  The thread is too fine for you to see it.  You can only feel it.
Now you can fancy how much spinning that took, although it does seem
such a little ball.'

'But what use can I make of it, if it lies in your cabinet?'

'That is what I will explain to you.  It would be of no use to you--it
wouldn't be yours at all if it did not lie in my cabinet.  Now listen.
If ever you find yourself in any danger--such, for example, as you were
in this same evening--you must take off your ring and put it under the
pillow of your bed.  Then you must lay your finger, the same that wore
the ring, upon the thread, and follow the thread wherever it leads you.'

'Oh, how delightful!  It will lead me to you, grandmother, I know!'

'Yes.  But, remember, it may seem to you a very roundabout way indeed,
and you must not doubt the thread.  Of one thing you may be sure, that
while you hold it, I hold it too.'

'It is very wonderful!' said Irene thoughtfully.  Then suddenly
becoming aware, she jumped up, crying:

'Oh, grandmother! here have I been sitting all this time in your chair,
and you standing!  I beg your pardon.'

The lady laid her hand on her shoulder, and said:

'Sit down again, Irene.  Nothing pleases me better than to see anyone
sit in my chair.  I am only too glad to stand so long as anyone will
sit in it.'

'How kind of you!' said the princess, and sat down again.

'It makes me happy,' said the lady.

'But,' said Irene, still puzzled, 'won't the thread get in somebody's
way and be broken, if the one end is fast to my ring, and the other
laid in your cabinet?'

'You will find all that arrange itself.  I am afraid it is time for you
to go.'

'Mightn't I stay and sleep with you tonight, grandmother?' 'No, not
tonight.  If I had meant you to stay tonight, I should have given you a
bath; but you know everybody in the house is miserable about you, and
it would be cruel to keep them so all night.  You must go downstairs.'

'I'm so glad, grandmother, you didn't say "Go home," for this is my
home.  Mayn't I call this my home?'

'You may, my child.  And I trust you will always think it your home.
Now come.  I must take you back without anyone seeing you.'

'Please, I want to ask you one question more,' said Irene.  'Is it
because you have your crown on that you look so young?'

'No, child,' answered her grandmother; 'it is because I felt so young
this evening that I put my crown on.  And I thought you would like to
see your old grandmother in her best.'

'Why do you call yourself old?  You're not old, grandmother.'

'I am very old indeed.  It is so silly of people--I don't mean you, for
you are such a tiny, and couldn't know better--but it is so silly of
people to fancy that old age means crookedness and witheredness and
feebleness and sticks and spectacles and rheumatism and forgetfulness!
It is so silly! Old age has nothing whatever to do with all that.  The
right old age means strength and beauty and mirth and courage and clear
eyes and strong painless limbs.  I am older than you are able to think,
and--'

'And look at you, grandmother!' cried Irene, jumping up and flinging
her arms about her neck.  'I won't be so silly again, I promise you.
At least--I'm rather afraid to promise--but if I am, I promise to be
sorry for it--I do.  I wish I were as old as you, grandmother.  I don't
think you are ever afraid of anything.'

'Not for long, at least, my child.  Perhaps by the time I am two
thousand years of age, I shall, indeed, never be afraid of anything.
But I confess I have sometimes been afraid about my children--sometimes
about you, Irene.'

'Oh, I'm so sorry, grandmother!  Tonight, I suppose, you mean.'

'Yes--a little tonight; but a good deal when you had all but made up
your mind that I was a dream, and no real great-great-grandmother.  You
must not suppose I am blaming you for that.  I dare say you could not
help it.'

'I don't know, grandmother,' said the princess, beginning to cry. 'I
can't always do myself as I should like.  And I don't always try.  I'm
very sorry anyhow.'

The lady stooped, lifted her in her arms, and sat down with her in her
chair, holding her close to her bosom.  In a few minutes the princess
had sobbed herself to sleep.  How long she slept I do not know.  When
she came to herself she was sitting in her own high chair at the
nursery table, with her doll's house before her.



CHAPTER 16

The Ring

The same moment her nurse came into the room, sobbing.  When she saw
her sitting there she started back with a loud cry of amazement and
joy.  Then running to her, she caught her in her arms and covered her
with kisses.

'My precious darling princess! where have you been?  What has happened
to you?  We've all been crying our eyes out, and searching the house
from top to bottom for you.'

'Not quite from the top,' thought Irene to herself; and she might have
added, 'not quite to the bottom', perhaps, if she had known all.  But
the one she would not, and the other she could not say. 'Oh, Lootie!
I've had such a dreadful adventure!' she replied, and told her all
about the cat with the long legs, and how she ran out upon the
mountain, and came back again.  But she said nothing of her grandmother
or her lamp.

'And there we've been searching for you all over the house for more
than an hour and a half!' exclaimed the nurse.  'But that's no matter,
now we've got you!  Only, princess, I must say,' she added, her mood
changing, 'what you ought to have done was to call for your own Lootie
to come and help you, instead of running out of the house, and up the
mountain, in that wild, I must say, foolish fashion.'

'Well, Lootie,' said Irene quietly, 'perhaps if you had a big cat, all
legs, running at you, you might not exactly know what was the wisest
thing to do at the moment.'

'I wouldn't run up the mountain, anyhow,' returned Lootie.

'Not if you had time to think about it.  But when those creatures came
at you that night on the mountain, you were so frightened yourself that
you lost your way home.'

This put a stop to Lootie's reproaches.  She had been on the point of
saying that the long-legged cat must have been a twilight fancy of the
princess's, but the memory of the horrors of that night, and of the
talking-to which the king had given her in consequence, prevented her
from saying what after all she did not half believe--having a strong
suspicion that the cat was a goblin; for she knew nothing of the
difference between the goblins and their creatures: she counted them
all just goblins.

Without another word she went and got some fresh tea and bread and
butter for the princess.  Before she returned, the whole household,
headed by the housekeeper, burst into the nursery to exult over their
darling.  The gentlemen-at-arms followed, and were ready enough to
believe all she told them about the long-legged cat. Indeed, though
wise enough to say nothing about it, they remembered, with no little
horror, just such a creature amongst those they had surprised at their
gambols upon the princess's lawn.

In their own hearts they blamed themselves for not having kept better
watch.  And their captain gave orders that from this night the front
door and all the windows on the ground floor should be locked
immediately the sun set, and opened after upon no pretence whatever.
The men-at-arms redoubled their vigilance, and for some time there was
no further cause of alarm.

When the princess woke the next morning, her nurse was bending over
her.  'How your ring does glow this morning, princess!--just like a
fiery rose!' she said.

'Does it, Lootie?' returned Irene.  'Who gave me the ring, Lootie? I
know I've had it a long time, but where did I get it?  I don't
remember.'

'I think it must have been your mother gave it you, princess; but
really, for as long as you have worn it, I don't remember that ever I
heard,' answered her nurse.

'I will ask my king-papa the next time he comes,' said Irene.



CHAPTER 17

Springtime

The spring so dear to all creatures, young and old, came at last, and
before the first few days of it had gone, the king rode through its
budding valleys to see his little daughter.  He had been in a distant
part of his dominions all the winter, for he was not in the habit of
stopping in one great city, or of visiting only his favourite country
houses, but he moved from place to place, that all his people might
know him.  Wherever he journeyed, he kept a constant look-out for the
ablest and best men to put into office; and wherever he found himself
mistaken, and those he had appointed incapable or unjust, he removed
them at once.  Hence you see it was his care of the people that kept
him from seeing his princess so often as he would have liked.  You may
wonder why he did not take her about with him; but there were several
reasons against his doing so, and I suspect her great-great-grandmother
had had a principal hand in preventing it.  Once more Irene heard the
bugle-blast, and once more she was at the gate to meet her father as he
rode up on his great white horse.

After they had been alone for a little while, she thought of what she
had resolved to ask him.

'Please, king-papa,' she said, 'Will you tell me where I got this
pretty ring?  I can't remember.'

The king looked at it.  A strange beautiful smile spread like sunshine
over his face, and an answering smile, but at the same time a
questioning one, spread like moonlight over Irene's.  'It was your
queen-mamma's once,' he said.

'And why isn't it hers now?' asked Irene.

'She does not want it now,' said the king, looking grave.

'Why doesn't she want it now?'

'Because she's gone where all those rings are made.'

'And when shall I see her?' asked the princess.

'Not for some time yet,' answered the king, and the tears came into his
eyes.

Irene did not remember her mother and did not know why her father
looked so, and why the tears came in his eyes; but she put her arms
round his neck and kissed him, and asked no more questions.

The king was much disturbed on hearing the report of the
gentlemen-at-arms concerning the creatures they had seen; and I presume
would have taken Irene with him that very day, but for what the
presence of the ring on her finger assured him of.  About an hour
before he left, Irene saw him go up the old stair; and he did not come
down again till they were just ready to start; and she thought with
herself that he had been up to see the old lady.  When he went away he
left other six gentlemen behind him, that there might be six of them
always on guard.

And now, in the lovely spring weather, Irene was out on the mountain
the greater part of the day.  In the warmer hollows there were lovely
primroses, and not so many that she ever got tired of them.  As often
as she saw a new one opening an eye of light in the blind earth, she
would clap her hands with gladness, and unlike some children I know,
instead of pulling it, would touch it as tenderly as if it had been a
new baby, and, having made its acquaintance, would leave it as happy as
she found it.  She treated the plants on which they grew like birds'
nests; every fresh flower was like a new little bird to her.  She would
pay visits to all the flower-nests she knew, remembering each by
itself.  She would go down on her hands and knees beside one and say:
'Good morning!  Are you all smelling very sweet this morning?
Good-bye!' and then she would go to another nest, and say the same.  It
was a favourite amusement with her.  There were many flowers up and
down, and she loved them all, but the primroses were her favourites.

'They're not too shy, and they're not a bit forward,' she would say to
Lootie.

There were goats too about, over the mountain, and when the little kids
came she was as pleased with them as with the flowers.  The goats
belonged to the miners mostly-a few of them to Curdie's mother; but
there were a good many wild ones that seemed to belong to nobody.
These the goblins counted theirs, and it was upon them partly that they
lived.  They set snares and dug pits for them; and did not scruple to
take what tame ones happened to be caught; but they did not try to
steal them in any other manner, because they were afraid of the dogs
the hill-people kept to watch them, for the knowing dogs always tried
to bite their feet.  But the goblins had a kind of sheep of their
own--very queer creatures, which they drove out to feed at night, and
the other goblin creatures were wise enough to keep good watch over
them, for they knew they should have their bones by and by.



CHAPTER 18

Curdie's Clue

Curdie was as watchful as ever, but was almost getting tired of his ill
success.  Every other night or so he followed the goblins about, as
they went on digging and boring, and getting as near them as he could,
watched them from behind stones and rocks; but as yet he seemed no
nearer finding out what they had in view.  As at first, he always kept
hold of the end of his string, while his pickaxe, left just outside the
hole by which he entered the goblins' country from the mine, continued
to serve as an anchor and hold fast the other end.  The goblins,
hearing no more noise in that quarter, had ceased to apprehend an
immediate invasion, and kept no watch.

One night, after dodging about and listening till he was nearly falling
asleep with weariness, he began to roll up his ball, for he had
resolved to go home to bed.  It was not long, however, before he began
to feel bewildered.  One after another he passed goblin houses, caves,
that is, occupied by goblin families, and at length was sure they were
many more than he had passed as he came.  He had to use great caution
to pass unseen--they lay so close together. Could his string have led
him wrong?  He still followed winding it, and still it led him into
more thickly populated quarters, until he became quite uneasy, and
indeed apprehensive; for although he was not afraid of the cobs, he was
afraid of not finding his way out. But what could he do?  It was of no
use to sit down and wait for the morning--the morning made no
difference here.  It was dark, and always dark; and if his string
failed him he was helpless.  He might even arrive within a yard of the
mine and never know it. Seeing he could do nothing better he would at
least find where the end of his string was, and, if possible, how it
had come to play him such a trick.  He knew by the size of the ball
that he was getting pretty near the last of it, when he began to feel a
tugging and pulling at it.  What could it mean?  Turning a sharp
corner, he thought he heard strange sounds.  These grew, as he went on,
to a scuffling and growling and squeaking; and the noise increased,
until, turning a second sharp corner, he found himself in the midst of
it, and the same moment tumbled over a wallowing mass, which he knew
must be a knot of the cobs' creatures.  Before he could recover his
feet, he had caught some great scratches on his face and several severe
bites on his legs and arms.  But as he scrambled to get up, his hand
fell upon his pickaxe, and before the horrid beasts could do him any
serious harm, he was laying about with it right and left in the dark.
The hideous cries which followed gave him the satisfaction of knowing
that he had punished some of them pretty smartly for their rudeness,
and by their scampering and their retreating howls, he perceived that
he had routed them.  He stood for a little, weighing his battle-axe in
his hand as if it had been the most precious lump of metal--but indeed
no lump of gold itself could have been so precious at the time as that
common tool--then untied the end of the string from it, put the ball in
his pocket, and still stood thinking.  It was clear that the cobs'
creatures had found his axe, had between them carried it off, and had
so led him he knew not where.  But for all his thinking he could not
tell what he ought to do, until suddenly he became aware of a glimmer
of light in the distance.  Without a moment's hesitation he set out for
it, as fast as the unknown and rugged way would permit.  Yet again
turning a corner, led by the dim light, he spied something quite new in
his experience of the underground regions--a small irregular shape of
something shining.  Going up to it, he found it was a piece of mica, or
Muscovy glass, called sheep-silver in Scotland, and the light flickered
as if from a fire behind it.  After trying in vain for some time to
discover an entrance to the place where it was burning, he came at
length to a small chamber in which an opening, high in the wall,
revealed a glow beyond.  To this opening he managed to scramble up, and
then he saw a strange sight.

Below sat a little group of goblins around a fire, the smoke of which
vanished in the darkness far aloft.  The sides of the cave were full of
shining minerals like those of the palace hall; and the company was
evidently of a superior order, for every one wore stones about head, or
arms, or waist, shining dull gorgeous colours in the light of the fire.
Nor had Curdie looked long before he recognized the king himself, and
found that he had made his way into the inner apartment of the royal
family.  He had never had such a good chance of hearing something.  He
crept through the hole as softly as he could, scrambled a good way down
the wall towards them without attracting attention, and then sat down
and listened. The king, evidently the queen, and probably the crown
prince and the Prime Minister were talking together.  He was sure of
the queen by her shoes, for as she warmed her feet at the fire, he saw
them quite plainly.

'That will be fun!' said the one he took for the crown prince. It was
the first whole sentence he heard.

'I don't see why you should think it such a grand affair!' said his
stepmother, tossing her head backward.

'You must remember, my spouse,' interposed His Majesty, as if making
excuse for his son, 'he has got the same blood in him.  His mother--'

'Don't talk to me of his mother!  You positively encourage his
unnatural fancies.  Whatever belongs to that mother ought to be cut out
of him.'

'You forget yourself, my dear!' said the king.

'I don't,' said the queen, 'nor you either.  If you expect me to
approve of such coarse tastes, you will find yourself mistaken.  I
don't wear shoes for nothing.'

'You must acknowledge, however,' the king said, with a little groan,
'that this at least is no whim of Harelip's, but a matter of State
policy.  You are well aware that his gratification comes purely from
the pleasure of sacrificing himself to the public good.

Does it not, Harelip?'

'Yes, father; of course it does.  Only it will be nice to make her cry.
I'll have the skin taken off between her toes, and tie them up till
they grow together.  Then her feet will be like other people's, and
there will be no occasion for her to wear shoes.'

'Do you mean to insinuate I've got toes, you unnatural wretch?' cried
the queen; and she moved angrily towards Harelip.  The councillor,
however, who was betwixt them, leaned forward so as to prevent her
touching him, but only as if to address the prince.

'Your Royal Highness,' he said, 'possibly requires to be reminded that
you have got three toes yourself--one on one foot, two on the other.'

'Ha! ha! ha!' shouted the queen triumphantly.

The councillor, encouraged by this mark of favour, went on.

'It seems to me, Your Royal Highness, it would greatly endear you to
your future people, proving to them that you are not the less one of
themselves that you had the misfortune to be born of a sun-mother, if
you were to command upon yourself the comparatively slight operation
which, in a more extended form, you so wisely meditate with regard to
your future princess.'

'Ha! ha! ha!' laughed the queen louder than before, and the king and
the minister joined in the laugh.  Harelip growled, and for a few
moments the others continued to express their enjoyment of his
discomfiture.

The queen was the only one Curdie could see with any distinctness. She
sat sideways to him, and the light of the fire shone full upon her
face.  He could not consider her handsome.  Her nose was certainly
broader at the end than its extreme length, and her eyes, instead of
being horizontal, were set up like two perpendicular eggs, one on the
broad, the other on the small end.  Her mouth was no bigger than a
small buttonhole until she laughed, when it stretched from ear to
ear--only, to be sure, her ears were very nearly in the middle of her
cheeks.

Anxious to hear everything they might say, Curdie ventured to slide
down a smooth part of the rock just under him, to a projection below,
upon which he thought to rest.  But whether he was not careful enough,
or the projection gave way, down he came with a rush on the floor of
the cavern, bringing with him a great rumbling shower of stones.

The goblins jumped from their seats in more anger than consternation,
for they had never yet seen anything to be afraid of in the palace.
But when they saw Curdie with his pick in his hand their rage was
mingled with fear, for they took him for the first of an invasion of
miners.  The king notwithstanding drew himself up to his full height of
four feet, spread himself to his full breadth of three and a half, for
he was the handsomest and squarest of all the goblins, and strutting up
to Curdie, planted himself with outspread feet before him, and said
with dignity:

'Pray what right have you in my palace?'

'The right of necessity, Your Majesty,' answered Curdie.  'I lost my
way and did not know where I was wandering to.'

'How did you get in?'

'By a hole in the mountain.'

'But you are a miner!  Look at your pickaxe!'

Curdie did look at it, answering:

'I came upon it lying on the ground a little way from here.  I tumbled
over some wild beasts who were playing with it.  Look, Your Majesty.'
And Curdie showed him how he was scratched and bitten.

The king was pleased to find him behave more politely than he had
expected from what his people had told him concerning the miners, for
he attributed it to the power of his own presence; but he did not
therefore feel friendly to the intruder.

'You will oblige me by walking out of my dominions at once,' he said,
well knowing what a mockery lay in the words.

'With pleasure, if Your Majesty will give me a guide,' said Curdie.

'I will give you a thousand,' said the king with a scoffing air of
magnificent liberality.

'One will be quite sufficient,' said Curdie.

But the king uttered a strange shout, half halloo, half roar, and in
rushed goblins till the cave was swarming.  He said something to the
first of them which Curdie could not hear, and it was passed from one
to another till in a moment the farthest in the crowd had evidently
heard and understood it.  They began to gather about him in a way he
did not relish, and he retreated towards the wall. They pressed upon
him.

'Stand back,' said Curdie, grasping his pickaxe tighter by his knee.

They only grinned and pressed closer.  Curdie bethought himself and
began to rhyme.


  'Ten, twenty, thirty--
  You're all so very dirty!
  Twenty, thirty, forty--
  You're all so thick and snorty!
  'Thirty, forty, fifty--
  You're all so puff-and-snifty!
  Forty, fifty, sixty--
  Beast and man so mixty!

  'Fifty, sixty, seventy--
  Mixty, maxty, leaventy!
  Sixty, seventy, eighty--
  All your cheeks so slaty!

  'Seventy, eighty, ninety,
  All your hands so flinty!
  Eighty, ninety, hundred,
  Altogether dundred!'


The goblins fell back a little when he began, and made horrible
grimaces all through the rhyme, as if eating something so disagreeable
that it set their teeth on edge and gave them the creeps; but whether
it was that the rhyming words were most of them no words at all, for, a
new rhyme being considered the more efficacious, Curdie had made it on
the spur of the moment, or whether it was that the presence of the king
and queen gave them courage, I cannot tell; but the moment the rhyme
was over they crowded on him again, and out shot a hundred long arms,
with a multitude of thick nailless fingers at the ends of them, to lay
hold upon him.  Then Curdie heaved up his axe.  But being as gentle as
courageous and not wishing to kill any of them, he turned the end which
was square and blunt like a hammer, and with that came down a great
blow on the head of the goblin nearest him.  Hard as the heads of all
goblins are, he thought he must feel that.  And so he did, no doubt;
but he only gave a horrible cry, and sprung at Curdie's throat.
Curdie, however, drew back in time, and just at that critical moment
remembered the vulnerable part of the goblin body.  He made a sudden
rush at the king and stamped with all his might on His Majesty's feet.
The king gave a most unkingly howl and almost fell into the fire.
Curdie then rushed into the crowd, stamping right and left.  The
goblins drew back, howling on every side as he approached, but they
were so crowded that few of those he attacked could escape his tread;
and the shrieking and roaring that filled the cave would have appalled
Curdie but for the good hope it gave him.  They were tumbling over each
other in heaps in their eagerness to rush from the cave, when a new
assailant suddenly faced him--the queen, with flaming eyes and expanded
nostrils, her hair standing half up from her head, rushed at him. She
trusted in her shoes: they were of granite--hollowed like French
sabots.  Curdie would have endured much rather than hurt a woman, even
if she was a goblin; but here was an affair of life and death:
forgetting her shoes, he made a great stamp on one of her feet.  But
she instantly returned it with very different effect, causing him
frightful pain, and almost disabling him.  His only chance with her
would have been to attack the granite shoes with his pickaxe, but
before he could think of that she had caught him up in her arms and was
rushing with him across the cave.  She dashed him into a hole in the
wall, with a force that almost stunned him.  But although he could not
move, he was not too far gone to hear her great cry, and the rush of
multitudes of soft feet, followed by the sounds of something heaved up
against the rock; after which came a multitudinous patter of stones
falling near him.  The last had not ceased when he grew very faint, for
his head had been badly cut, and at last insensible.

When he came to himself there was perfect silence about him, and utter
darkness, but for the merest glimmer in one tiny spot.  He crawled to
it, and found that they had heaved a slab against the mouth of the
hole, past the edge of which a poor little gleam found its way from the
fire.  He could not move it a hairbreadth, for they had piled a great
heap of stones against it.  He crawled back to where he had been lying,
in the faint hope of finding his pickaxe, But after a vain search he
was at last compelled to acknowledge himself in an evil plight.  He sat
down and tried to think, but soon fell fast asleep.



CHAPTER 19

Goblin Counsels

He must have slept a long time, for when he awoke he felt wonderfully
restored--indeed almost well--and very hungry.  There were voices in
the outer cave.

Once more, then, it was night; for the goblins slept during the day and
went about their affairs during the night.

In the universal and constant darkness of their dwelling they had no
reason to prefer the one arrangement to the other; but from aversion to
the sun-people they chose to be busy when there was least chance of
their being met either by the miners below, when they were burrowing,
or by the people of the mountain above, when they were feeding their
sheep or catching their goats.  And indeed it was only when the sun was
away that the outside of the mountain was sufficiently like their own
dismal regions to be endurable to their mole eyes, so thoroughly had
they become unaccustomed to any light beyond that of their own fires
and torches.

Curdie listened, and soon found that they were talking of himself.

'How long will it take?' asked Harelip.

'Not many days, I should think,' answered the king.  'They are poor
feeble creatures, those sun-people, and want to be always eating. We
can go a week at a time without food, and be all the better for it; but
I've been told they eat two or three times every day!  Can you believe
it?  They must be quite hollow inside--not at all like us, nine-tenths
of whose bulk is solid flesh and bone.  Yes--I judge a week of
starvation will do for him.'

'If I may be allowed a word,' interposed the queen,--'and I think I
ought to have some voice in the matter--'

'The wretch is entirely at your disposal, my spouse,' interrupted the
king.  'He is your property.  You caught him yourself.  We should never
have done it.'

The queen laughed.  She seemed in far better humour than the night
before.

'I was about to say,' she resumed, 'that it does seem a pity to waste
so much fresh meat.'

'What are you thinking of, my love?' said the king.  'The very notion
of starving him implies that we are not going to give him any meat,
either salt or fresh.'

'I'm not such a stupid as that comes to,' returned Her Majesty. 'What I
mean is that by the time he is starved there will hardly be a picking
upon his bones.'

The king gave a great laugh.

'Well, my spouse, you may have him when you like,' he said.  'I don't
fancy him for my part.  I am pretty sure he is tough eating.'

'That would be to honour instead of punish his insolence,' returned the
queen.  'But why should our poor creatures be deprived of so much
nourishment?  Our little dogs and cats and pigs and small bears would
enjoy him very much.'

'You are the best of housekeepers, my lovely queen!' said her husband.
'Let it be so by all means.  Let us have our people in, and get him out
and kill him at once.  He deserves it.  The mischief he might have
brought upon us, now that he had penetrated so far as our most retired
citadel, is incalculable.  Or rather let us tie him hand and foot, and
have the pleasure of seeing him torn to pieces by full torchlight in
the great hall.'

'Better and better!' cried the queen and the prince together, both of
them clapping their hands.  And the prince made an ugly noise with his
hare-lip, just as if he had intended to be one at the feast.

'But,' added the queen, bethinking herself, 'he is so troublesome. For
poor creatures as they are, there is something about those sun-people
that is very troublesome.  I cannot imagine how it is that with such
superior strength and skill and understanding as ours, we permit them
to exist at all.  Why do we not destroy them entirely, and use their
cattle and grazing lands at our pleasure? Of course we don't want to
live in their horrid country!  It is far too glaring for our quieter
and more refined tastes.  But we might use it as a sort of outhouse,
you know.  Even our creatures' eyes might get used to it, and if they
did grow blind that would be of no consequence, provided they grew fat
as well.  But we might even keep their great cows and other creatures,
and then we should have a few more luxuries, such as cream and cheese,
which at present we only taste occasionally, when our brave men have
succeeded in carrying some off from their farms.'

'It is worth thinking of,' said the king; 'and I don't know why you
should be the first to suggest it, except that you have a positive
genius for conquest.  But still, as you say, there is something very
troublesome about them; and it would be better, as I understand you to
suggest, that we should starve him for a day or two first, so that he
may be a little less frisky when we take him out.'


  'Once there was a goblin
  Living in a hole;
  Busy he was cobblin'
  A shoe without a sole.

  'By came a birdie:
  "Goblin, what do you do?"
  "Cobble at a sturdie
  Upper leather shoe."

  '"What's the good o' that, Sir?"
  Said the little bird.
  "Why it's very Pat, Sir--
  Plain without a word.

  '"Where 'tis all a hole, Sir,
  Never can be holes:
  Why should their shoes have soles, Sir,
  When they've got no souls?"'


'What's that horrible noise?' cried the queen, shuddering from
pot-metal head to granite shoes.

'I declare,' said the king with solemn indignation, 'it's the
sun-creature in the hole!'

'Stop that disgusting noise!' cried the crown prince valiantly, getting
up and standing in front of the heap of stones, with his face towards
Curdie's prison.  'Do now, or I'll break your head.'

'Break away,' shouted Curdie, and began singing again:


  'Once there was a goblin,
  Living in a hole--'


'I really cannot bear it,' said the queen.  'If I could only get at his
horrid toes with my slippers again!'

'I think we had better go to bed,' said the king.

'It's not time to go to bed,' said the queen.

'I would if I was you,' said Curdie.

'Impertinent wretch!' said the queen, with the utmost scorn in her
voice.

'An impossible if,' said His Majesty with dignity.

'Quite,' returned Curdie, and began singing again:


  'Go to bed,
  Goblin, do.
  Help the queen
  Take off her shoe.

  'If you do,
  It will disclose
  A horrid set
  Of sprouting toes.'


'What a lie!' roared the queen in a rage.

'By the way, that reminds me,' said the king, 'that for as long as we
have been married, I have never seen your feet, queen.  I think you
might take off your shoes when you go to bed!  They positively hurt me
sometimes.'

'I will do as I like,' retorted the queen sulkily.

'You ought to do as your own hubby wishes you,' said the king.

'I will not,' said the queen.

'Then I insist upon it,' said the king.

Apparently His Majesty approached the queen for the purpose of
following the advice given by Curdie, for the latter heard a scuffle,
and then a great roar from the king.

'Will you be quiet, then?' said the queen wickedly.

'Yes, yes, queen.  I only meant to coax you.'

'Hands off!' cried the queen triumphantly.  'I'm going to bed.  You may
come when you like.  But as long as I am queen I will sleep in my
shoes.  It is my royal privilege.  Harelip, go to bed.'

'I'm going,' said Harelip sleepily.

'So am I,' said the king.

'Come along, then,' said the queen; 'and mind you are good, or I'll--'

'Oh, no, no, no!' screamed the king in the most supplicating of tones.

Curdie heard only a muttered reply in the distance; and then the cave
was quite still.

They had left the fire burning, and the light came through brighter
than before.  Curdie thought it was time to try again if anything could
be done.  But he found he could not get even a finger through the chink
between the slab and the rock.  He gave a great rush with his shoulder
against the slab, but it yielded no more than if it had been part of
the rock.  All he could do was to sit down and think again.

By and by he came to the resolution to pretend to be dying, in the hope
they might take him out before his strength was too much exhausted to
let him have a chance.  Then, for the creatures, if he could but find
his axe again, he would have no fear of them; and if it were not for
the queen's horrid shoes, he would have no fear at all.

Meantime, until they should come again at night, there was nothing for
him to do but forge new rhymes, now his only weapons.  He had no
intention of using them at present, of course; but it was well to have
a stock, for he might live to want them, and the manufacture of them
would help to while away the time.



CHAPTER 20

Irene's Clue

That same morning early, the princess woke in a terrible fright. There
was a hideous noise in her room--creatures snarling and hissing and
rocketing about as if they were fighting.  The moment she came to
herself, she remembered something she had never thought of again--what
her grandmother told her to do when she was frightened.  She
immediately took off her ring and put it under her pillow.  As she did
so she fancied she felt a finger and thumb take it gently from under
her palm.  'It must be my grandmother!' she said to herself, and the
thought gave her such courage that she stopped to put on her dainty
little slippers before running from the room.  While doing this she
caught sight of a long cloak of sky-blue, thrown over the back of a
chair by the bedside.  She had never seen it before but it was
evidently waiting for her.  She put it on, and then, feeling with the
forefinger of her right hand, soon found her grandmother's thread,
which she proceeded at once to follow, expecting it would lead her
straight up the old stair. When she reached the door she found it went
down and ran along the floor, so that she had almost to crawl in order
to keep a hold of it.  Then, to her surprise, and somewhat to her
dismay, she found that instead of leading her towards the stair it
turned in quite the opposite direction.  It led her through certain
narrow passages towards the kitchen, turning aside ere she reached it,
and guiding her to a door which communicated with a small back yard.
Some of the maids were already up, and this door was standing open.
Across the yard the thread still ran along the ground, until it brought
her to a door in the wall which opened upon the Mountainside.  When she
had passed through, the thread rose to about half her height, and she
could hold it with ease as she walked.  It led her straight up the
mountain.

The cause of her alarm was less frightful than she supposed.  The
cook's great black cat, pursued by the housekeeper's terrier, had
bounced against her bedroom door, which had not been properly fastened,
and the two had burst into the room together and commenced a battle
royal.  How the nurse came to sleep through it was a mystery, but I
suspect the old lady had something to do with it.

It was a clear warm morning.  The wind blew deliciously over the
Mountainside.  Here and there she saw a late primrose but she did not
stop to call upon them.  The sky was mottled with small clouds.

The sun was not yet up, but some of their fluffy edges had caught his
light, and hung out orange and gold-coloured fringes upon the air.  The
dew lay in round drops upon the leaves, and hung like tiny diamond
ear-rings from the blades of grass about her path.

'How lovely that bit of gossamer is!' thought the princess, looking at
a long undulating line that shone at some distance from her up the
hill.  It was not the time for gossamers though; and Irene soon
discovered that it was her own thread she saw shining on before her in
the light of the morning.  It was leading her she knew not whither; but
she had never in her life been out before sunrise, and everything was
so fresh and cool and lively and full of something coming, that she
felt too happy to be afraid of anything.

After leading her up a good distance, the thread turned to the left,
and down the path upon which she and Lootie had met Curdie. But she
never thought of that, for now in the morning light, with its far
outlook over the country, no path could have been more open and airy
and cheerful.  She could see the road almost to the horizon, along
which she had so often watched her king-papa and his troop come
shining, with the bugle-blast cleaving the air before them; and it was
like a companion to her.  Down and down the path went, then up, and
then down and then up again, getting rugged and more rugged as it went;
and still along the path went the silvery thread, and still along the
thread went Irene's little rosy-tipped forefinger.  By and by she came
to a little stream that jabbered and prattled down the hill, and up the
side of the stream went both path and thread.  And still the path grew
rougher and steeper, and the mountain grew wilder, till Irene began to
think she was going a very long way from home; and when she turned to
look back she saw that the level country had vanished and the rough
bare mountain had closed in about her.  But still on went the thread,
and on went the princess.  Everything around her was getting brighter
and brighter as the sun came nearer; till at length his first rays all
at once alighted on the top of a rock before her, like some golden
creature fresh from the sky.  Then she saw that the little stream ran
out of a hole in that rock, that the path did not go past the rock, and
that the thread was leading her straight up to it.  A shudder ran
through her from head to foot when she found that the thread was
actually taking her into the hole out of which the stream ran.  It ran
out babbling joyously, but she had to go in.

She did not hesitate.  Right into the hole she went, which was high
enough to let her walk without stooping.  For a little way there was a
brown glimmer, but at the first turn it all but ceased, and before she
had gone many paces she was in total darkness.  Then she began to be
frightened indeed.  Every moment she kept feeling the thread backwards
and forwards, and as she went farther and farther into the darkness of
the great hollow mountain, she kept thinking more and more about her
grandmother, and all that she had said to her, and how kind she had
been, and how beautiful she was, and all about her lovely room, and the
fire of roses, and the great lamp that sent its light through stone
walls.  And she became more and more sure that the thread could not
have gone there of itself, and that her grandmother must have sent it.
But it tried her dreadfully when the path went down very steep, and
especially When she came to places where she had to go down rough
stairs, and even sometimes a ladder.  Through one narrow passage after
another, over lumps of rock and sand and clay, the thread guided her,
until she came to a small hole through which she had to creep.  Finding
no change on the other side, 'Shall I ever get back?' she thought, over
and over again, wondering at herself that she was not ten times more
frightened, and often feeling as if she were only walking in the story
of a dream.  Sometimes she heard the noise of water, a dull gurgling
inside the rock.  By and by she heard the sounds of blows, which came
nearer and nearer; but again they grew duller, and almost died away.
In a hundred directions she turned, obedient to the guiding thread.

At last she spied a dull red shine, and came up to the mica window, and
thence away and round about, and right, into a cavern, where glowed the
red embers of a fire.  Here the thread began to rise. It rose as high
as her head and higher still.  What should she do if she lost her hold?
She was pulling it down: She might break it! She could see it far up,
glowing as red as her fire-opal in the light of the embers.

But presently she came to a huge heap of stones, piled in a slope
against the wall of the cavern.  On these she climbed, and soon
recovered the level of the thread only however to find, the next
moment, that it vanished through the heap of stones, and left her
standing on it, with her face to the solid rock.  For one terrible
moment she felt as if her grandmother had forsaken her.  The thread
which the spiders had spun far over the seas, which her grandmother had
sat in the moonlight and spun again for her, which she had tempered in
the rose-fire and tied to her opal ring, had left her--had gone where
she could no longer follow it--had brought her into a horrible cavern,
and there left her!  She was forsaken indeed!

'When shall I wake?' she said to herself in an agony, but the same
moment knew that it was no dream.  She threw herself upon the heap, and
began to cry.  It was well she did not know what creatures, one of them
with stone shoes on her feet, were lying in the next cave. But neither
did she know who was on the other side of the slab.

At length the thought struck her that at least she could follow the
thread backwards, and thus get out of the mountain, and home.  She rose
at once, and found the thread.  But the instant she tried to feel it
backwards, it vanished from her touch.  Forwards, it led her hand up to
the heap of stones--backwards it seemed nowhere. Neither could she see
it as before in the light of the fire.  She burst into a wailing cry,
and again threw herself down on the stones.



CHAPTER 21

The Escape

As the princess lay and sobbed she kept feeling the thread
mechanically, following it with her finger many times up to the stones
in which it disappeared.  By and by she began, still mechanically, to
poke her finger in after it between the stones as far as she could.
All at once it came into her head that she might remove some of the
stones and see where the thread went next. Almost laughing at herself
for never having thought of this before, she jumped to her feet.  Her
fear vanished; once more she was certain her grandmother's thread could
not have brought her there just to leave her there; and she began to
throw away the stones from the top as fast as she could, sometimes two
or three at a handful, sometimes taking both hands to lift one.  After
clearing them away a little, she found that the thread turned and went
straight downwards.  Hence, as the heap sloped a good deal, growing of
course wider towards its base, she had to throw away a multitude of
stones to follow the thread.  But this was not all, for she soon found
that the thread, after going straight down for a little way, turned
first sideways in one direction, then sideways in another, and then
shot, at various angles, hither and thither inside the heap, so that
she began to be afraid that to clear the thread she must remove the
whole huge gathering.  She was dismayed at the very idea, but, losing
no time, set to work with a will; and with aching back, and bleeding
fingers and hands, she worked on, sustained by the pleasure of seeing
the heap slowly diminish and begin to show itself on the opposite side
of the fire.  Another thing which helped to keep up her courage was
that, as often as she uncovered a turn of the thread, instead of lying
loose upon the stone, it tightened up; this made her sure that her
grandmother was at the end of it somewhere.

She had got about half-way down when she started, and nearly fell with
fright.  Close to her ears as it seemed, a voice broke out singing:

  'Jabber, bother, smash!
  You'll have it all in a crash.
  Jabber, smash, bother!
  You'll have the worst of the pother.
  Smash, bother, jabber!--'


Here Curdie stopped, either because he could not find a rhyme to
'jabber', or because he remembered what he had forgotten when he woke
up at the sound of Irene's labours, that his plan was to make the
goblins think he was getting weak.  But he had uttered enough to let
Irene know who he was.

'It's Curdie!' she cried joyfully.

'Hush! hush!' came Curdie's voice again from somewhere.  'Speak softly.'

'Why, you were singing loud!' said Irene.

'Yes.  But they know I am here, and they don't know you are.  Who are
you?'

'I'm Irene,' answered the princess.  'I know who you are quite well.
You're Curdie.'

'Why, how ever did you come here, Irene?'

'My great-great-grandmother sent me; and I think I've found out why.
You can't get out, I suppose?'

'No, I can't.  What are you doing?'

'Clearing away a huge heap of stones.'

'There's a princess!' exclaimed Curdie, in a tone of delight, but still
speaking in little more than a whisper.  'I can't think how you got
here, though.'

'My grandmother sent me after her thread.'

'I don't know what you mean,' said Curdie; 'but so you're there, it
doesn't much matter.'

'Oh, yes, it does!' returned Irene.  'I should never have been here but
for her.'

'You can tell me all about it when we get out, then.  There's no time
to lose now,'said Curdie.

And Irene went to work, as fresh as when she began.

'There's such a lot of stones!' she said.  'It will take me a long time
to get them all away.'

'How far on have you got?' asked Curdie.

'I've got about the half away, but the other half is ever so much
bigger.'

'I don't think you will have to move the lower half.  Do you see a slab
laid up against the wall?'

Irene looked, and felt about with her hands, and soon perceived the
outlines of the slab.

'Yes,' she answered, 'I do.'

'Then, I think,' rejoined Curdie, 'when you have cleared the slab about
half-way down, or a bit more, I shall be able to push it over.'

'I must follow my thread,' returned Irene, 'whatever I do.'

'What do you mean?' exclaimed Curdie. 'You will see when you get out,'
answered the princess, and went on harder than ever.

But she was soon satisfied that what Curdie wanted done and what the
thread wanted done were one and the same thing.  For she not only saw
that by following the turns of the thread she had been clearing the
face of the slab, but that, a little more than half-way down, the
thread went through the chink between the slab and the wall into the
place where Curdie was confined, so that she could not follow it any
farther until the slab was out of her way. As soon as she found this,
she said in a right joyous whisper:

'Now, Curdie, I think if you were to give a great push, the slab would
tumble over.'

'Stand quite clear of it, then,' said Curdie, 'and let me know when you
are ready.'

Irene got off the heap, and stood on one side of it.  'Now, Curdie!'
she cried.

Curdie gave a great rush with his shoulder against it.  Out tumbled the
slab on the heap, and out crept Curdie over the top of it.

'You've saved my life, Irene!' he whispered.

'Oh, Curdie! I'm so glad!  Let's get out of this horrid place as fast
as we can.'

'That's easier said than done,' returned he.

'Oh, no, it's quite easy,' said Irene.  'We have only to follow my
thread.  I am sure that it's going to take us out now.'

She had already begun to follow it over the fallen slab into the hole,
while Curdie was searching the floor of the cavern for his pickaxe.

'Here it is!' he cried.  'No, it is not,' he added, in a disappointed
tone.  'What can it be, then?  I declare it's a torch. That is jolly!
It's better almost than my pickaxe.  Much better if it weren't for
those stone shoes!' he went on, as he lighted the torch by blowing the
last embers of the expiring fire.

When he looked up, with the lighted torch casting a glare into the
great darkness of the huge cavern, he caught sight of Irene
disappearing in the hole out of which he had himself just come.

'Where are you going there?' he cried.  'That's not the way out. That's
where I couldn't get out.'

'I know that,' whispered Irene.  'But this is the way my thread goes,
and I must follow it.'

'What nonsense the child talks!' said Curdie to himself.  'I must
follow her, though, and see that she comes to no harm.  She will soon
find she can't get out that way, and then she will come with me.'

So he crept over the slab once more into the hole with his torch in his
hand.  But when he looked about in it, he could see her nowhere.  And
now he discovered that although the hole was narrow, it was much longer
than he had supposed; for in one direction the roof came down very low,
and the hole went off in a narrow passage, of which he could not see
the end.  The princess must have crept in there.  He got on his knees
and one hand, holding the torch with the other, and crept after her.
The hole twisted about, in some parts so low that he could hardly get
through, in others so high that he could not see the roof, but
everywhere it was narrow--far too narrow for a goblin to get through,
and so I presume they never thought that Curdie might.  He was
beginning to feel very uncomfortable lest something should have
befallen the princess, when he heard her voice almost close to his ear,
whispering:

'Aren't you coming, Curdie?'

And when he turned the next corner there she stood waiting for him.

'I knew you couldn't go wrong in that narrow hole, but now you must
keep by me, for here is a great wide place,' she said.

'I can't understand it,' said Curdie, half to himself, half to Irene.

'Never mind,' she returned.  'Wait till we get out.'

Curdie, utterly astonished that she had already got so far, and by a
path he had known nothing of, thought it better to let her do as she
pleased.  'At all events,' he said again to himself, 'I know nothing
about the way, miner as I am; and she seems to think she does know
something about it, though how she should passes my comprehension.  So
she's just as likely to find her way as I am, and as she insists on
taking the lead, I must follow.  We can't be much worse off than we
are, anyhow.'  Reasoning thus, he followed her a few steps, and came
out in another great cavern, across which Irene walked in a straight
line, as confidently as if she knew every step of the way.  Curdie went
on after her, flashing his torch about, and trying to see something of
what lay around them. Suddenly he started back a pace as the light fell
upon something close by which Irene was passing.  It was a platform of
rock raised a few feet from the floor and covered with sheepskins, upon
which lay two horrible figures asleep, at once recognized by Curdie as
the king and queen of the goblins.  He lowered his torch instantly lest
the light should awake them.  As he did so it flashed upon his pickaxe,
lying by the side of the queen, whose hand lay close by the handle of
it.

'Stop one moment,' he whispered.  'Hold my torch, and don't let the
light on their faces.'

Irene shuddered when she saw the frightful creatures, whom she had
passed without observing them, but she did as he requested, and turning
her back, held the torch low in front of her.  Curdie drew his pickaxe
carefully away, and as he did so spied one of her feet, projecting from
under the skins.  The great clumsy granite shoe, exposed thus to his
hand, was a temptation not to be resisted.  He laid hold of it, and,
with cautious efforts, drew it off.  The moment he succeeded, he saw to
his astonishment that what he had sung in ignorance, to annoy the
queen, was actually true: she had six horrible toes.  Overjoyed at his
success, and seeing by the huge bump in the sheepskins where the other
foot was, he proceeded to lift them gently, for, if he could only
succeed in carrying away the other shoe as well, he would be no more
afraid of the goblins than of so many flies.  But as he pulled at the
second shoe the queen gave a growl and sat up in bed.  The same instant
the king awoke also and sat up beside her.

'Run, Irene!' cried Curdie, for though he was not now in the least
afraid for himself, he was for the princess.

Irene looked once round, saw the fearful creatures awake, and like the
wise princess she was, dashed the torch on the ground and extinguished
it, crying out:

'Here, Curdie, take my hand.'

He darted to her side, forgetting neither the queen's shoe nor his
pickaxe, and caught hold of her hand, as she sped fearlessly where her
thread guided her.  They heard the queen give a great bellow; but they
had a good start, for it would be some time before they could get
torches lighted to pursue them.  Just as they thought they saw a gleam
behind them, the thread brought them to a very narrow opening, through
which Irene crept easily, and Curdie with difficulty.

'Now,'said Curdie; 'I think we shall be safe.'

'Of course we shall,' returned Irene.  'Why do you think so?'asked
Curdie.

'Because my grandmother is taking care of us.'

'That's all nonsense,' said Curdie.  'I don't know what you mean.'

'Then if you don't know what I mean, what right have you to call it
nonsense?' asked the princess, a little offended.

'I beg your pardon, Irene,' said Curdie; 'I did not mean to vex you.'

'Of course not,' returned the princess.  'But why do you think we shall
be safe?'

'Because the king and queen are far too stout to get through that hole.'

'There might be ways round,' said the princess.

'To be sure there might: we are not out of it yet,' acknowledged Curdie.

'But what do you mean by the king and queen?' asked the princess. 'I
should never call such creatures as those a king and a queen.'

'Their own people do, though,' answered Curdie.

The princess asked more questions, and Curdie, as they walked leisurely
along, gave her a full account, not only of the character and habits of
the goblins, so far as he knew them, but of his own adventures with
them, beginning from the very night after that in which he had met her
and Lootie upon the mountain.  When he had finished, he begged Irene to
tell him how it was that she had come to his rescue.  So Irene too had
to tell a long story, which she did in rather a roundabout manner,
interrupted by many questions concerning things she had not explained.
But her tale, as he did not believe more than half of it, left
everything as unaccountable to him as before, and he was nearly as much
perplexed as to what he must think of the princess.  He could not
believe that she was deliberately telling stories, and the only
conclusion he could come to was that Lootie had been playing the child
tricks, inventing no end of lies to frighten her for her own purposes.

'But how ever did Lootie come to let you go into the mountains
alone?'he asked.

'Lootie knows nothing about it.  I left her fast asleep--at least I
think so.  I hope my grandmother won't let her get into trouble, for it
wasn't her fault at all, as my grandmother very well knows.'

'But how did you find your way to me?' persisted Curdie.

'I told you already,' answered Irene; 'by keeping my finger upon my
grandmother's thread, as I am doing now.'

'You don't mean you've got the thread there?'

'Of course I do.  I have told you so ten times already.  I have
hardly--except when I was removing the stones--taken my finger off it.
There!' she added, guiding Curdie's hand to the thread, 'you feel it
yourself--don't you?'

'I feel nothing at all,' replied Curdie. 'Then what can be the matter
with your finger?  I feel it perfectly.  To be sure it is very thin,
and in the sunlight looks just like the thread of a spider, though
there are many of them twisted together to make it--but for all that I
can't think why you shouldn't feel it as well as I do.'

Curdie was too polite to say he did not believe there was any thread
there at all.  What he did say was:

'Well, I can make nothing of it.'

'I can, though, and you must be glad of that, for it will do for both
of us.'

'We're not out yet,' said Curdie.

'We soon shall be,' returned Irene confidently.  And now the thread
went downwards, and led Irene's hand to a hole in the floor of the
cavern, whence came a sound of running water which they had been
hearing for some time.

'It goes into the ground now, Curdie,' she said, stopping.

He had been listening to another sound, which his practised ear had
caught long ago, and which also had been growing louder.  It was the
noise the goblin-miners made at their work, and they seemed to be at no
great distance now.  Irene heard it the moment she stopped.

'What is that noise?' she asked.  'Do you know, Curdie?'

'Yes.  It is the goblins digging and burrowing,' he answered.

'And you don't know what they do it for?'

'No; I haven't the least idea.  Would you like to see them?' he asked,
wishing to have another try after their secret.

'If my thread took me there, I shouldn't much mind; but I don't want to
see them, and I can't leave my thread.  It leads me down into the hole,
and we had better go at once.'

'Very well.  Shall I go in first?' said Curdie.

'No; better not.  You can't feel the thread,' she answered, stepping
down through a narrow break in the floor of the cavern. 'Oh!' she
cried, 'I am in the water.  It is running strong--but it is not deep,
and there is just room to walk.  Make haste, Curdie.'

He tried, but the hole was too small for him to get in.

'Go on a little bit he said, shouldering his pickaxe.  In a few moments
he had cleared a larger opening and followed her.  They went on, down
and down with the running water, Curdie getting more and more afraid it
was leading them to some terrible gulf in the heart of the mountain.
In one or two places he had to break away the rock to make room before
even Irene could get through--at least without hurting herself.  But at
length they spied a glimmer of light, and in a minute more they were
almost blinded by the full sunlight, into which they emerged.  It was
some little time before the princess could see well enough to discover
that they stood in her own garden, close by the seat on which she and
her king-papa had sat that afternoon.  They had come out by the channel
of the little stream.  She danced and clapped her hands with delight.

'Now, Curdie!' she cried, 'won't you believe what I told you about my
grandmother and her thread?'

For she had felt all the time that Curdie was not believing what she
told him.

'There!--don't you see it shining on before us?' she added.

'I don't see anything,' persisted Curdie.

'Then you must believe without seeing,' said the princess; 'for you
can't deny it has brought us out of the mountain.'

'I can't deny we are out of the mountain, and I should be very
ungrateful indeed to deny that you had brought me out of it.'

'I couldn't have done it but for the thread,' persisted Irene.

'That's the part I don't understand.'

'Well, come along, and Lootie will get you something to eat.  I am sure
you must want it very much.'

'Indeed I do.  But my father and mother will be so anxious about me, I
must make haste--first up the mountain to tell my mother, and then down
into the mine again to let my father know.'

'Very well, Curdie; but you can't get out without coming this way, and
I will take you through the house, for that is nearest.'

They met no one by the way, for, indeed, as before, the people were
here and there and everywhere searching for the princess.  When they
got in Irene found that the thread, as she had half expected, went up
the old staircase, and a new thought struck her.  She turned to Curdie
and said:

'My grandmother wants me.  Do come up with me and see her.  Then you
will know that I have been telling you the truth.  Do come--to please
me, Curdie.  I can't bear you should think what I say is not true.'

'I never doubted you believed what you said,' returned Curdie.  'I only
thought you had some fancy in your head that was not correct.' 'But do
come, dear Curdie.'

The little miner could not withstand this appeal, and though he felt
shy in what seemed to him a huge grand house, he yielded, and followed
her up the stair.



CHAPTER 22

The Old Lady and Curdie

Up the stair then they went, and the next and the next, and through the
long rows of empty rooms, and up the little tower stair, Irene growing
happier and happier as she ascended.  There was no answer when she
knocked at length at the door of the workroom, nor could she hear any
sound of the spinning-wheel, and once more her heart sank within her,
but only for one moment, as she turned and knocked at the other door.

'Come in,' answered the sweet voice of her grandmother, and Irene
opened the door and entered, followed by Curdie.

'You darling!' cried the lady, who was seated by a fire of red roses
mingled with white.  'I've been waiting for you, and indeed getting a
little anxious about you, and beginning to think whether I had not
better go and fetch you myself.'

As she spoke she took the little princess in her arms and placed her
upon her lap.  She was dressed in white now, and looking if possible
more lovely than ever.

'I've brought Curdie, grandmother.  He wouldn't believe what I told him
and so I've brought him.'

'Yes--I see him.  He is a good boy, Curdie, and a brave boy. Aren't you
glad you've got him out?'

'Yes, grandmother.  But it wasn't very good of him not to believe me
when I was telling him the truth.'

'People must believe what they can, and those who believe more must not
be hard upon those who believe less.  I doubt if you would have
believed it all yourself if you hadn't seen some of it.'

'Ah! yes, grandmother, I dare say.  I'm sure you are right.  But he'll
believe now.'

'I don't know that,' replied her grandmother.

'Won't you, Curdie?' said Irene, looking round at him as she asked the
question.  He was standing in the middle of the floor, staring, and
looking strangely bewildered.  This she thought came of his
astonishment at the beauty of the lady.

'Make a bow to my grandmother, Curdie,' she said.

'I don't see any grandmother,' answered Curdie rather gruffly.

'Don't see my grandmother, when I'm sitting in her lap?' exclaimed the
princess.

'No, I don't,' reiterated Curdie, in an offended tone.

'Don't you see the lovely fire of roses--white ones amongst them this
time?' asked Irene, almost as bewildered as he.

'No, I don't,' answered Curdie, almost sulkily.

'Nor the blue bed?  Nor the rose-coloured counterpane?--Nor the
beautiful light, like the moon, hanging from the roof?'

'You're making game of me, Your Royal Highness; and after what we have
come through together this day, I don't think it is kind of you,' said
Curdie, feeling very much hurt.

'Then what do you see?' asked Irene, who perceived at once that for her
not to believe him was at least as bad as for him not to believe her.

'I see a big, bare, garret-room--like the one in mother's cottage, only
big enough to take the cottage itself in, and leave a good margin all
round,' answered Curdie.

'And what more do you see?'

'I see a tub, and a heap of musty straw, and a withered apple, and a
ray of sunlight coming through a hole in the middle of the roof and
shining on your head, and making all the place look a curious dusky
brown.  I think you had better drop it, princess, and go down to the
nursery, like a good girl.'

'But don't you hear my grandmother talking to me?' asked Irene, almost
crying.

'No.  I hear the cooing of a lot of pigeons.  If you won't come down, I
will go without you.  I think that will be better anyhow, for I'm sure
nobody who met us would believe a word we said to them.  They would
think we made it all up.  I don't expect anybody but my own father and
mother to believe me.  They know I wouldn't tell a story.'

'And yet you won't believe me, Curdie?' expostulated the princess, now
fairly crying with vexation and sorrow at the gulf between her and
Curdie.

'No.  I can't, and I can't help it,' said Curdie, turning to leave the
room.

'What SHALL I do, grandmother?' sobbed the princess, turning her face
round upon the lady's bosom, and shaking with suppressed sobs.

'You must give him time,' said her grandmother; 'and you must be
content not to be believed for a while.  It is very hard to bear; but I
have had to bear it, and shall have to bear it many a time yet.  I will
take care of what Curdie thinks of you in the end. You must let him go
now.'

'You're not coming, are you?' asked Curdie.

'No, Curdie; my grandmother says I must let you go.  Turn to the right
when you get to the bottom of all the stairs, and that will take you to
the hall where the great door is.'

'Oh! I don't doubt I can find my way--without you, princess, or your
old grannie's thread either,' said Curdie quite rudely.

'Oh, Curdie!  Curdie!'

'I wish I had gone home at once.  I'm very much obliged to you, Irene,
for getting me out of that hole, but I wish you hadn't made a fool of
me afterwards.'

He said this as he opened the door, which he left open, and, without
another word, went down the stair.  Irene listened with dismay to his
departing footsteps.  Then turning again to the lady:

'What does it all mean, grandmother?' she sobbed, and burst into fresh
tears.

'It means, my love, that I did not mean to show myself.  Curdie is not
yet able to believe some things.  Seeing is not believing--it is only
seeing.  You remember I told you that if Lootie were to see me, she
would rub her eyes, forget the half she saw, and call the other half
nonsense.'

'Yes; but I should have thought Curdie--'

'You are right.  Curdie is much farther on than Lootie, and you will
see what will come of it.  But in the meantime you must be content, I
say, to be misunderstood for a while.  We are all very anxious to be
understood, and it is very hard not to be.  But there is one thing much
more necessary.'

'What is that, grandmother?'

'To understand other people.'

'Yes, grandmother.  I must be fair--for if I'm not fair to other
people, I'm not worth being understood myself.  I see.  So as Curdie
can't help it, I will not be vexed with him, but just wait.'

'There's my own dear child,' said her grandmother, and pressed her
close to her bosom.

'Why weren't you in your workroom when we came up, grandmother?' asked
Irene, after a few moments' silence.

'If I had been there, Curdie would have seen me well enough.  But why
should I be there rather than in this beautiful room?'

'I thought you would be spinning.'

'I've nobody to spin for just at present.  I never spin without knowing
for whom I am spinning.'

'That reminds me--there is one thing that puzzles me,' said the
princess: 'how are you to get the thread out of the mountain again?
Surely you won't have to make another for me?  That would be such a
trouble!'

The lady set her down and rose and went to the fire.  Putting in her
hand, she drew it out again and held up the shining ball between her
finger and thumb.

'I've got it now, you see,' she said, coming back to the princess, 'all
ready for you when you want it.'

Going to her cabinet, she laid it in the same drawer as before.

'And here is your ring,' she added, taking it from the little finger of
her left hand and putting it on the forefinger of Irene's right hand.

'Oh, thank you, grandmother! I feel so safe now!'

'You are very tired, my child,' the lady went on.  'Your hands are hurt
with the stones, and I have counted nine bruises on you.  Just look
what you are like.'

And she held up to her a little mirror which she had brought from the
cabinet.  The princess burst into a merry laugh at the sight. She was
so draggled with the stream and dirty with creeping through narrow
places, that if she had seen the reflection without knowing it was a
reflection, she would have taken herself for some gipsy child whose
face was washed and hair combed about once in a month. The lady laughed
too, and lifting her again upon her knee, took off her cloak and
night-gown.  Then she carried her to the side of the room.  Irene
wondered what she was going to do with her, but asked no
questions--only starting a little when she found that she was going to
lay her in the large silver bath; for as she looked into it, again she
saw no bottom, but the stars shining miles away, as it seemed, in a
great blue gulf.  Her hands closed involuntarily on the beautiful arms
that held her, and that was all.

The lady pressed her once more to her bosom, saying:

'Do not be afraid, my child.'

'No, grandmother,' answered the princess, with a little gasp; and the
next instant she sank in the clear cool water.

When she opened her eyes, she saw nothing but a strange lovely blue
over and beneath and all about her.  The lady, and the beautiful room,
had vanished from her sight, and she seemed utterly alone. But instead
of being afraid, she felt more than happy--perfectly blissful.  And
from somewhere came the voice of the lady, singing a strange sweet
song, of which she could distinguish every word; but of the sense she
had only a feeling--no understanding.  Nor could she remember a single
line after it was gone.  It vanished, like the poetry in a dream, as
fast as it came.  In after years, however, she would sometimes fancy
that snatches of melody suddenly rising in her brain must be little
phrases and fragments of the air of that song; and the very fancy would
make her happier, and abler to do her duty.

How long she lay in the water she did not know.  It seemed a long
time--not from weariness but from pleasure.  But at last she felt the
beautiful hands lay hold of her, and through the gurgling water she was
lifted out into the lovely room.  The lady carried her to the fire, and
sat down with her in her lap, and dried her tenderly with the softest
towel.  It was so different from Lootie's drying. When the lady had
done, she stooped to the fire, and drew from it her night-gown, as
white as snow.

'How delicious!' exclaimed the princess.  'It smells of all the roses
in the world, I think.'

When she stood up on the floor she felt as if she had been made over
again.  Every bruise and all weariness were gone, and her hands were
soft and whole as ever.

'Now I am going to put you to bed for a good sleep,' said her
grandmother.

'But what will Lootie be thinking?  And what am I to say to her when
she asks me where I have been?'

'Don't trouble yourself about it.  You will find it all come right,'
said her grandmother, and laid her into the blue bed, under the rosy
counterpane.

'There is just one thing more,' said Irene.  'I am a little anxious
about Curdie.  As I brought him into the house, I ought to have seen
him safe on his way home.'

'I took care of all that,' answered the lady.  'I told you to let him
go, and therefore I was bound to look after him.  Nobody saw him, and
he is now eating a good dinner in his mother's cottage far up in the
mountain.'

'Then I will go to sleep,' said Irene, and in a few minutes she was
fast asleep.



CHAPTER 23

Curdie and His Mother

Curdie went up the mountain neither whistling nor singing, for he was
vexed with Irene for taking him in, as he called it; and he was vexed
with himself for having spoken to her so angrily.  His mother gave a
cry of joy when she saw him, and at once set about getting him
something to eat, asking him questions all the time, which he did not
answer so cheerfully as usual.  When his meal was ready, she left him
to eat it, and hurried to the mine to let his father know he was safe.
When she came back, she found him fast asleep upon her bed; nor did he
wake until his father came home in the evening.

'Now, Curdie,' his mother said, as they sat at supper, 'tell us the
whole story from beginning to end, just as it all happened.'

Curdie obeyed, and told everything to the point where they came out
upon the lawn in the garden of the king's house.

'And what happened after that?' asked his mother.  'You haven't told us
all.  You ought to be very happy at having got away from those demons,
and instead of that I never saw you so gloomy.  There must be something
more.  Besides, you do not speak of that lovely child as I should like
to hear you.  She saved your life at the risk of her own, and yet
somehow you don't seem to think much of it.'

'She talked such nonsense' answered Curdie, 'and told me a pack of
things that weren't a bit true; and I can't get over it.'

'What were they?' asked his father.  'Your mother may be able to throw
some light upon them.'

Then Curdie made a clean breast of it, and told them everything.

They all sat silent for some time, pondering the strange tale.  At last
Curdie's mother spoke.

'You confess, my boy,' she said, 'there is something about the whole
affair you do not understand?'

'Yes, of course, mother,' he answered.  'I cannot understand how a
child knowing nothing about the mountain, or even that I was shut up in
it, should come all that way alone, straight to where I was; and then,
after getting me out of the hole, lead me out of the mountain too,
where I should not have known a step of the way if it had been as light
as in the open air.'

'Then you have no right to say what she told you was not true.  She did
take you out, and she must have had something to guide her: why not a
thread as well as a rope, or anything else?  There is something you
cannot explain, and her explanation may be the right one.'

'It's no explanation at all, mother; and I can't believe it.'

'That may be only because you do not understand it.  If you did, you
would probably find it was an explanation, and believe it thoroughly.
I don't blame you for not being able to believe it, but I do blame you
for fancying such a child would try to deceive you.  Why should she?
Depend upon it, she told you all she knew. Until you had found a better
way of accounting for it all, you might at least have been more sparing
of your judgement.'

'That is what something inside me has been saying all the time,' said
Curdie, hanging down his head.  'But what do you make of the
grandmother?  That is what I can't get over.  To take me up to an old
garret, and try to persuade me against the sight of my own eyes that it
was a beautiful room, with blue walls and silver stars, and no end of
things in it, when there was nothing there but an old tub and a
withered apple and a heap of straw and a sunbeam!  It was too bad!  She
might have had some old woman there at least to pass for her precious
grandmother!'

'Didn't she speak as if she saw those other things herself, Curdie?'

'Yes.  That's what bothers me.  You would have thought she really meant
and believed that she saw every one of the things she talked about.
And not one of them there!  It was too bad, I say.'

'Perhaps some people can see things other people can't see, Curdie,'
said his mother very gravely.  'I think I will tell you something I saw
myself once--only Perhaps You won't believe me either!'

'Oh, mother, mother!' cried Curdie, bursting into tears; 'I don't
deserve that, surely!'

'But what I am going to tell you is very strange,' persisted his
mother; 'and if having heard it you were to say I must have been
dreaming, I don't know that I should have any right to be vexed with
you, though I know at least that I was not asleep.'

'Do tell me, mother.  Perhaps it will help me to think better of the
princess.'

'That's why I am tempted to tell you,' replied his mother.  'But first,
I may as well mention that, according to old whispers, there is
something more than common about the king's family; and the queen was
of the same blood, for they were cousins of some degree. There were
strange stories told concerning them--all good stories--but strange,
very strange.  What they were I cannot tell, for I only remember the
faces of my grandmother and my mother as they talked together about
them.  There was wonder and awe--not fear--in their eyes, and they
whispered, and never spoke aloud.  But what I saw myself was this: Your
father was going to work in the mine one night, and I had been down
with his supper.  It was soon after we were married, and not very long
before you were born.  He came with me to the mouth of the mine, and
left me to go home alone, for I knew the way almost as well as the
floor of our own cottage.  It was pretty dark, and in some parts of the
road where the rocks overhung nearly quite dark.  But I got along
perfectly well, never thinking of being afraid, until I reached a spot
you know well enough, Curdie, where the path has to make a sharp turn
out of the way of a great rock on the left-hand side.  When I got
there, I was suddenly surrounded by about half a dozen of the cobs, the
first I had ever seen, although I had heard tell of them often enough.
One of them blocked up the path, and they all began tormenting and
teasing me in a way it makes me shudder to think of even now.'

'If I had only been with you!' cried father and son in a breath.

The mother gave a funny little smile, and went on.

'They had some of their horrible creatures with them too, and I must
confess I was dreadfully frightened.  They had torn my clothes very
much, and I was afraid they were going to tear myself to pieces, when
suddenly a great white soft light shone upon me.  I looked up.  A broad
ray, like a shining road, came down from a large globe of silvery
light, not very high up, indeed not quite so high as the horizon--so it
could not have been a new star or another moon or anything of that
sort.  The cobs dropped persecuting me, and looked dazed, and I thought
they were going to run away, but presently they began again.  The same
moment, however, down the path from the globe of light came a bird,
shining like silver in the sun.  It gave a few rapid flaps first, and
then, with its wings straight out, shot, sliding down the slope of the
light.  It looked to me just like a white pigeon.  But whatever it was,
when the cobs caught sight of it coming straight down upon them, they
took to their heels and scampered away across the mountain, leaving me
safe, only much frightened.  As soon as it had sent them off, the bird
went gliding again up the light, and the moment it reached the globe
the light disappeared, just as if a shutter had been closed over a
window, and I saw it no More.  But I had no more trouble with the cobs
that night or ever after.'

'How strange!' exclaimed Curdie.

'Yes, it was strange; but I can't help believing it, whether you do or
not,' said his mother.

'It's exactly as your mother told it to me the very next morning,' said
his father.

'You don't think I'm doubting my own mother?' cried Curdie. 'There are
other people in the world quite as well worth believing as your own
mother,' said his mother.  'I don't know that she's so much the fitter
to be believed that she happens to be your mother, Mr. Curdie.  There
are mothers far more likely to tell lies than the little girl I saw
talking to the primroses a few weeks ago.  If she were to lie I should
begin to doubt my own word.'

'But princesses have told lies as well as other people,' said Curdie.

'Yes, but not princesses like that child.  She's a good girl, I am
certain, and that's more than being a princess.  Depend upon it you
will have to be sorry for behaving so to her, Curdie.  You ought at
least to have held your tongue.'

'I am sorry now,' answered Curdie.

'You ought to go and tell her so, then.'

'I don't see how I could manage that.  They wouldn't let a miner boy
like me have a word with her alone; and I couldn't tell her before that
nurse of hers.  She'd be asking ever so many questions, and I don't
know how many the little princess would like me to answer.  She told me
that Lootie didn't know anything about her coming to get me out of the
mountain.  I am certain she would have prevented her somehow if she had
known it.  But I may have a chance before long, and meantime I must try
to do something for her.  I think, father, I have got on the track at
last.'

'Have you, indeed, my boy?' said Peter.  'I am sure you deserve some
success; you have worked very hard for it.  What have you found out?'

'It's difficult, you know, father, inside the mountain, especially in
the dark, and not knowing what turns you have taken, to tell the lie of
things outside.'

'Impossible, my boy, without a chart, or at least a compass,' returned
his father.

'Well, I think I have nearly discovered in what direction the cobs are
mining.  If I am right, I know something else that I can put to it, and
then one and one will make three.'

'They very often do, Curdie, as we miners ought to be very well aware.
Now tell us, my boy, what the two things are, and see whether we can
guess at the same third as you.'

'I don't see what that has to do with the princess,' interposed his
mother.

'I will soon let you see that, mother.  Perhaps you may think me
foolish, but until I am sure there, is nothing in my present fancy, I
am more determined than ever to go on with my observations.  Just as we
came to the channel by which we got out, I heard the miners at work
somewhere near--I think down below us.  Now since I began to watch
them, they have mined a good half-mile, in a straight line; and so far
as I am aware, they are working in no other part of the mountain.  But
I never could tell in what direction they were going.  When we came out
in the king's garden, however, I thought at once whether it was
possible they were working towards the king's house; and what I want to
do tonight is to make sure whether they are or not.  I will take a
light with me--'

'Oh, Curdie,' cried his mother, 'then they will see you.'

'I'm no more afraid of them now than I was before,' rejoined Curdie,
'now that I've got this precious shoe.  They can't make another such in
a hurry, and one bare foot will do for my purpose. Woman as she may be,
I won't spare her next time.  But I shall be careful with my light, for
I don't want them to see me.  I won't stick it in my hat.'

'Go on, then, and tell us what you mean to do.'

'I mean to take a bit of paper with me and a pencil, and go in at the
mouth of the stream by which we came out.  I shall mark on the paper as
near as I can the angle of every turning I take until I find the cobs
at work, and so get a good idea in what direction they are going.  If
it should prove to be nearly parallel with the stream, I shall know it
is towards the king's house they are working.'

'And what if you should?  How much wiser will you be then?'

'Wait a minute, mother dear.  I told you that when I came upon the
royal family in the cave, they were talking of their prince--Harelip,
they called him--marrying a sun-woman--that means one of us--one with
toes to her feet.  Now in the speech one of them made that night at
their great gathering, of which I heard only a part, he said that peace
would be secured for a generation at least by the pledge the prince
would hold for the good behaviour of her relatives: that's what he
said, and he must have meant the sun-woman the prince was to marry.  I
am quite sure the king is much too proud to wish his son to marry any
but a princess, and much too knowing to fancy that his having a peasant
woman for a wife would be of any great advantage to them.'

'I see what you are driving at now,' said his mother.

'But,' said his father, 'our king would dig the mountain to the plain
before he would have his princess the wife of a cob, if he were ten
times a prince.'

'Yes; but they think so much of themselves!' said his mother. 'Small
creatures always do.  The bantam is the proudest cock in my little
yard.'

'And I fancy,' said Curdie, 'if they once got her, they would tell the
king they would kill her except he consented to the marriage.'

'They might say so,' said his father, 'but they wouldn't kill her; they
would keep her alive for the sake of the hold it gave them over our
king.  Whatever he did to them, they would threaten to do the same to
the princess.'

'And they are bad enough to torment her just for their own amusement--I
know that,' said his mother.

'Anyhow, I will keep a watch on them, and see what they are up to,'
said Curdie.  'It's too horrible to think of.  I daren't let myself do
it.  But they shan't have her--at least if I can help it.  So, mother
dear--my clue is all right--will you get me a bit of paper and a pencil
and a lump of pease pudding, and I will set out at once.  I saw a place
where I can climb over the wall of the garden quite easily.'

'You must mind and keep out of the way of the men on the watch,' said
his mother.

'That I will.  I don't want them to know anything about it.  They would
spoil it all.  The cobs would only try some other plan--they are such
obstinate creatures!  I shall take good care, mother. They won't kill
and eat me either, if they should come upon me.  So you needn't mind
them.'

His mother got him what he had asked for, and Curdie set out. Close
beside the door by which the princess left the garden for the mountain
stood a great rock, and by climbing it Curdie got over the wall.  He
tied his clue to a stone just inside the channel of the stream, and
took his pickaxe with him.  He had not gone far before he encountered a
horrid creature coming towards the mouth.  The spot was too narrow for
two of almost any size or shape, and besides Curdie had no wish to let
the creature pass.  Not being able to use his pickaxe, however, he had
a severe struggle with him, and it was only after receiving many bites,
some of them bad, that he succeeded in killing him with his
pocket-knife.  Having dragged him out, he made haste to get in again
before another should stop up the way.

I need not follow him farther in this night's adventures.  He returned
to his breakfast, satisfied that the goblins were mining in the
direction of the palace--on so low a level that their intention must,
he thought, be to burrow under the walls of the king's house, and rise
up inside it--in order, he fully believed, to lay hands on the little
princess, and carry her off for a wife to their horrid Harelip.



CHAPTER 24

Irene Behaves Like a Princess

When the princess awoke from the sweetest of sleeps, she found her
nurse bending over her, the housekeeper looking over the nurse's
shoulder, and the laundry-maid looking over the housekeeper's. The room
was full of women-servants; and the gentlemen-at-arms, with a long
column of servants behind them, were peeping, or trying to peep in at
the door of the nursery.

'Are those horrid creatures gone?' asked the princess, remembering
first what had terrified her in the morning.

'You naughty, naughty little princess!' cried Lootie.

Her face was very pale, with red streaks in it, and she looked as if
she were going to shake her; but Irene said nothing--only waited to
hear what should come next.

'How could you get under the clothes like that, and make us all fancy
you were lost!  And keep it up all day too!  You are the most obstinate
child!  It's anything but fun to us, I can tell you!'

It was the only way the nurse could account for her disappearance.

'I didn't do that, Lootie,' said Irene, very quietly.

'Don't tell stories!' cried her nurse quite rudely.

'I shall tell you nothing at all,' said Irene.

'That's just as bad,' said the nurse.

'Just as bad to say nothing at all as to tell stories?' exclaimed the
princess.  'I will ask my papa about that.  He won't say so. And I
don't think he will like you to say so.'

'Tell me directly what you mean by it!' screamed the nurse, half wild
with anger at the princess and fright at the possible consequences to
herself.

'When I tell you the truth, Lootie,' said the princess, who somehow did
not feel at all angry, 'you say to me "Don't tell stories": it seems I
must tell stories before you will believe me.'

'You are very rude, princess,' said the nurse.

'You are so rude, Lootie, that I will not speak to you again till you
are sorry.  Why should I, when I know you will not believe me?'
returned the princess.  For she did know perfectly well that if she
were to tell Lootie what she had been about, the more she went on to
tell her, the less would she believe her.

'You are the most provoking child!' cried her nurse.  'You deserve to
be well punished for your wicked behaviour.'

'Please, Mrs Housekeeper,' said the princess, 'will you take me to your
room, and keep me till my king-papa comes?  I will ask him to come as
soon as he can.'

Every one stared at these words.  Up to this moment they had all
regarded her as little more than a baby.

But the housekeeper was afraid of the nurse, and sought to patch
matters up, saying:

'I am sure, princess, nursie did not mean to be rude to you.'

'I do not think my papa would wish me to have a nurse who spoke to me
as Lootie does.  If she thinks I tell lies, she had better either say
so to my papa, or go away.  Sir Walter, will you take charge of me?'

'With the greatest of pleasure, princess,' answered the captain of the
gentlemen-at-arms, walking with his great stride into the room.

The crowd of servants made eager way for him, and he bowed low before
the little princess's bed.  'I shall send my servant at once, on the
fastest horse in the stable, to tell your king-papa that Your Royal
Highness desires his presence.  When you have chosen one of these
under-servants to wait upon you, I shall order the room to be cleared.'

'Thank you very much, Sir Walter,' said the princess, and her eye
glanced towards a rosy-cheeked girl who had lately come to the house as
a scullery-maid.

But when Lootie saw the eyes of her dear princess going in search of
another instead of her, she fell upon her knees by the bedside, and
burst into a great cry of distress.

'I think, Sir Walter,' said the princess, 'I will keep Lootie.  But I
put myself under your care; and you need not trouble my king-papa until
I speak to you again.  Will you all please to go away?  I am quite safe
and well, and I did not hide myself for the sake either of amusing
myself, or of troubling my people.  Lootie, will you please to dress
me.'



CHAPTER 25

Curdie Comes to Grief

Everything was for some time quiet above ground.  The king was still
away in a distant part of his dominions.  The men-at-arms kept watching
about the house.  They had been considerably astonished by finding at
the foot of the rock in the garden the hideous body of the goblin
creature killed by Curdie; but they came to the conclusion that it had
been slain in the mines, and had crept out there to die; and except an
occasional glimpse of a live one they saw nothing to cause alarm.
Curdie kept watching in the mountain, and the goblins kept burrowing
deeper into the earth.  As long as they went deeper there was, Curdie
judged, no immediate danger.

To Irene the summer was as full of pleasure as ever, and for a long
time, although she often thought of her grandmother during the day, and
often dreamed about her at night, she did not see her.  The kids and
the flowers were as much her delight as ever, and she made as much
friendship with the miners' children she met on the mountain as Lootie
would permit; but Lootie had very foolish notions concerning the
dignity of a princess, not understanding that the truest princess is
just the one who loves all her brothers and sisters best, and who is
most able to do them good by being humble towards them.  At the same
time she was considerably altered for the better in her behaviour to
the princess.  She could not help seeing that she was no longer a mere
child, but wiser than her age would account for.  She kept foolishly
whispering to the servants, however--sometimes that the princess was
not right in her mind, sometimes that she was too good to live, and
other nonsense of the same sort.

All this time Curdie had to be sorry, without a chance of confessing,
that he had behaved so unkindly to the princess.  This perhaps made him
the more diligent in his endeavours to serve her. His mother and he
often talked on the subject, and she comforted him, and told him she
was sure he would some day have the opportunity he so much desired.

Here I should like to remark, for the sake of princes and princesses in
general, that it is a low and contemptible thing to refuse to confess a
fault, or even an error.  If a true princess has done wrong, she is
always uneasy until she has had an opportunity of throwing the
wrongness away from her by saying: 'I did it; and I wish I had not; and
I am sorry for having done it.' So you see there is some ground for
supposing that Curdie was not a miner only, but a prince as well.  Many
such instances have been known in the world's history.

At length, however, he began to see signs of a change in the
proceedings of the goblin excavators: they were going no deeper, but
had commenced running on a level; and he watched them, therefore, more
closely than ever.  All at once, one night, coming to a slope of very
hard rock, they began to ascend along the inclined plane of its
surface.  Having reached its top, they went again on a level for a
night or two, after which they began to ascend once more, and kept on
at a pretty steep angle.  At length Curdie judged it time to transfer
his observation to another quarter, and the next night he did not go to
the mine at all; but, leaving his pickaxe and clue at home, and taking
only his usual lumps of bread and pease pudding, went down the mountain
to the king's house.  He climbed over the wall, and remained in the
garden the whole night, creeping on hands and knees from one spot to
the other, and lying at full length with his ear to the ground,
listening.  But he heard nothing except the tread of the men-at-arms as
they marched about, whose observation, as the night was cloudy and
there was no moon, he had little difficulty in avoiding.  For several
following nights he continued to haunt the garden and listen, but with
no success.

At length, early one evening, whether it was that he had got careless
of his own safety, or that the growing moon had become strong enough to
expose him, his watching came to a sudden end.  He was creeping from
behind the rock where the stream ran out, for he had been listening all
round it in the hope it might convey to his ear some indication of the
whereabouts of the goblin miners, when just as he came into the
moonlight on the lawn, a whizz in his ear and a blow upon his leg
startled him.  He instantly squatted in the hope of eluding further
notice.  But when he heard the sound of running feet, he jumped up to
take the chance of escape by flight. He fell, however, with a keen
shoot of pain, for the bolt of a crossbow had wounded his leg, and the
blood was now streaming from it.  He was instantly laid Hold of by two
or three of the men-at-arms.  It was useless to struggle, and he
submitted in silence.

'It's a boy!' cried several of them together, in a tone of amazement.
'I thought it was one of those demons.  What are you about here?'

'Going to have a little rough usage, apparently,' said Curdie,
laughing, as the men shook him.

'Impertinence will do you no good.  You have no business here in the
king's grounds, and if you don't give a true account of yourself, you
shall fare as a thief.'

'Why, what else could he be?' said one.

'He might have been after a lost kid, you know,' suggested another.

'I see no good in trying to excuse him.  He has no business here,
anyhow.'

'Let me go away, then, if you please,' said Curdie.

'But we don't please--not except you give a good account of yourself.'

'I don't feel quite sure whether I can trust you,' said Curdie.

'We are the king's own men-at-arms,' said the captain courteously, for
he was taken with Curdie's appearance and courage.

'Well, I will tell you all about it--if you will promise to listen to
me and not do anything rash.'

'I call that cool!' said one of the party, laughing.  'He will tell us
what mischief he was about, if we promise to do as pleases him.'

'I was about no mischief,' said Curdie.

But ere he could say more he turned faint, and fell senseless on the
grass.  Then first they discovered that the bolt they had shot, taking
him for one of the goblin creatures, had wounded him.

They carried him into the house and laid him down in the hall.  The
report spread that they had caught a robber, and the servants crowded
in to see the villain.  Amongst the rest came the nurse. The moment she
saw him she exclaimed with indignation:

'I declare it's the same young rascal of a miner that was rude to me
and the princess on the mountain.  He actually wanted to kiss the
princess.  I took good care of that--the wretch!  And he was prowling
about, was he?  Just like his impudence!' The princess being fast
asleep, she could misrepresent at her pleasure.

When he heard this, the captain, although he had considerable doubt of
its truth, resolved to keep Curdie a prisoner until they could search
into the affair.  So, after they had brought him round a little, and
attended to his wound, which was rather a bad one, they laid him, still
exhausted from the loss of blood, upon a mattress in a disused
room--one of those already so often mentioned--and locked the door, and
left him.  He passed a troubled night, and in the morning they found
him talking wildly.  In the evening he came to himself, but felt very
weak, and his leg was exceedingly painful.  Wondering where he was, and
seeing one of the men-at-arms in the room, he began to question him and
soon recalled the events of the preceding night.  As he was himself
unable to watch any more, he told the soldier all he knew about the
goblins, and begged him to tell his companions, and stir them up to
watch with tenfold vigilance; but whether it was that he did not talk
quite coherently, or that the whole thing appeared incredible,
certainly the man concluded that Curdie was only raving still, and
tried to coax him into holding his tongue.  This, of course, annoyed
Curdie dreadfully, who now felt in his turn what it was not to be
believed, and the consequence was that his fever returned, and by the
time when, at his persistent entreaties, the captain was called, there
could be no doubt that he was raving.  They did for him what they
could, and promised everything he wanted, but with no intention of
fulfilment.  At last he went to sleep, and when at length his sleep
grew profound and peaceful, they left him, locked the door again, and
withdrew, intending to revisit him early in the morning.



CHAPTER 26

The Goblin-Miners

That same night several of the servants were having a chat together
before going to bed.

'What can that noise be?' said one of the housemaids, who had been
listening for a moment or two.

'I've heard it the last two nights,' said the cook.  'If there were any
about the place, I should have taken it for rats, but my Tom keeps them
far enough.'

'I've heard, though,' said the scullery-maid, 'that rats move about in
great companies sometimes.  There may be an army of them invading us.
I've heard the noises yesterday and today too.'

'It'll be grand fun, then, for my Tom and Mrs Housekeeper's Bob,' said
the cook.  'They'll be friends for once in their lives, and fight on
the same side.  I'll engage Tom and Bob together will put to flight any
number of rats.'

'It seems to me,' said the nurse, 'that the noises are much too loud
for that.  I have heard them all day, and my princess has asked me
several times what they could be.  Sometimes they sound like distant
thunder, and sometimes like the noises you hear in the mountain from
those horrid miners underneath.'

'I shouldn't wonder,' said the cook, 'if it was the miners after all.
They may have come on some hole in the mountain through which the
noises reach to us.  They are always boring and blasting and breaking,
you know.'

As he spoke, there came a great rolling rumble beneath them, and the
house quivered.  They all started up in affright, and rushing to the
hall found the gentlemen-at-arms in consternation also. They had sent
to wake their captain, who said from their description that it must
have been an earthquake, an occurrence which, although very rare in
that country, had taken place almost within the century; and then went
to bed again, strange to say, and fell fast asleep without once
thinking of Curdie, or associating the noises they had heard with what
he had told them.  He had not believed Curdie.  If he had, he would at
once have thought of what he had said, and would have taken
precautions.  As they heard nothing more, they concluded that Sir
Walter was right, and that the danger was over for perhaps another
hundred years.  The fact, as discovered afterwards, was that the
goblins had, in working up a second sloping face of stone, arrived at a
huge block which lay under the cellars of the house, within the line of
the foundations.

It was so round that when they succeeded, after hard work, in
dislodging it without blasting, it rolled thundering down the slope
with a bounding, jarring roll, which shook the foundations of the
house.  The goblins were themselves dismayed at the noise, for they
knew, by careful spying and measuring, that they must now be very near,
if not under the king's house, and they feared giving an alarm.  They,
therefore, remained quiet for a while, and when they began to work
again, they no doubt thought themselves very fortunate in coming upon a
vein of sand which filled a winding fissure in the rock on which the
house was built.  By scooping this away they came out in the king's
wine cellar.

No sooner did they find where they were, than they scurried back again,
like rats into their holes, and running at full speed to the goblin
palace, announced their success to the king and queen with shouts of
triumph.

In a moment the goblin royal family and the whole goblin people were on
their way in hot haste to the king's house, each eager to have a share
in the glory of carrying off that same night the Princess Irene.

The queen went stumping along in one shoe of stone and one of skin.

This could not have been pleasant, and my readers may wonder that, with
such skilful workmen about her, she had not yet replaced the shoe
carried off by Curdie.  As the king, however, had more than one ground
of objection to her stone shoes, he no doubt took advantage of the
discovery of her toes, and threatened to expose her deformity if she
had another made.  I presume he insisted on her being content with skin
shoes, and allowed her to wear the remaining granite one on the present
occasion only because she was going out to war.

They soon arrived in the king's wine cellar, and regardless of its huge
vessels, of which they did not know the use, proceeded at once, but as
quietly as they could, to force the door that led upwards.



CHAPTER 27

The Goblins in the King's House

When Curdie fell asleep he began at once to dream.  He thought he was
ascending the Mountainside from the mouth of the mine, whistling and
singing 'Ring, dod, bang!' when he came upon a woman and child who had
lost their way; and from that point he went on dreaming everything that
had happened to him since he thus met the princess and Lootie; how he
had watched the goblins, how he had been taken by them, how he had been
rescued by the princess; everything, indeed, until he was wounded,
captured, and imprisoned by the men-at-arms.  And now he thought he was
lying wide awake where they had laid him, when suddenly he heard a
great thundering sound.

'The cobs are coming!' he said.  'They didn't believe a word I told
them!  The cobs'll be carrying off the princess from under their stupid
noses!  But they shan't! that they shan't!'

He jumped up, as he thought, and began to dress, but, to his dismay,
found that he was still lying in bed.

'Now then, I will!' he said.  'Here goes!  I am up now!'

But yet again he found himself snug in bed.  Twenty times he tried, and
twenty times he failed; for in fact he was not awake, only dreaming
that he was.  At length in an agony of despair, fancying he heard the
goblins all over the house, he gave a great cry.  Then there came, as
he thought, a hand upon the lock of his door.  It opened, and, looking
up, he saw a lady with white hair, carrying a silver box in her hand,
enter the room.  She came to his bed, he thought, stroked his head and
face with cool, soft hands, took the dressing from his leg, rubbed it
with something that smelt like roses, and then waved her hands over him
three times.  At the last wave of her hands everything vanished, he
felt himself sinking into the profoundest slumber, and remembered
nothing more until he awoke in earnest.

The setting moon was throwing a feeble light through the casement, and
the house was full of uproar.  There was soft heavy multitudinous
stamping, a clashing and clanging of weapons, the voices of men and the
cries of women, mixed with a hideous bellowing, which sounded
victorious.  The cobs were in the house! He sprang from his bed,
hurried on some of his clothes, not forgetting his shoes, which were
armed with nails; then spying an old hunting-knife, or short sword,
hanging on the wall, he caught it, and rushed down the stairs, guided
by the sounds of strife, which grew louder and louder.

When he reached the ground floor he found the whole place swarming.

All the goblins of the mountain seemed gathered there.  He rushed
amongst them, shouting:

  'One, two,
  Hit and hew!
  Three, four,
  Blast and bore!'

and with every rhyme he came down a great stamp upon a foot, cutting at
the same time their faces--executing, indeed, a sword dance of the
wildest description.  Away scattered the goblins in every
direction--into closets, up stairs, into chimneys, up on rafters, and
down to the cellars.  Curdie went on stamping and slashing and singing,
but saw nothing of the people of the house until he came to the great
hall, in which, the moment he entered it, arose a great goblin shout.
The last of the men-at-arms, the captain himself, was on the floor,
buried beneath a wallowing crowd of goblins.  For, while each knight
was busy defending himself as well as he could, by stabs in the thick
bodies of the goblins, for he had soon found their heads all but
invulnerable, the queen had attacked his legs and feet with her
horrible granite shoe, and he was soon down; but the captain had got
his back to the wall and stood out longer.  The goblins would have torn
them all to pieces, but the king had given orders to carry them away
alive, and over each of them, in twelve groups, was standing a knot of
goblins, while as many as could find room were sitting upon their
prostrate bodies.

Curdie burst in dancing and gyrating and stamping and singing like a
small incarnate whirlwind.

  'Where 'tis all a hole, sir,
  Never can be holes:
  Why should their shoes have soles, sir,
  When they've got no souls?

  'But she upon her foot, sir,
  Has a granite shoe:
  The strongest leather boot, sir,
  Six would soon be through.'


The queen gave a howl of rage and dismay; and before she recovered her
presence of mind, Curdie, having begun with the group nearest him, had
eleven of the knights on their legs again.

'Stamp on their feet!' he cried as each man rose, and in a few minutes
the hall was nearly empty, the goblins running from it as fast as they
could, howling and shrieking and limping, and cowering every now and
then as they ran to cuddle their wounded feet in their hard hands, or
to protect them from the frightful stamp-stamp of the armed men.

And now Curdie approached the group which, in trusting in the queen and
her shoe, kept their guard over the prostrate captain.  The king sat on
the captain's head, but the queen stood in front, like an infuriated
cat, with her perpendicular eyes gleaming green, and her hair standing
half up from her horrid head.  Her heart was quaking, however, and she
kept moving about her skin-shod foot with nervous apprehension.  When
Curdie was within a few paces, she rushed at him, made one tremendous
stamp at his opposing foot, which happily he withdrew in time, and
caught him round the waist, to dash him on the marble floor.  But just
as she caught him, he came down with all the weight of his iron-shod
shoe upon her skin-shod foot, and with a hideous howl she dropped him,
squatted on the floor, and took her foot in both her hands.  Meanwhile
the rest rushed on the king and the bodyguard, sent them flying, and
lifted the prostrate captain, who was all but pressed to death.  It was
some moments before he recovered breath and consciousness.

'Where's the princess?' cried Curdie, again and again.

No one knew, and off they all rushed in search of her.

Through every room in the house they went, but nowhere was she to be
found.  Neither was one of the servants to be seen.  But Curdie, who
had kept to the lower part of the house, which was now quiet enough,
began to hear a confused sound as of a distant hubbub, and set out to
find where it came from.  The noise grew as his sharp ears guided him
to a stair and so to the wine cellar.  It was full of goblins, whom the
butler was supplying with wine as fast as he could draw it.

While the queen and her party had encountered the men-at-arms, Harelip
with another company had gone off to search the house. They captured
every one they met, and when they could find no more, they hurried away
to carry them safe to the caverns below.  But when the butler, who was
amongst them, found that their path lay through the wine cellar, he
bethought himself of persuading them to taste the wine, and, as he had
hoped, they no sooner tasted than they wanted more.  The routed
goblins, on their way below, joined them, and when Curdie entered they
were all, with outstretched hands, in which were vessels of every
description from sauce pan to silver cup, pressing around the butler,
who sat at the tap of a huge cask, filling and filling.  Curdie cast
one glance around the place before commencing his attack, and saw in
the farthest corner a terrified group of the domestics unwatched, but
cowering without courage to attempt their escape.  Amongst them was the
terror-stricken face of Lootie; but nowhere could he see the princess.
Seized with the horrible conviction that Harelip had already carried
her off, he rushed amongst them, unable for wrath to sing any more, but
stamping and cutting with greater fury than ever.

'Stamp on their feet; stamp on their feet!' he shouted, and in a moment
the goblins were disappearing through the hole in the floor like rats
and mice.

They could not vanish so fast, however, but that many more goblin feet
had to go limping back over the underground ways of the mountain that
morning.

Presently, however, they were reinforced from above by the king and his
party, with the redoubtable queen at their head.  Finding Curdie again
busy amongst her unfortunate subjects, she rushed at him once more with
the rage of despair, and this time gave him a bad bruise on the foot.
Then a regular stamping fight got up between them, Curdie, with the
point of his hunting-knife, keeping her from clasping her mighty arms
about him, as he watched his opportunity of getting once more a good
stamp at her skin-shod foot.  But the queen was more wary as well as
more agile than hitherto.

The rest meantime, finding their adversary thus matched for the moment,
paused in their headlong hurry, and turned to the shivering group of
women in the corner.  As if determined to emulate his father and have a
sun-woman of some sort to share his future throne, Harelip rushed at
them, caught up Lootie, and sped with her to the hole.  She gave a
great shriek, and Curdie heard her, and saw the plight she was in.
Gathering all his strength, he gave the queen a sudden cut across the
face with his weapon, came down, as she started back, with all his
weight on the proper foot, and sprung to Lootie's rescue.  The prince
had two defenceless feet, and on both of them Curdie stamped just as he
reached the hole.  He dropped his burden and rolled shrieking into the
earth.  Curdie made one stab at him as he disappeared, caught hold of
the senseless Lootie, and having dragged her back to the corner, there
mounted guard over her, preparing once more to encounter the queen.

Her face streaming with blood, and her eyes flashing green lightning
through it, she came on with her mouth open and her teeth grinning like
a tiger's, followed by the king and her bodyguard of the thickest
goblins.  But the same moment in rushed the captain and his men, and
ran at them stamping furiously.  They dared not encounter such an
onset.  Away they scurried, the queen foremost. Of course, the right
thing would have been to take the king and queen prisoners, and hold
them hostages for the princess, but they were so anxious to find her
that no one thought of detaining them until it was too late.

Having thus rescued the servants, they set about searching the house
once more.  None of them could give the least information concerning
the princess.  Lootie was almost silly with terror, and, although
scarcely able to walk would not leave Curdie's side for a single
moment.  Again he allowed the others to search the rest of the
house--where, except a dismayed goblin lurking here and there, they
found no one--while he requested Lootie to take him to the princess's
room.  She was as submissive and obedient as if he had been the king.

He found the bedclothes tossed about, and most of them on the floor,
while the princess's garments were scattered all over the room, which
was in the greatest confusion.  It was only too evident that the
goblins had been there, and Curdie had no longer any doubt that she had
been carried off at the very first of the inroad. With a pang of
despair he saw how wrong they had been in not securing the king and
queen and prince; but he determined to find and rescue the princess as
she had found and rescued him, or meet the worst fate to which the
goblins could doom him.



CHAPTER 28

Curdie's Guide

Just as the consolation of this resolve dawned upon his mind and he was
turning away for the cellar to follow the goblins into their hole,
something touched his hand.  It was the slightest touch, and when he
looked he could see nothing.  Feeling and peering about in the grey of
the dawn, his fingers came upon a tight thread.  He looked again, and
narrowly, but still could see nothing.  It flashed upon him that this
must be the princess's thread.  Without saying a word, for he knew no
one would believe him any more than he had believed the princess, he
followed the thread with his finger, contrived to give Lootie the slip,
and was soon out of the house and on the mountainside--surprised that,
if the thread were indeed the grandmother's messenger, it should have
led the princess, as he supposed it must, into the mountain, where she
would be certain to meet the goblins rushing back enraged from their
defeat.  But he hurried on in the hope of overtaking her first.  When
he arrived, however, at the place where the path turned off for the
mine, he found that the thread did not turn with it, but went straight
up the mountain.  Could it be that the thread was leading him home to
his mother's cottage?  Could the princess be there?  He bounded up the
mountain like one of its own goats, and before the sun was up the
thread had brought him indeed to his mother's door.  There it vanished
from his fingers, and he could not find it, search as he might.

The door was on the latch, and he entered.  There sat his mother by the
fire, and in her arms lay the princess, fast asleep.

'Hush, Curdie!' said his mother.  'Do not wake her.  I'm so glad you're
come!  I thought the cobs must have got you again!'

With a heart full of delight, Curdie sat down at a corner of the
hearth, on a stool opposite his mother's chair, and gazed at the
princess, who slept as peacefully as if she had been in her own bed.
All at once she opened her eyes and fixed them on him.

'Oh, Curdie! you're come!' she said quietly.  'I thought you would!'

Curdie rose and stood before her with downcast eyes.

'Irene,' he said, 'I am very sorry I did not believe you.'

'Oh, never mind, Curdie!' answered the princess.  'You couldn't, you
know.  You do believe me now, don't you?'

'I can't help it now.  I ought to have helped it before.'

'Why can't you help it now?'

'Because, just as I was going into the mountain to look for you, I got
hold of your thread, and it brought me here.'

'Then you've come from my house, have you?'

'Yes, I have.'

'I didn't know you were there.'

'I've been there two or three days, I believe.'

'And I never knew it!  Then perhaps you can tell me why my grandmother
has brought me here?  I can't think.  Something woke me--I didn't know
what, but I was frightened, and I felt for the thread, and there it
was!  I was more frightened still when it brought me out on the
mountain, for I thought it was going to take me into it again, and I
like the outside of it best.  I supposed you were in trouble again, and
I had to get you out.  But it brought me here instead; and, oh, Curdie!
your mother has been so kind to me--just like my own grandmother!'

Here Curdie's mother gave the princess a hug, and the princess turned
and gave her a sweet smile, and held up her mouth to kiss her.

'Then you didn't see the cobs?'asked Curdie.

'No; I haven't been into the mountain, I told you, Curdie.'

'But the cobs have been into your house--all over it--and into your
bedroom, making such a row!'

'What did they want there?  It was very rude of them.'

'They wanted you--to carry you off into the mountain with them, for a
wife to their prince Harelip.'

'Oh, how dreadful' cried the princess, shuddering.

'But you needn't be afraid, you know.  Your grandmother takes care of
you.'

'Ah! you do believe in my grandmother, then?  I'm so glad!  She made me
think you would some day.'

All at once Curdie remembered his dream, and was silent, thinking.

'But how did you come to be in my house, and me not know it?' asked the
princess.

Then Curdie had to explain everything--how he had watched for her sake,
how he had been wounded and shut up by the soldiers, how he heard the
noises and could not rise, and how the beautiful old lady had come to
him, and all that followed.

'Poor Curdie! to lie there hurt and ill, and me never to know it!'
exclaimed the princess, stroking his rough hand.  'I would have come
and nursed you, if they had told me.'

'I didn't see you were lame,' said his mother.

'Am I, mother?  Oh--yes--I suppose I ought to be! I declare I've never
thought of it since I got up to go down amongst the cobs!'

'Let me see the wound,' said his mother.

He pulled down his stocking--when behold, except a great scar, his leg
was perfectly sound!

Curdie and his mother gazed in each other's eyes, full of wonder, but
Irene called out:

'I thought so, Curdie!  I was sure it wasn't a dream.  I was sure my
grandmother had been to see you.  Don't you smell the roses?  It was my
grandmother healed your leg, and sent you to help me.'

'No, Princess Irene,' said Curdie; 'I wasn't good enough to be allowed
to help you: I didn't believe you.  Your grandmother took care of you
without me.'

'She sent you to help my people, anyhow.  I wish my king-papa would
come.  I do want so to tell him how good you have been!'

'But,' said the mother, 'we are forgetting how frightened your people
must be.  You must take the princess home at once, Curdie--or at least
go and tell them where she is.'

'Yes, mother.  Only I'm dreadfully hungry.  Do let me have some
breakfast first.  They ought to have listened to me, and then they
wouldn't have been taken by surprise as they were.'

'That is true, Curdie; but it is not for you to blame them much. You
remember?'

'Yes, mother, I do.  Only I must really have something to eat.'

'You shall, my boy--as fast as I can get it,' said his mother, rising
and setting the princess on her chair.

But before his breakfast was ready, Curdie jumped up so suddenly as to
startle both his companions.

'Mother, mother!' he cried, 'I was forgetting.  You must take the
princess home yourself.  I must go and wake my father.'

Without a word of explanation, he rushed to the place where his father
was sleeping.  Having thoroughly roused him with what he told him he
darted out of the cottage.



CHAPTER 29

Masonwork

He had all at once remembered the resolution of the goblins to carry
out their second plan upon the failure of the first.  No doubt they
were already busy, and the mine was therefore in the greatest danger of
being flooded and rendered useless--not to speak of the lives of the
miners.

When he reached the mouth of the mine, after rousing all the miners
within reach, he found his father and a good many more just entering.
They all hurried to the gang by which he had found a way into the
goblin country.  There the foresight of Peter had already collected a
great many blocks of stone, with cement, ready for building up the weak
place--well enough known to the goblins. Although there was not room
for more than two to be actually building at once, they managed, by
setting all the rest to work in preparing the cement and passing the
stones, to finish in the course of the day a huge buttress filling the
whole gang, and supported everywhere by the live rock.  Before the hour
when they usually dropped work, they were satisfied the mine was secure.

They had heard goblin hammers and pickaxes busy all the time, and at
length fancied they heard sounds of water they had never heard before.
But that was otherwise accounted for when they left the mine, for they
stepped out into a tremendous storm which was raging all over the
mountain.  The thunder was bellowing, and the lightning lancing out of
a huge black cloud which lay above it and hung down  its edges of thick
mist over its sides.  The lightning was breaking out of the mountain,
too, and flashing up into the cloud.  From the state of the brooks, now
swollen into raging torrents, it was evident that the storm had been
storming all day.

The wind was blowing as if it would blow him off the mountain, but,
anxious about his mother and the princess, Curdie darted up through the
thick of the tempest.  Even if they had not set out before the storm
came on, he did not judge them safe, for in such a storm even their
poor little house was in danger.  Indeed he soon found that but for a
huge rock against which it was built, and which protected it both from
the blasts and the waters, it must have been swept if it was not blown
away; for the two torrents into which this rock parted the rush of
water behind it united again in front of the cottage--two roaring and
dangerous streams, which his mother and the princess could not possibly
have passed.  It was with great difficulty that he forced his way
through one of them, and up to the door.

The moment his hand fell on the latch, through all the uproar of winds
and Waters came the joyous cry of the princess:

'There's Curdie!  Curdie!  Curdie!'

She was sitting wrapped in blankets on the bed, his mother trying for
the hundredth time to light the fire which had been drowned by the rain
that came down the chimney.  The clay floor was one mass of mud, and
the whole place looked wretched.  But the faces of the mother and the
princess shone as if their troubles only made them the merrier.  Curdie
burst out laughing at the sight of them.

'I never had such fun!' said the princess, her eyes twinkling and her
pretty teeth shining.  'How nice it must be to live in a cottage on the
mountain!'

'It all depends on what kind your inside house is,' said the mother.

'I know what you mean,' said Irene.  'That's the kind of thing my
grandmother says.'

By the time Peter returned the storm was nearly over, but the streams
were so fierce and so swollen that it was not only out of the question
for the princess to go down the mountain, but most dangerous for Peter
even or Curdie to make the attempt in the gathering darkness.

'They will be dreadfully frightened about you,' said Peter to the
princess, 'but we cannot help it.  We must wait till the morning.'

With Curdie's help, the fire was lighted at last, and the mother set
about making their supper; and after supper they all told the princess
stories till she grew sleepy.  Then Curdie's mother laid her in
Curdie's bed, which was in a tiny little garret-room.  As soon as she
was in bed, through a little window low down in the roof she caught
sight of her grandmother's lamp shining far away beneath, and she gazed
at the beautiful silvery globe until she fell asleep.



CHAPTER 30

The King and the Kiss

The next morning the sun rose so bright that Irene said the rain had
washed his face and let the light out clean.  The torrents were still
roaring down the side of the mountain, but they were so much smaller as
not to be dangerous in the daylight.  After an early breakfast, Peter
went to his work and Curdie and his mother set out to take the princess
home.  They had difficulty in getting her dry across the streams, and
Curdie had again and again to carry her, but at last they got safe on
the broader part of the road, and walked gently down towards the king's
house.  And what should they see as they turned the last corner but the
last of the king's troop riding through the gate!

'Oh, Curdie!' cried Irene, clapping her hands right joyfully,'my
king-papa is come.'

The moment Curdie heard that, he caught her up in his arms, and set off
at full speed, crying:

'Come on, mother dear!  The king may break his heart before he knows
that she is safe.'

Irene clung round his neck and he ran with her like a deer.  When he
entered the gate into the court, there sat the king on his horse, with
all the people of the house about him, weeping and hanging their heads.
The king was not weeping, but his face was white as a dead man's, and
he looked as if the life had gone out of him.  The men-at-arms he had
brought with him sat with horror-stricken faces, but eyes flashing with
rage, waiting only for the word of the king to do something--they did
not know what, and nobody knew what.

The day before, the men-at-arms belonging to the house, as soon as they
were satisfied the princess had been carried away, rushed after the
goblins into the hole, but found that they had already so skilfully
blockaded the narrowest part, not many feet below the cellar, that
without miners and their tools they could do nothing. Not one of them
knew where the mouth of the mine lay, and some of those who had set out
to find it had been overtaken by the storm and had not even yet
returned.  Poor Sir Walter was especially filled with shame, and almost
hoped the king would order his head to be cut off, for to think of that
sweet little face down amongst the goblins was unendurable.

When Curdie ran in at the gate with the princess in his arms, they were
all so absorbed in their own misery and awed by the king's presence and
grief, that no one observed his arrival.  He went straight up to the
king, where he sat on his horse.

'Papa! papa!' the princess cried, stretching out her arms to him; 'here
I am!'

The king started.  The colour rushed to his face.  He gave an
inarticulate cry.  Curdie held up the princess, and the king bent down
and took her from his arms.  As he clasped her to his bosom, the big
tears went dropping down his cheeks and his beard.  And such a shout
arose from all the bystanders that the startled horses pranced and
capered, and the armour rang and clattered, and the rocks of the
mountain echoed back the noises.  The princess greeted them all as she
nestled in her father's bosom, and the king did not set her down until
she had told them all the story.  But she had more to tell about Curdie
than about herself, and what she did tell about herself none of them
could understand--except the king and Curdie, who stood by the king's
knee stroking the neck of the great white horse.  And still as she told
what Curdie had done, Sir Walter and others added to what she told,
even Lootie joining in the praises of his courage and energy.

Curdie held his peace, looking quietly up in the king's face.  And his
mother stood on the outskirts of the crowd listening with delight, for
her son's deeds were pleasant in her ears, until the princess caught
sight of her.

'And there is his mother, king-papa!' she said.  'See--there.  She is
such a nice mother, and has been so kind to me!'

They all parted asunder as the king made a sign to her to come forward.
She obeyed, and he gave her his hand, but could not speak.

'And now, king-papa,' the princess went on, 'I must tell you another
thing.  One night long ago Curdie drove the goblins away and brought
Lootie and me safe from the mountain.  And I promised him a kiss when
we got home, but Lootie wouldn't let me give it him.  I don't want you
to scold Lootie, but I want you to tell her that a princess must do as
she promises.'

'Indeed she must, my child--except it be wrong,' said the king. 'There,
give Curdie a kiss.'

And as he spoke he held her towards him.

The princess reached down, threw her arms round Curdie's neck, and
kissed him on the mouth, saying: 'There, Curdie!  There's the kiss I
promised you!'

Then they all went into the house, and the cook rushed to the kitchen
and the servants to their work.  Lootie dressed Irene in her shiningest
clothes, and the king put off his armour, and put on purple and gold;
and a messenger was sent for Peter and all the miners, and there was a
great and a grand feast, which continued long after the princess was
put to bed.



CHAPTER 31

The Subterranean Waters

The king's harper, who always formed a part of his escort, was chanting
a ballad which he made as he went on playing on his instrument--about
the princess and the goblins, and the prowess of Curdie, when all at
once he ceased, with his eyes on one of the doors of the hall.
Thereupon the eyes of the king and his guests turned thitherward also.
The next moment, through the open doorway came the princess Irene.  She
went straight up to her father, with her right hand stretched out a
little sideways, and her forefinger, as her father and Curdie
understood, feeling its way along the invisible thread.  The king took
her on his knee, and she said in his ear:

'King-papa, do you hear that noise?'

'I hear nothing,' said the king.

'Listen,' she said, holding up her forefinger.

The king listened, and a great stillness fell upon the company. Each
man, seeing that the king listened, listened also, and the harper sat
with his harp between his arms, and his finger silent upon the strings.

'I do hear a noise,' said the king at length--'a noise as of distant
thunder.  It is coming nearer and nearer.  What can it be?'

They all heard it now, and each seemed ready to start to his feet as he
listened.  Yet all sat perfectly still.  The noise came rapidly nearer.

'What can it be?' said the king again.

'I think it must be another storm coming over the mountain,' said Sir
Walter.

Then Curdie, who at the first word of the king had slipped from his
seat, and laid his ear to the ground, rose up quickly, and approaching
the king said, speaking very fast:

'Please, Your Majesty, I think I know what it is.  I have no time to
explain, for that might make it too late for some of us.  Will Your
Majesty give orders that everybody leave the house as quickly as
possible and get up the mountain?'

The king, who was the wisest man in the kingdom, knew well there was a
time when things must be done and questions left till afterwards.  He
had faith in Curdie, and rose instantly, with Irene in his arms.
'Every man and woman follow me,' he said, and strode out into the
darkness.

Before he had reached the gate, the noise had grown to a great
thundering roar, and the ground trembled beneath their feet, and before
the last of them had crossed the court, out after them from the great
hall door came a huge rush of turbid water, and almost swept them away.
But they got safe out of the gate and up the mountain, while the
torrent went roaring down the road into the valley beneath.

Curdie had left the king and the princess to look after his mother,
whom he and his father, one on each side, caught up when the stream
overtook them and carried safe and dry.

When the king had got out of the way of the water, a little up the
mountain, he stood with the princess in his arms, looking back with
amazement on the issuing torrent, which glimmered fierce and foamy
through the night.  There Curdie rejoined them.

'Now, Curdie,' said the king, 'what does it mean?  Is this what you
expected?'

'It is, Your Majesty,' said Curdie; and proceeded to tell him about the
second scheme of the goblins, who, fancying the miners of more
importance to the upper world than they were, had resolved, if they
should fail in carrying off the king's daughter, to flood the mine and
drown the miners.  Then he explained what the miners had done to
prevent it.  The goblins had, in pursuance of their design, let loose
all the underground reservoirs and streams, expecting the water to run
down into the mine, which was lower than their part of the mountain,
for they had, as they supposed, not knowing of the solid wall close
behind, broken a passage through into it.  But the readiest outlet the
water could find had turned out to be the tunnel they had made to the
king's house, the possibility of which catastrophe had not occurred to
the young miner until he had laid his ear to the floor of the hall.

What was then to be done?  The house appeared in danger of falling, and
every moment the torrent was increasing.

'We must set out at once,' said the king.  'But how to get at the
horses!'

'Shall I see if we can manage that?' said Curdie.

'Do,' said the king.

Curdie gathered the men-at-arms, and took them over the garden wall,
and so to the stables.  They found their horses in terror; the water
was rising fast around them, and it was quite time they were got out.
But there was no way to get them out, except by riding them through the
stream, which was now pouring from the lower windows as well as the
door.  As one horse was quite enough for any man to manage through such
a torrent, Curdie got on the king's white charger and, leading the way,
brought them all in safety to the rising ground.

'Look, look, Curdie!' cried Irene, the moment that, having dismounted,
he led the horse up to the king.

Curdie did look, and saw, high in the air, somewhere about the top of
the king's house, a great globe of light shining like the purest silver.

'Oh!' he cried in some consternation, 'that is your grandmother's lamp!
We must get her out.  I will go an find her.  The house may fall, you
know.'

'My grandmother is in no danger,' said Irene, smiling.

'Here, Curdie, take the princess while I get on my horse,' said the
king.

Curdie took the princess again, and both turned their eyes to the globe
of light.  The same moment there shot from it a white bird, which,
descending with outstretched wings, made one circle round the king an
Curdie and the princess, and then glided up again.  The light and the
pigeon vanished together.

'Now, Curdie!' said the princess, as he lifted her to her father's
arms, 'you see my grandmother knows all about it, and isn't frightened.
I believe she could walk through that water and it wouldn't wet her a
bit.'

'But, my child,' said the king, 'you will be cold if you haven't
Something more on.  Run, Curdie, my boy, and fetch anything you can lay
your hands on, to keep the princess warm.  We have a long ride before
us.'

Curdie was gone in a moment, and soon returned with a great rich fur,
and the news that dead goblins were tossing about in the current
through the house.  They had been caught in their own snare; instead of
the mine they had flooded their own country, whence they were now swept
up drowned.  Irene shuddered, but the king held her close to his bosom.
Then he turned to Sir Walter, and said:

'Bring Curdie's father and mother here.'

'I wish,' said the king, when they stood before him, 'to take your son
with me.  He shall enter my bodyguard at once, and wait further
promotion.'

Peter and his wife, overcome, only murmured almost inaudible thanks.
But Curdie spoke aloud.

'Please, Your Majesty,' he said, 'I cannot leave my father and mother.'

'That's right, Curdie!' cried the princess.  'I wouldn't if I was you.'

The king looked at the princess and then at Curdie with a glow of
satisfaction on his countenance.

'I too think you are right, Curdie,' he said, 'and I will not ask you
again.  But I shall have a chance of doing something for you some time.'

'Your Majesty has already allowed me to serve you,' said Curdie.

'But, Curdie,' said his mother, 'why shouldn't you go with the king?
We can get on very well without you.'

'But I can't get on very well without you,' said Curdie.  'The king is
very kind, but I could not be half the use to him that I am to you.
Please, Your Majesty, if you wouldn't mind giving my mother a red
petticoat!  I should have got her one long ago, but for the goblins.'

'As soon as we get home,' said the king, 'Irene and I will search out
the warmest one to be found, and send it by one of the gentlemen.'

'Yes, that we will, Curdie!' said the princess.  'And next summer we'll
come back and see you wear it, Curdie's mother,' she added. 'Shan't we,
king-papa?'

'Yes, my love; I hope so,' said the king.

Then turning to the miners, he said:

'Will you do the best you can for my servants tonight?  I hope they
will be able to return to the house tomorrow.'

The miners with one voice promised their hospitality. Then the king
commanded his servants to mind whatever Curdie should say to them, and
after shaking hands with him and his father and mother, the king and
the princess and all their company rode away down the side of the new
stream, which had already devoured half the road, into the starry night.



CHAPTER 32

The Last Chapter

All the rest went up the mountain, and separated in groups to the homes
of the miners.  Curdie and his father and mother took Lootie with them.
And the whole way a light, of which all but Lootie understood the
origin, shone upon their path.  But when they looked round they could
see nothing of the silvery globe.

For days and days the water continued to rush from the doors and
windows of the king's house, and a few goblin bodies were swept out
into the road.

Curdie saw that something must be done.  He spoke to his father and the
rest of the miners, and they at once proceeded to make another outlet
for the waters.  By setting all hands to the work, tunnelling here and
building there, they soon succeeded; and having also made a little
tunnel to drain the water away from under the king's house, they were
soon able to get into the wine cellar, where they found a multitude of
dead goblins--among the rest the queen, with the skin-shoe gone, and
the stone one fast to her ankle--for the water had swept away the
barricade, which prevented the men-at-arms from following the goblins,
and had greatly widened the passage.  They built it securely up, and
then went back to their labours in the mine.

A good many of the goblins with their creatures escaped from the
inundation out upon the mountain.  But most of them soon left that part
of the country, and most of those who remained grew milder in
character, and indeed became very much like the Scotch brownies. Their
skulls became softer as well as their hearts, and their feet grew
harder, and by degrees they became friendly with the inhabitants of the
mountain and even with the miners.  But the latter were merciless to
any of the cobs' creatures that came in their way, until at length they
all but disappeared.

The rest of the history of The Princess and Curdie must be kept for
another volume.



